BLEU:	0.0992137693859022
ID:	0
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamek ▁Israeli ▁eginarazi ▁zizkion ▁bekatuetatik ▁aldendu ▁gabe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he refused to turn from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But he did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , continuing the sins that Jeroboam had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1
INPUT:	▁Z ap iak ▁elkarrekin ▁josi ▁zituzten , ▁bost ▁alde ▁batetik ▁eta ▁sei ▁bestetik .
PRED:	They tied up five crossbars for five months and five months .
GOLD:	Bezalel joined five of these curtains together to make one long curtain , and the other six were joined to make a second long curtain .

ID:	2
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁egintza ▁gores garriak , haren ▁garaipena ▁eta ▁egin ▁dituen ▁mirariak ez ▁dizkiegu ▁ezkutatuko ▁geure ▁haurrei , baizik ▁eta ▁datorren ▁belaunaldi ari ▁kontatuko .
PRED:	It is what the Lord says to the Lord , “ Let us see how we have done to us , and we will see the children of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	We will not hide these truths from our children ; we will tell the next generationabout the glorious deeds of the Lord , about his power and his mighty wonders .

ID:	3
INPUT:	▁Apaizak : ▁Jed aiasen ▁ondorengoak , ▁hots , ▁Josueren ▁jatorrikoak , ▁ <unk> ;
PRED:	The priests of the priests were descendants of Jeshua , who were the clans of Jeshua .
GOLD:	These are the priests who returned from exile : The family of Jedaiah ( through the line of Jeshua ) 973

ID:	4
INPUT:	▁Suntsitu ▁egingo ▁ditut
PRED:	I will punish Israel 's Enemies
GOLD:	Jeremiah Weeps for Sinful Judah

ID:	5
INPUT:	▁Zoritx ar ▁biok ▁gertatuko ▁zaizkizu , bat - batean , ▁egun ▁berean : haur rik ▁gabe ▁eta ▁alargun geldituko ▁zara — zoritx arraren ▁zoritxarra ! —; ez ▁dizute ▁balioko zeure ▁sorgin keria ▁ugari eketa ▁aztikeri en ▁ahalmen ▁handiak .
PRED:	I will pour out your heads on you , your children , and your children will lie down on your heads . They will never forget your heads , and your descendants , and your descendants will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	Well , both these things will come upon you in a moment : widowhood and the loss of your children.Yes , these calamities will come upon you , despite all your witchcraft and magic .

ID:	6
INPUT:	▁Denbora ldia ▁zeraman ▁Isaakek ▁Gerar - en . ▁Behin ▁batez , ▁filistearren ▁errege ▁Abimelek ▁leiho ra ▁atera ▁zen . ▁Eta ▁hona ▁non ▁ikusten ▁dituen ▁Isaak ▁eta ▁Rebeka ▁emaztea ▁harreman ▁gox oan .
PRED:	When Isaac arrived at Gerar with a vision , he took a feast to the Philistines . He saw that she was in the City of Abimelech , Isaac , and his wife .
GOLD:	But some time later , Abimelech , king of the Philistines , looked out his window and saw Isaac caressing Rebekah .

ID:	7
INPUT:	▁Lur rean ▁eztia ▁barre iatua ▁zegoen ▁oihan ▁batera ▁heldu ▁zen ▁gizatalde ▁osoa .
PRED:	When they arrived in the boat , the large crowd sat down in the hill country .
GOLD:	even though they had all found honeycomb on the ground in the forest .

ID:	8
INPUT:	▁Tenpluaren ▁barn eneko ▁azken ▁hamar ▁metro ak , ▁berriz , ▁zedrozko ▁ohol ez ▁estali ▁zituen , ▁beh etik ▁hasi ▁eta ▁goiko ▁habe etaraino , ▁eta ▁toki ▁hori ▁santutegia , ▁hots , ▁toki ▁santu - santua , ▁izateko ▁antolatu ▁zuen .
PRED:	He made ten bronze altar in the inner courtyard , and the doors of the Most Holy Place . He began to rebuild the Temple of the Most Holy Place , and the Holy Place .
GOLD:	He partitioned off an inner sanctuary — the Most Holy Place — at the far end of the Temple . It was 30 feet deep and was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling .

ID:	9
INPUT:	▁baita ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoetatik ▁eta ▁gaitz etatik ▁sendatu ak ▁zituen ▁zenbait ▁emakume ▁ere : ▁Magdalako ▁Maria ▁— honen gandik ▁zazpi ▁deabru ▁bota ▁zituen —,
PRED:	For the Spirit of the Spirit came from evil spirits , including the spirits of the devil , and the angels of the devil came to the devil .
GOLD:	along with some women who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases . Among them were Mary Magdalene , from whom he had cast out seven demons ;

ID:	10
INPUT:	▁« Egun ▁hau ▁gogoan garri ▁izango ▁duzue ▁eta , ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez , ▁festa ▁nagus iz ▁ospatuko . ▁ F esta ▁hau ▁lege - indarrez ▁ezarriko ▁duzue ▁belaunez ▁belaun .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You will celebrate this festival to the Lord your God . This festival will be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	“ This is a day to remember . Each year , from generation to generation , you must celebrate it as a special festival to the Lord . This is a law for all time .

ID:	11
INPUT:	▁alargun tsak ▁esku - hutsik ▁bidaltzen ▁zenituen , um ezur tzak ▁gaizki ▁hartzen .
PRED:	You must take advantage of orphans , and take advantage of orphans .
GOLD:	You must have sent widows away empty-handedand crushed the hopes of orphans .

ID:	12
INPUT:	▁Zintz ilik atu ▁errezela ▁zapi en ▁kati gail uen ▁p ean , ▁eta ▁sartu ▁haren ▁atzean ▁itun - kutxa . ▁Er rez elak ▁bereiziko ▁ditu ▁toki ▁santua ▁eta ▁toki ▁santu - santua .
PRED:	He made the Ark of the Covenant with the inner curtain to the inner curtain , so he can break the Ark of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	Hang the inner curtain from clasps , and put the Ark of the Covenant in the room behind it . This curtain will separate the Holy Place from the Most Holy Place .

ID:	13
INPUT:	▁Gaur ▁jakingo ▁duzue ▁Jauna ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoa ▁aurretik ▁igaroko ▁zaizu ela ▁Jordan ▁zehar ka tzean , ▁su ▁kiskalgarria ▁bezala : ▁berak ▁suntsitu ▁eta ▁makur raraziko ▁ditu ▁herri ▁horiek ▁zuen ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁zuek ▁beren ▁lurraldetik ▁bota ▁eta ▁deuseztatu ▁egingo ▁dituzue ▁berehala , ▁Jaunak ▁hitzeman ▁bezala .
PRED:	For you will know that the Lord your God will pass through the Jordan River , and you will pass through the Jordan River , and you will be destroyed by the Lord your God will destroy them .
GOLD:	But recognize today that the Lord your God is the one who will cross over ahead of you like a devouring fire to destroy them . He will subdue them so that you will quickly conquer them and drive them out , just as the Lord has promised .

ID:	14
INPUT:	▁sitsak ▁jan dako ▁jantzia ▁bezala , h arrak ▁jotako ▁artilea ▁bezal agaldu ko ▁baitira . Baina ▁nire ▁garai penak beti ▁iraungo ▁du , nire ▁salbamen ak ▁gizaldiz ▁gizaldi ».
PRED:	O Lord , you are like a deer ; your unfailing love is like a pleasing aroma to me .
GOLD:	For the moth will devour them as it devours clothing.The worm will eat at them as it eats wool.But my righteousness will last forever.My salvation will continue from generation to generation . ”

ID:	15
INPUT:	▁«“ Jainko ▁ahaltsuak bedeinka ▁zaitzala , eman kor ▁egin ▁eta ▁ugaldu ▁zaitzala , herri ▁askoren ▁sor tzaile bihur ▁zaitezen !
PRED:	“ May God bless you and bless you ; you will bless you and bless you .
GOLD:	May God Almighty bless you and give you many children . And may your descendants multiply and become many nations !

ID:	16
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁duzu ▁herri ▁zapaldua ▁salbatzen , eta ▁harro pu tzen ▁handik eria ▁makur rarazten .
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and my people are filled with violence .
GOLD:	You rescue the humble , but your eyes watch the proud and humiliate them .

ID:	17
INPUT:	▁« Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁jabetzan ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldean ▁norbait ▁landan ▁lurrean ▁hilda ▁azaldu ▁eta ▁nork ▁hil ▁duen ▁ez ▁badakizue ,
PRED:	“ When you arrive in the land the Lord your God has told you , you will die in the land of the Lord your God has killed you .
GOLD:	“ When you are in the land the Lord your God is giving you , someone may be found murdered in a field , and you do n't know who committed the murder .

ID:	18
INPUT:	▁Ezkon tza ▁eta ▁dibortzi oa
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Discussion about Divorce and Marriage

ID:	19
INPUT:	▁« Horiek ▁dira ▁Jaunaren ▁festa buruak , ▁eta ▁horietan ▁batzar ▁sakratua ▁ospatuko ▁duzue , ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁opariak ▁eskaintzeko : ▁erre - opariak ▁eta ▁labore - opariak , ▁elkartasun - opariak ▁eta ▁isur - opariak , ▁jai ▁bakoitzari ▁dagokion ▁arabera ;
PRED:	“ These are the sacrifices of the Lord and sacrifices to the Lord . In this day , you must offer sacrifices to the Lord , offer sacrifices and grain offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	( “ These are the Lord 's appointed festivals . Celebrate them each year as official days for holy assembly by presenting special gifts to the Lord — burnt offerings , grain offerings , sacrifices , and liquid offerings — each on its proper day .

ID:	20
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁asm oen ▁araberako ▁nahigabeak ▁salbamenera ▁gar am atz an ▁bizi - al daketa ▁dakar ▁ondorio , ▁eta ▁horretaz ▁damutu ▁beharrik ▁ez ▁dago . ▁Mundu ▁honetatik ▁datorki gun ▁nahigabeak , ▁berriz , ▁heriotzara ▁eramaten ▁gaitu .
PRED:	For the wicked people of God , their lives , for their lives are destroyed by the power of God . But they do n't need it to be destroyed by their sins .
GOLD:	For the kind of sorrow God wants us to experience leads us away from sin and results in salvation . There 's no regret for that kind of sorrow . But worldly sorrow , which lacks repentance , results in spiritual death .

ID:	21
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁galdegin ▁zion :— Zer ▁nahi ▁duzu ▁niregandik ? I tsuak ▁erantzun :— Berriro ▁ikustea , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	Jesus asked , “ Why do you want me ? ” “ Yes , Lord , have you seen me ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you want me to do for you ? ” Jesus asked. “ My Rabbi , ” the blind man said , “ I want to see ! ”

ID:	22
INPUT:	▁« Zil arra ▁kal era ▁botako ▁dute , ur rea ▁zabor tzat ▁hartuko . Ez ▁urreak , ▁ez ▁zil arrak , ez ▁ditu ▁libratuko Jaunaren ▁sumin - egunean , urre ak ▁eta ▁zil arrak era gin ▁baitzieten ▁bekatu . Ez ▁diete ▁gosea ▁aseko , ezta ▁sabel ak ▁ere ▁beteko .
PRED:	“ They will bring an object of wood , and their wealth will be cut off with gold . They will not be filled with gold , wine , and famine , and disease .
GOLD:	“ They will throw their money in the streets , tossing it out like worthless trash.Their silver and gold wo n't save themon that day of the Lord 's anger.It will neither satisfy nor feed them , for their greed can only trip them up .

ID:	23
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak , ▁orduan :— Antz ina ▁esan ▁ohi ▁zuten : ▁« Galde tzeko tan , ▁galdetu ▁Abel ▁hirian , ▁eta ▁kito ».
PRED:	She said , “ My child is coming , ” she said . “ He is coming , and he asked . ”
GOLD:	Then she continued , “ There used to be a saying , ‘ If you want to settle an argument , ask advice at the town of Abel . '

ID:	24
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁zenuten ▁iragarpena : den - dena ▁bete ▁dela ▁ikusirik , ez ▁ote ▁duzue ▁iragarriko ? Eta ▁orain ▁gauza ▁berriak adi eraz iko ▁dizkizuet , ez ▁dak izkizuen ▁gerta ▁gauza ▁ezkutuak ;
PRED:	You know what you are saying , “ I know that the Lord has done , ” says : “ I will make you ashamed of you , and I will make you ashamed of you . ”
GOLD:	You have heard my predictions and seen them fulfilled , but you refuse to admit it.Now I will tell you new things , secrets you have not yet heard .

ID:	25
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitzatela ▁inork ▁argu dio ▁hutsal ez ▁lilura , ▁horre <unk> ▁pizten ▁baita ▁Jainkoaren ▁haserrea ▁errebelde en ▁aurka .
PRED:	Do n't let us tell you , “ Do n't be angry with those who fight against God . ”
GOLD:	Do n't be fooled by those who try to excuse these sins , for the anger of God will fall on all who disobey him .

ID:	26
INPUT:	▁Zakarias , ▁haurraren ▁aita , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaz ▁beterik , ▁profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzatu ▁zen , ▁esanez :
PRED:	Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit , just as the Holy Spirit said ,
GOLD:	Then his father , Zechariah , was filled with the Holy Spirit and gave this prophecy :

ID:	27
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Eliasi :— Orain ▁badakit ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizona ▁zarena , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁diozun a ▁egiaz ▁Jaunaren ▁hitza ▁dena .
PRED:	She replied to Elijah , “ I am living , ” she replied . “ Yes , you know that the Lord is true . ”
GOLD:	Then the woman told Elijah , “ Now I know for sure that you are a man of God , and that the Lord truly speaks through you . ”

ID:	28
INPUT:	▁Judak ▁ere , ▁ordea , ▁Jaunaren , ▁bere ▁Jainkoaren , ▁aginduak ▁bete ▁ordez , ▁Israelen ▁erara ▁jokatu ▁zuen .
PRED:	But Judah did not forget the power of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	But even the people of Judah refused to obey the commands of the Lord their God , for they followed the evil practices that Israel had introduced .

ID:	29
INPUT:	▁Gaiztak eriak ▁hilko ▁du ▁gaiztoa , zintzo ari ▁gorroto ▁dioten ek ▁zigorra ▁izango .
PRED:	The wicked will die , but the wicked will be punished .
GOLD:	But the Lord will redeem those who serve him.No one who takes refuge in him will be condemned .

ID:	30
INPUT:	▁Samuelek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Sauli :— Neu ▁nauzu ▁ikus lea . ▁Igo ▁nire ▁aurretik ▁muin ora ▁eta ▁nirekin ▁jango ▁duzue ▁gaur . ▁Bihar ▁goizean ▁utziko ▁dizut ▁joaten , ▁jakin ▁nahi ▁duzun ▁guztia ▁esan ▁ondoren .
PRED:	Samuel replied to Saul , “ I am sending you out of the hill country , and you are going on the top of my way , and you will go to my place . ”
GOLD:	“ I am the seer ! ” Samuel replied . “ Go up to the place of worship ahead of me . We will eat there together , and in the morning I 'll tell you what you want to know and send you on your way .

ID:	31
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁pentsa : ▁Moisesek ▁erdainkun tzaren ▁legea ▁ezarri ▁zizuen ▁ ( egia ▁esan , ▁ohitura ▁hau ▁ez ▁zen ▁Moisesekin ▁hasi , ▁arbasoekin ▁baino ) , ▁eta ▁larunbatez ▁ere ▁erdaindu ▁ohi ▁duzue ▁gizona .
PRED:	But Moses gave you the law of the law of the law . This is the law of Moses , the law of Moses , who was circumcised on the Sabbath .
GOLD:	But you work on the Sabbath , too , when you obey Moses ' law of circumcision . ( Actually , this tradition of circumcision began with the patriarchs , long before the law of Moses . )

ID:	32
INPUT:	▁Goi - goikoaren ▁aurka ▁birao ka ▁ari tuko ▁da ▁eta ▁herri ▁santua ▁gaizki ▁erabiliko ▁du : ▁jaiak ▁eta ▁legea ▁aldatu ▁nahi ▁izango ▁ditu . ▁Hiru ▁urte ▁eta ▁erdiz ▁egongo ▁da ▁herri ▁santua ▁haren ▁menpean .
PRED:	The Most High will purify the Most High , and he will be forgiven . He will be forgiven , and he will be punished for three years .
GOLD:	He will defy the Most High and oppress the holy people of the Most High . He will try to change their sacred festivals and laws , and they will be placed under his control for a time , times , and half a time .

ID:	33
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erantsi ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁ogi - horni dura ▁kenduko ▁diot ▁Jerusalemi ; ▁mug atua ▁eta ▁larri ▁jango ▁dute ▁ogia , ▁ura ▁ere ▁neur tua ▁eta ▁ikaraz ▁edango .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , I will take it into the town of Jerusalem , and it will eat it with water and drink .
GOLD:	Then he told me , “ Son of man , I will make food very scarce in Jerusalem . It will be weighed out with great care and eaten fearfully . The water will be rationed out drop by drop , and the people will drink it with dismay .

ID:	34
INPUT:	▁Samuelek , ▁zahartu ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁semeak ▁jarri ▁zituen ▁Israelen ▁buruzagi .
PRED:	When Samuel died , Samuel made his throne , and his sons .
GOLD:	As Samuel grew old , he appointed his sons to be judges over Israel .

ID:	35
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁jakinduria ▁agertu ▁duenean , ▁gizakiak ▁ez ▁dira ▁gauza ▁izan ▁beren ▁jakinduriaz ▁Jainkoa ▁ezagutzeko ; ▁horregatik , ▁Jainkoak , ▁guk ▁hots ▁egiten ▁dugun ▁zor akeri aren ▁bitartez ▁salbatu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁ditu ▁fededunak .
PRED:	Look , God is able to get wisdom , and they do n't understand what God has done to you . So we can pray to you , too , for we are filled with joy .
GOLD:	Since God in his wisdom saw to it that the world would never know him through human wisdom , he has used our foolish preaching to save those who believe .

ID:	36
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrek ▁galdetzen ▁zuten : ▁« Israelgo ▁leinu etatik ▁zein ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁aitzinean ▁egiten ▁ari ▁garen ▁biltzar rera ▁etorri ▁ez ▁dena ?» ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁zin ▁handia ▁egina ▁zuten , ▁hil ▁egingo ▁zutela ▁Mitzpara , ▁Jaunaren ▁aurreko ▁biltzar rera , ▁joan ▁ez ▁zedin a .
PRED:	The people of Israel asked , “ Where is the tribes of Israel ? ” So they said , “ This is what the Lord had said to the Lord , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then they said , “ Who among the tribes of Israel did not join us at Mizpah when we held our assembly in the presence of the Lord ? ” At that time they had taken a solemn oath in the Lord 's presence , vowing that anyone who refused to come would be put to death .

ID:	37
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio :« Bas amortuko ▁haizeak ▁daraman las toa ▁bezal asak aban atuko ▁zaituztet .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will send them into the desert .
GOLD:	“ I will scatter you like chaffthat is blown away by the desert winds .

ID:	38
INPUT:	▁« Kontuz ▁lege - maisu ekin ! ▁Gogo ko ▁baitute ▁harro - harro ▁jantzita ▁ibiltzea ▁eta ▁plazetan ▁jendeak ▁beraiei ▁agur ▁egitea ; ▁gogoko ▁dituzte ▁sinagogetan ▁lehenengo ▁aul kiak ▁eta ▁jai - otor duetan ▁mahai buruak ;
PRED:	“ Do n't worry about the teachers of religious law , for they rejoice in the synagogues and sing to joy in the synagogues and joy of the believers .
GOLD:	“ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces . And how they love the seats of honor in the synagogues and the head table at banquets .

ID:	39
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁maitaleen ▁esku ▁utziko ▁zaitut ; ▁zure ▁prostituzio - lekuak ▁suntsitu ▁eta ▁eraitsiko ▁dituzte ; ▁soinekoak ▁erantzi , ▁bitxi ▁zora garriak ▁kendu ▁eta ▁jantzirik ▁gabe ▁utziko ▁zaituzte , ▁larrugorrian .
PRED:	I will send you into your hand , and you will cut off your clothes and put your clothes into your clothing . I will put your clothes with your clothes and clothing .
GOLD:	Then I will give you to these many nations who are your lovers , and they will destroy you . They will knock down your pagan shrines and the altars to your idols . They will strip you and take your beautiful jewels , leaving you stark naked .

ID:	40
INPUT:	▁izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoak ▁zerbait ▁hobea ▁prestatu ▁zuen ▁guretzat , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zuen ▁nahi ▁izan ▁haiek ▁hel mug ara ▁gu ▁gabe ▁iris terik .
PRED:	So God prepared a money for us , and there is no better than we want to come to buy it into that time .
GOLD:	For God had something better in mind for us , so that they would not reach perfection without us .

ID:	41
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak :« K e inu ▁egingo ▁diet ▁nazioei , neure ▁bandera ▁jasoko ▁herri entzat : bes oetan ▁ekarriko ▁dituzte zure ▁semeak , le poan ▁zure ▁alabak .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will bring you back to the pagan nations , for I will bring them to your daughters .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ See , I will give a signal to the godless nations.They will carry your little sons back to you in their arms ; they will bring your daughters on their shoulders .

ID:	42
INPUT:	▁Ogi - oparia
PRED:	Plans for the Priests
GOLD:	Penalty for Breaking the Sabbath

ID:	43
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁esan ▁zion :— Jauna , ▁profeta ▁zarela ▁ikusten ▁dut .
PRED:	“ Lord , ” she said to her , “ I see your prophet . ”
GOLD:	“ Sir , ” the woman said , “ you must be a prophet .

ID:	44
INPUT:	▁Biho zberri ▁zaitezte , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁itzuli ▁Jainkoarengana , ▁bekatuak ▁ken ▁dak izkizuen ;
PRED:	May the sins of your sins be forgiven , and may the sins of the sins of the Lord .
GOLD:	Now repent of your sins and turn to God , so that your sins may be wiped away .

ID:	45
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁esan ▁zion :« Ni ▁Jainko ▁Ahaltsua ▁naiz . Ondoren go ▁ugari ▁izango ▁duzu . A re ▁gehiago , nazio ▁asko ▁sortuko ▁dituzu , eta ▁erregeak ▁aterako ▁dirazure gandik .
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ I will give you victory over your enemies , and your descendants will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then God said , “ I am El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty . ' Be fruitful and multiply . You will become a great nation , even many nations . Kings will be among your descendants !

ID:	46
INPUT:	▁Jakobek , ▁zum itz -, ▁hur ri tz - ▁eta ▁pl atan o - z iri ▁heze ▁batzuk ▁harturik , ▁zuritu ▁egin ▁zituen .
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ I am the one of the family of Jacob , the one of the family of Jacob , ” Jacob replied .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	47
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁dugu ▁parterik ▁izango ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldeko ▁lur - banak etan , ▁guri ▁dagoki gun ▁ondarea ▁Jordanez ▁alde ▁honetan , ▁ekialdean , ▁baita uk agu .
PRED:	But we will not be sure to share the Jordan River in the Jordan River on the Jordan River , for we are left in the Jordan River .
GOLD:	But we do not claim any of the land on the other side of the Jordan . We would rather live here on the east side and accept this as our grant of land . ”

ID:	48
INPUT:	▁karratua : ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁luze - zabal ▁eta ▁metro ▁bat ▁gora . ▁Aldare - ertzeko ▁adarrek ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egingo ▁dute ▁aldare arekin .
PRED:	It will be 71/2 feet wide , 71/2 feet wide , 71/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	Make it 18 inches square and 36 inches high , with horns at the corners carved from the same piece of wood as the altar itself .

ID:	49
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁lege - maisuak ▁salatu
PRED:	The teachers of religious law
GOLD:	The Widow 's Offering

ID:	50
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁nor ▁zaren ▁jakinarazi ▁diet , ▁eta ▁aurrerantzean ▁ere ▁jakinaraziko , ▁zuk ▁didazun ▁maitasuna ▁hauen gan ▁izan ▁dadin , ▁eta ▁ni ▁neu ▁ere ▁hauen gan ▁izan ▁nadin ».
PRED:	I told you what I told you , ‘ You have seen and your love , and you will know how I have seen . ' ”
GOLD:	I have revealed you to them , and I will continue to do so . Then your love for me will be in them , and I will be in them . ”

ID:	51
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁begiratzean , ▁erregea ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁ohol tzaren ▁gainean ▁zutik , ▁tenpluaren ▁sarreran . ▁Buruzagiak ▁eta ▁turuta - jo tzaileak ▁erregearen ▁ondoan ▁zeuden ; ▁herriko ▁jendea , ▁berriz , ▁pozez ▁beterik ▁zebilen , ▁turu taren ▁soin ura . ▁Kan tariek , ▁beren ▁musika - tresnak ▁joz , ▁gorespen - kantu ak ▁zuzentzen ▁zituzten . ▁Orduan , ▁Ataliak , ▁bere ▁soinekoak ▁ur ratuz , ▁garrasi ▁egin ▁zuen :— Tra izioa ! ▁Tra izioa !
PRED:	When the king saw that the king was standing on the altar , he stood at the entrance of the king 's Temple , shouting , “ How joyful are those who were filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	When she arrived , she saw the newly crowned king standing in his place of authority by the pillar at the Temple entrance . The commanders and trumpeters were surrounding him , and people from all over the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets . Singers with musical instruments were leading the people in a great celebration . When Athaliah saw all this , she tore her clothes in despair and shouted , “ Treason ! Treason ! ”

ID:	52
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁gure ▁Aitak ▁eman ▁biez az kizue ▁grazia ▁eta ▁bakea .
PRED:	May the Father of our Father be with peace and peace .
GOLD:	We are writing to God 's holy people in the city of Colosse , who are faithful brothers and sisters in Christ.May God our Father give you grace and peace .

ID:	53
INPUT:	▁Ken azen ▁seme ▁eta ▁Kaleb en ▁anaia ▁gazteenak , ▁Otni elek , ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁hiria , ▁eta ▁Kalebek ▁bere ▁alaba ▁Ak sa ▁eman ▁zion ▁emaztetzat .
PRED:	Then Caleb son of Jephunneh and gave him this message to Caleb son of Jephunneh .
GOLD:	Othniel , the son of Caleb 's younger brother , Kenaz , was the one who conquered it , so Acsah became Othniel 's wife .

ID:	54
INPUT:	▁Pedro ▁eta ▁Korn elio
PRED:	Peter and Peter 's Prayer
GOLD:	Cornelius Calls for Peter

ID:	55
INPUT:	▁hau ▁Joan an ena , ▁hau ▁R es arena , ▁hau ▁Zorobabel ena , ▁hau ▁Sal ati elena , ▁hau ▁N eri rena ,
PRED:	This was the son of Hilkiah , son of Ahitub , son of Zerubbabel .
GOLD:	Joda was the son of Joanan.Joanan was the son of Rhesa.Rhesa was the son of Zerubbabel.Zerubbabel was the son of Shealtiel.Shealtiel was the son of Neri .

ID:	56
INPUT:	▁Samuelen ▁azken ▁hitzaldia
PRED:	Samuel 's Covenant to Samuel
GOLD:	Samuel 's Farewell Address

ID:	57
INPUT:	▁Morro iek ▁adierazi ▁zioten ▁Sauli :— Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zaigu ▁David .
PRED:	So David said to Saul , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	When Saul 's men reported this back to the king ,

ID:	58
INPUT:	▁Soldaduek ▁ere ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Eta ▁guk , ▁zer ▁egin ▁behar ▁dugu ? Joanek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Ez ▁atera ▁inori ▁dirurik ▁gogorkeriaz , ▁ezta ▁gezurrezko ▁salak un tzaz ▁ere ; ▁kon for ma ▁zaitezte ▁dauk azuen ▁sol dat arekin .
PRED:	The soldiers asked him , “ What do we want ? ” “ We are n't going to tell anyone , ” the man replied . “ Do n't let anyone go with us ? ”
GOLD:	“ What should we do ? ” asked some soldiers.John replied , “ Do n't extort money or make false accusations . And be content with your pay . ”

ID:	59
INPUT:	▁munduak ▁baliogabe tzat ▁eta ▁mespretxagarri tzat ▁duena , ▁munduaren ▁begitan ▁ezerez ▁dena , ▁aukeratu ▁du ▁Jainkoak , ▁zerbait ▁direla ▁uste ▁dutenak ▁ezerez teko ;
PRED:	Anyone who does not belong to the world will be given to the world , for God has chosen them to save them .
GOLD:	God chose things despised by the world , things counted as nothing at all , and used them to bring to nothing what the world considers important .

ID:	60
INPUT:	▁« Hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Hon daturiko ▁hiri ▁bihurtuko ▁zaitudan ean ▁— jen derik ▁gabeko ▁hiriak ▁bezala —, ▁itsas ▁leiz ea ▁zure ▁aurka ▁altxarazi ▁eta ▁ur ▁handi ek ▁estaliko ▁zaituzten ean ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make you a place for you , and I will make you desolate , as you live in the sea .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	61
INPUT:	▁Mesias ▁etorriko ▁denean , ▁ez ▁du ▁inork ▁jakingo ▁nongoa ▁den ; ▁hau , ▁ordea , ▁badakigu ▁nongoa ▁den ».
PRED:	When the Messiah comes , he will know that no one will know that comes from the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	But how could he be ? For we know where this man comes from . When the Messiah comes , he will simply appear ; no one will know where he comes from . ”

ID:	62
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁batean , ▁Siriako ▁errege ▁Ben - Hadadek , ▁bere ▁gudaroste ▁osoa ▁bildurik , ▁setiatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Samaria .
PRED:	Then Ben-hadad sent messengers to King Ben-hadad of Aram , and all the entire army of Aram and Samaria .
GOLD:	Some time later , however , King Ben-hadad of Aram mustered his entire army and besieged Samaria .

ID:	63
INPUT:	▁Honako ▁hauek ▁ziren ▁Judaren ▁leinukoek ▁hegoaldeko ▁ertzean , ▁Edomgo ▁muga ▁inguruan , ▁zituzten ▁hiriak : ▁K ab tze el , ▁Eder , ▁J ag ur ,
PRED:	These were the tribe of Edom : The tribe of Edom was named after the tribe of Edom , named after the territory of Edom .
GOLD:	The towns of Judah situated along the borders of Edom in the extreme south were Kabzeel , Eder , Jagur ,

ID:	64
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁ez ▁jokatu ▁horrela . ▁Zuen ▁artean ▁nagusiena ▁izan ▁bedi ▁gazteenaren ▁pareko , ▁eta ▁agin taria ▁zerbitzariaren ▁pareko .
PRED:	You have not done wrong , for your unfailing love is as well as you promised .
GOLD:	But among you it will be different . Those who are the greatest among you should take the lowest rank , and the leader should be like a servant .

ID:	65
INPUT:	▁Am etsa ▁eta ▁esanahia ▁entzun ▁zituenean , ▁Gedeonek , ▁makurtuz , ▁Jainkoa ▁gurtu ▁zuen . ▁Gero , ▁israeldarren ▁kanpalekura ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁oihuka :— Jaiki ! ▁Gure ▁esku ▁utzi ▁du ▁Jaunak ▁madiandarren ▁kanpalekua !
PRED:	When he heard what he had happened , he worshiped him and worshiped him . Then he worshiped the Lord , the God of Israel . “ Come , ” the Lord said .
GOLD:	When Gideon heard the dream and its interpretation , he bowed in worship before the Lord . Then he returned to the Israelite camp and shouted , “ Get up ! For the Lord has given you victory over the Midianite hordes ! ”

ID:	66
INPUT:	▁Lurraldea ▁estaltzen ▁duen ▁hodei ▁beltzak ▁bezala , ▁nire ▁herri ▁Israeli ▁erasoko ▁diozu . ▁Azken ▁garaia ▁iristean , ▁neure ▁herriaren ▁kontra ▁etorraraziko ▁zaitut , ▁neure ▁santutasuna ▁zure ▁bitartez , ▁oi ▁Gog , ▁beraien ▁aurrean ▁agertuko ▁dudanean , ▁nazioek ▁aitor ▁nazaten .
PRED:	You will be like a cloud , like the people of Israel , and you will attack my people . You will come down to the land of the Lord , the God of Israel , says the Lord .
GOLD:	and you will attack my people Israel , covering their land like a cloud . At that time in the distant future , I will bring you against my land as everyone watches , and my holiness will be displayed by what happens to you , Gog . Then all the nations will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	67
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁nazio ▁guztien ▁gainean ▁garai , haren ▁ospea ▁zeruak ▁baino ▁gorago .
PRED:	For the Lord is higher than all nations .
GOLD:	For the Lord is high above the nations ; his glory is higher than the heavens .

ID:	68
INPUT:	▁Beraiek ▁kontatzen ▁dute , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁nolako ▁harrera ▁egin ▁zeni gu ten ▁zuengana ▁joan ▁ginenean ▁eta ▁nola , ▁sasijainkoak ▁utzirik , ▁Jainko ▁bizi ▁eta ▁egiazko agana ▁itzuli ▁zineten , ▁berau ▁zerbitzatzeko
PRED:	In this way , you know that I have told you , ‘ This is what I have done to you . I am the one who sent you to serve the Lord . '
GOLD:	for they keep talking about the wonderful welcome you gave us and how you turned away from idols to serve the living and true God .

ID:	69
INPUT:	▁Labore - opari ▁eta ▁isur - opari ▁berdin a ▁egingo ▁duzu ▁ilunabarrean ▁beste ▁arkume arekin , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁du ▁bere ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁oparia .
PRED:	You must present a liquid offering to the regular grain offering and liquid offering . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Offer the other lamb in the evening , along with the same offerings of flour and wine as in the morning . It will be a pleasing aroma , a special gift presented to the Lord .

ID:	70
INPUT:	▁geure ▁bekatuengatik ▁hilik ▁geun d elarik , ▁bizia ▁eman ▁zigun ▁Kristorekin ▁batera ▁— on ginahi ▁hutsez ▁salbatu ▁zaituzte ! —;
PRED:	For our sins have been given to our ancestors , and we have given you his life to Christ .
GOLD:	that even though we were dead because of our sins , he gave us life when he raised Christ from the dead . ( It is only by God 's grace that you have been saved ! )

ID:	71
INPUT:	▁Gazte ▁izan ▁nintzen , ▁orain ▁zahar turik ▁nago : ez ▁dut ▁sekula ▁ikusi ▁zintzoa ▁bertan ▁behera ▁utzia , ezta ▁haren ▁ondorengorik ▁ere ▁ogi ▁eskean .
PRED:	I was now old when I saw the old man , I saw the righteous men who had never seen him . I saw the descendants of the Amorites , the descendants of Esau , who had never seen him .
GOLD:	Once I was young , and now I am old.Yet I have never seen the godly abandonedor their children begging for bread .

ID:	72
INPUT:	▁Eraman go ▁ditut , ▁ostera , ▁zuen ▁seme - alabak , ▁gatibu ▁eroriko ▁zirela ▁zenio tenak , ▁zuek ▁gutxietsi ▁duzuen ▁lurraldera , ▁hartaz ▁gozatzeko .
PRED:	Then I will send you home , and you will be sent to the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ ‘ You said your children would be carried off as plunder . Well , I will bring them safely into the land , and they will enjoy what you have despised .

ID:	73
INPUT:	▁Ismaelek ▁erro mes - taldea ▁hil
PRED:	Ishmael 's Final Words
GOLD:	The Murder of Gedaliah

ID:	74
INPUT:	▁Esan dako ▁on ▁guztiak ▁emango ▁dizkizu ▁Jaunak ▁eta ▁zu , ▁ene ▁jauna , ▁Israelen ▁buruzagi ▁eginen ▁zaitu .
PRED:	Then the Lord will give you good to you , and he will give you victory over Israel .
GOLD:	When the Lord has done all he promised and has made you leader of Israel ,

ID:	75
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea . ▁Urruti ko ▁herri ▁bati ▁dei
PRED:	A Warning against the Lord 's Enemies
GOLD:	Judah 's Guilt and Judgment

ID:	76
INPUT:	▁Guk ▁badakigu ▁heriotzatik ▁bizira ▁iragan ▁g arena , ▁eta ▁hau ▁jakin , ▁senideak ▁maite ▁ditugu lako ▁dakigu . ▁Maite ▁ez ▁duena ▁heriotzaren ▁menpe ▁dago .
PRED:	But we know that Christ was raised from death , so we know that we know that we are not faithful to death . ”
GOLD:	If we love our brothers and sisters who are believers , it proves that we have passed from death to life . But a person who has no love is still dead .

ID:	77
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁neuk ▁burutuko ▁dut ▁ituna ▁zurekin , ▁eta ▁orduan ▁jakingo ▁duzu ▁ni ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	I will make you an covenant with you , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will reaffirm my covenant with you , and you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	78
INPUT:	▁Zertan ▁ekarri ▁gaitu ▁Jaunak ▁lurralde ▁honetara : ▁gu ▁gerran ▁erortzeko ▁eta ▁gure ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁gatibu ▁bihurtzeko ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁genuke ▁hobe ▁Egiptora ▁itzuli ?»
PRED:	That is why the Lord has brought us to this land to this land . Why are we going to bring us back to Egypt ? What will we go to Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why is the Lord taking us to this country only to have us die in battle ? Our wives and our little ones will be carried off as plunder ! Would n't it be better for us to return to Egypt ? ”

ID:	79
INPUT:	▁Noemik ▁esan ▁zion ▁Ruti :— Bai , ▁alaba , ▁askoz ▁hobe ▁duzu ▁Booz en ▁soroan ▁beraren ▁morroiekin ▁lan ▁egin , ▁beste ▁inoren ▁soro tan ▁gogai taraz ▁ez ▁zaitzaten .
PRED:	Naomi said to her , “ You have a little daughter , ” Naomi replied . “ You have no one of the grain at the bed of the field . If you do n't have any of it . ”
GOLD:	“ Good ! ” Naomi exclaimed . “ Do as he said , my daughter . Stay with his young women right through the whole harvest . You might be harassed in other fields , but you 'll be safe with him . ”

ID:	80
INPUT:	▁Nik , ▁Paulok , ▁ez ▁giza ▁aginduz ▁edo ▁izen da penez , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁eta ▁hau ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁zuen ▁Jainko ▁Aitaren ▁izen da penez ▁baizik ▁apostolu ▁naizen ▁honek ,
PRED:	This is what Paul says : ‘ I am not raised from God , and I am the name of Christ Jesus Christ . I am the one who is raised from the dead . '
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , an apostle . I was not appointed by any group of people or any human authority , but by Jesus Christ himself and by God the Father , who raised Jesus from the dead .

ID:	81
INPUT:	▁Hogei ▁gizonekin ▁joan ▁zen ▁Hebronera , ▁Davidengana . ▁Honek ▁otordua ▁eman ▁zien ▁Abnerri ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁joan ▁zirenei .
PRED:	So David went to Hebron and went to Hebron to Hebron . He went with David and went with him .
GOLD:	When Abner and twenty of his men came to Hebron , David entertained them with a great feast .

ID:	82
INPUT:	▁Aur ki tzen ▁zituen ▁edonor ki ren sten ▁zituen ; ets aiek ▁honela ▁zioten :“ Guk ▁ez ▁dugu ▁errurik , ber ori ek ▁egin ▁baitute ▁bekatu Jaunaren ▁aurka ”». Jauna ▁da ▁justiziaren ▁barru ti , gu raso en ▁itxaropen !
PRED:	When he saw that his wings was covered with him , he said to him , ‘ We have not sinned against the Lord . '
GOLD:	All who found them devoured them.Their enemies said , ‘ We did nothing wrong in attacking them , for they sinned against the Lord , their true place of rest , and the hope of their ancestors . '

ID:	83
INPUT:	▁Gabaonen ▁dagoen ▁harri ▁handiaren ▁ingurura ▁heltzean , ▁han ▁non ▁dator kien ▁Amasa . ▁Joabek ▁guda - jantzia ▁zeraman ▁soinean , ▁gerriko z ▁loturik ▁eta ▁gerriko tik ▁zintzilik ▁ezpata ▁bere ▁zorro an . ▁Amas arengana ▁aurrera tzean , ▁ezpata ▁erori ▁zitzaion ▁Joabi .
PRED:	When Joab saw that the great stone was coming , he told Joab , “ What sorrow awaits Joab and laid his sword on the side of the battle . When Joab 's sword , he threw the sword into a sword . ”
GOLD:	As they arrived at the great stone in Gibeon , Amasa met them . Joab was wearing his military tunic with a dagger strapped to his belt . As he stepped forward to greet Amasa , he slipped the dagger from its sheath .

ID:	84
INPUT:	▁Big bai renak ▁ 2 . <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Anathoth128
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,067

ID:	85
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan :— Jarri ▁tra pu ▁zahar ▁horiek ▁bes apean , ▁sok aren ▁azpitik . Hala ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jeremiasek ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah said to him , “ These men are all around the hands of the earth , ” Jeremiah said .
GOLD:	Ebed-melech called down to Jeremiah , “ Put these rags under your armpits to protect you from the ropes. ” Then when Jeremiah was ready ,

ID:	86
INPUT:	▁« Zure ▁esku ina , ▁Jauna , izu garri ▁indartsu ! Ets aia ▁desegin ▁du .
PRED:	“ O Lord , you are your enemies ; your enemies surround me .
GOLD:	“ Your right hand , O Lord , is glorious in power.Your right hand , O Lord , smashes the enemy .

ID:	87
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁zuek , ▁etxea ▁etxeari eta ▁soroa ▁soro ari eran sten ▁diozuenok , beste ak ▁bizi toki rik ▁gabe ▁utziz , lurralde ▁osoaren j aun ▁eta ▁jabe ▁bakar ▁izateko !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who live in the field , and you will live in the field . They will live there , and they will live there .
GOLD:	What sorrow for you who buy up house after house and field after field , until everyone is evicted and you live alone in the land .

ID:	88
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁dira ▁Leak ▁Jakobi ▁Mesopotamian ▁sortu ▁zizkion ▁semeak , ▁Dina ▁bere ▁alab az ▁gainera ; ▁hogeita ▁hamahiru ▁guztira , ▁seme - alaba ▁eta ▁bilob en ▁artean .
PRED:	These were the sons of Jacob 's oldest son : The oldest sons of Jacob 's daughters were born to the oldest sons of Ephraim .
GOLD:	These were the sons of Leah and Jacob who were born in Paddan-aram , in addition to their daughter , Dinah . The number of Jacob 's descendants ( male and female ) through Leah was thirty-three .

ID:	89
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁apal ▁eta ▁egon ▁erne
PRED:	Hope for the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Peter 's Final Greetings

ID:	90
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁duzu ▁sexu - harremanik ▁izango ▁zeure ▁arreba orde arekin , ▁aitaren ▁nahiz ▁amaren ▁alabarekin , ▁ezta ▁etxe ▁berean ▁haz iak ▁ez ▁bazarete ▁ere .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your sister , or your mother 's sister , or your mother 's sister , or if you have sexual intercourse with your mother .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your sister or half sister , whether she is your father 's daughter or your mother 's daughter , whether she was born into your household or someone else 's .

ID:	91
INPUT:	▁Ea ▁bada , ▁sendotu ▁beso ▁ahul duak ▁eta ▁belaun ▁mak aldu ak ,
PRED:	Instead , let them grow strong , and encourage those who have weak knees .
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	92
INPUT:	▁« Hego alderantz , ▁ondorengo ▁beste ▁leinu ▁hauen ▁zatiak ▁daude , ▁ekialdeko ▁mu gatik ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoraino ▁hedatu z , ▁ord ena ▁honetan : ▁Benjamin , ▁Simeon , ▁Isakar , ▁Zabulon ▁eta ▁Gad .
PRED:	“ The descendants of the tribe of Zebulun will run south to the Mediterranean Sea . The eastern boundary will run to the Mediterranean Sea , Zebulun , and Zebulun .
GOLD:	“ These are the territories allotted to the rest of the tribes . Benjamin 's territory lies just south of the prince 's lands , and it extends across the entire land of Israel from east to west .

ID:	93
INPUT:	▁eta ▁haren ▁gorpua ▁simaur ▁bihurtuko ▁zela ▁al orrean , ▁Izreelgo ▁landan ; ▁inork ▁ere ▁ezin ▁izango ▁zuela ▁« Hau ▁Jezabel ▁da » ▁esan .
PRED:	When he goes out into the field , there will be no water in Jezreel . “ This is what the Kingdom of Jezreel , ” he said .
GOLD:	Her remains will be scattered like dung on the plot of land in Jezreel , so that no one will be able to recognize her . ' ”

ID:	94
INPUT:	▁Gore tsiko ▁dut ▁Jauna ▁bizi ▁naizen ▁artean , so inua ▁joko ▁neure ▁Jainkoari ▁naizen ▁artean .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord as long as I live.I will sing praises to my God with my dying breath .

ID:	95
INPUT:	▁Negar ▁eta ▁negar ▁ari ▁da ▁gauean , ▁masailak ▁malkoz ▁bete ta . Bere ▁maitaleen ▁artean , ▁ez ▁du ▁nork ▁kontsol aturik . Adiskide ▁guztiek ▁zapuztu ▁egin ▁dute , ▁etsai ▁bihurtu ▁zaizkio .
PRED:	They weep among those who weep , for their enemies are crushed among those who weep . They will not mourn for her ; they will flee from their enemies .
GOLD:	She sobs through the night ; tears stream down her cheeks.Among all her lovers , there is no one left to comfort her.All her friends have betrayed herand become her enemies .

ID:	96
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Eman ▁dezagun ▁zuetako ▁batek ▁adiskide ▁bat ▁duela ▁eta ▁gau erdian ▁datorki ola , ▁esanez : ▁“ Adi skidea , ▁em azki dak ▁hiru ▁ogi , ▁bihurtuko ▁di ti at ▁eta ;
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Let us go into the night , ” he said to them , “ We will look for three days . ”
GOLD:	Then , teaching them more about prayer , he used this story : “ Suppose you went to a friend 's house at midnight , wanting to borrow three loaves of bread . You say to him ,

ID:	97
INPUT:	▁zuek , ▁berriz , ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ▁atxikirik ▁iraun ▁zenuten ok , ▁bizirik ▁zaudete ▁oraindik .
PRED:	But you were still in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	But all of you who were faithful to the Lord your God are still alive today — every one of you .

ID:	98
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁belauniko ▁jartzen ▁naiz ▁Aitaren ▁aurrean ,
PRED:	So I lay my Father in the presence of the Father .
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I fall to my knees and pray to the Father ,

ID:	99
INPUT:	▁Jaitsi ▁eta ▁han ▁mintzatuko ▁natzaizu ▁eta , ▁zuk ▁duzun ▁espiritu tik ▁harturik , ▁haiengan ▁isuriko ▁dut , ▁herria ▁gidatzen ▁lagun ▁diezazu ten . ▁Horrela ▁ez ▁zara ▁bakarrik ▁izango .
PRED:	So I will speak to you , and I will speak to you . Then I will pour out your word to you .
GOLD:	I will come down and talk to you there . I will take some of the Spirit that is upon you , and I will put the Spirit upon them also . They will bear the burden of the people along with you , so you will not have to carry it alone .

ID:	100
INPUT:	▁Gudari ▁ausart ▁haien ▁ofizi alak ▁bi ▁mila ▁eta ▁seiehun ▁familiaburu ▁ziren .
PRED:	These men were the troops of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	These regiments of mighty warriors were commanded by 2,600 clan leaders .

ID:	101
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrek ▁kontsulta ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁egun ▁haietan ▁Betelen ▁zegoen ▁Jainkoaren ▁itun - kutxa
PRED:	But the people of Israel did what the Lord had done to the Ark of God .
GOLD:	The Israelites went up seeking direction from the Lord . ( In those days the Ark of the Covenant of God was in Bethel ,

ID:	102
INPUT:	▁zergatik ▁zaudete , ▁gailur ▁garai ok , ▁inbi diaz ▁begira Jainkoak ▁bizitzeko ▁desi ratu ▁duen ▁mendiari , Jaunak ▁betiko ▁bizileku ▁egin ▁duenari ?
PRED:	Why do you live in the sky , O God , who lives in your land ? Do you live forever ?
GOLD:	Surrounded by unnumbered thousands of chariots , the Lord came from Mount Sinai into his sanctuary .

ID:	103
INPUT:	▁Ikusten ▁nauten ek ▁burla ▁egiten ▁didate , ke inuka ▁eta ▁ze inuka .
PRED:	How joyful are those who look for me , O God !
GOLD:	“ Is this the one who relies on the Lord ? Then let the Lord save him ! If the Lord loves him so much , let the Lord rescue him ! ”

ID:	104
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁herriak ▁Jainkoarekin ▁adiskidetu ▁ditu ▁eta ▁guru tzeko ▁heriotzaren ▁bidez ▁gorputz ▁bakar ▁batean ▁elkartu , ▁beraien ▁arteko ▁etsai goa ▁suntsi tuz .
PRED:	The people of God is a strong man , and the people of Israel are like a wild animal .
GOLD:	Together as one body , Christ reconciled both groups to God by means of his death on the cross , and our hostility toward each other was put to death .

ID:	105
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jakob ▁Egiptora ▁joan ▁zen eta ▁K amen ▁lurraldean ▁atzerritar ▁gisa ▁bizi ▁izan .
PRED:	Then Jacob went to Egypt with a foreigner in the land of Ham .
GOLD:	Then Israel arrived in Egypt ; Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham .

ID:	106
INPUT:	▁« Ez - mai tea » ▁bul arretik ▁kendu ▁ondoren , ▁Gomer - ek ▁berriro ▁haurdun ▁gelditu ▁eta ▁semea ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with her , and she became pregnant and gave birth to her son .
GOLD:	After Gomer had weaned Lo-ruhamah , she again became pregnant and gave birth to a second son .

ID:	107
INPUT:	▁Jakobek , ▁zahar da dez ▁begiak ▁lauso turik , ▁ezin ▁zuen ▁ikusi . ▁Josek ▁bere ▁semeak ▁aurrera ▁eraman ▁zizkion ean , ▁laztan du ▁eta ▁besarkatu ▁egin ▁zituen .
PRED:	When Jacob saw that Jacob had seen his eyes , he did n't see him . When Joseph saw him , he saw his sons , he took him to him .
GOLD:	Jacob was half blind because of his age and could hardly see . So Joseph brought the boys close to him , and Jacob kissed and embraced them .

ID:	108
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁zera ! ▁Bihotz ▁makur rez ▁jokatzen ▁duzue , zeuen ▁egite ez ▁lurraldean ▁bide gabek eriak ▁zabaltzen .
PRED:	Yes , you are good , and your good deeds are useless .
GOLD:	These wicked people are born sinners ; even from birth they have lied and gone their own way .

ID:	109
INPUT:	▁Jeroboamen ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak , ▁egintza ▁guztiak , ▁ekintza ▁bizkorrak ▁eta ▁Judaren ak ▁izandako ▁Damasko ▁eta ▁Hamat ▁hiriak ▁Israelentzat ▁berreskuratzeko ▁eginiko ▁guduak ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events of Jeroboam 's reign and everything he had done . The rest of the events of the Kings of Israel are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in the reign of Jeroboam II and everything he did — including the extent of his power , his wars , and how he recovered for Israel both Damascus and Hamath , which had belonged to Judah — are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	110
INPUT:	▁Atzerri etan ▁putzuak ▁zulatu ▁dituteta ▁bertako ▁ura ▁edan ; han ka pean ▁zapaldu z leh ortu ▁egin ▁ditut Egiptoko ▁ubide ▁guztiak ”.
PRED:	For I have dug deep waters of my enemies in the streets of Zin . I have dug the rivers of Egypt in the wilderness of Egypt . '
GOLD:	I have dug wells in many foreign landsand refreshed myself with their water.With the sole of my foot , I stopped up all the rivers of Egypt ! '

ID:	111
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuko ▁gil tzak ▁emango ▁dizkizut ; ▁zuk ▁mundu ▁honetan ▁lotua ▁zeruan ▁ere ▁loturik ▁geldituko ▁da , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁mundu ▁honetan ▁askatua ▁zeruan ▁ere ▁askatu rik ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	For I will give you the authority of God on earth , and you will be put on earth on earth .
GOLD:	And I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven . Whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven . ”

ID:	112
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁gantz ▁guztiak ▁aurkeztuko ▁dira : ▁buztan a , ▁heste ▁inguruko ▁gantza ,
PRED:	The fat of the fat must present the fat of the fat , the fat of the internal organs ,
GOLD:	The priest will then offer all its fat on the altar , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	113
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁orain , ▁Sik u t ▁zuen ▁jainko - errege aren ▁eta ▁K i ion ▁zuen ▁jainko - iz arraren ▁irudiak ▁egin ▁dituzuen ez ,
PRED:	But now now , the leader of the earth , the gods of your gods — all your gods .
GOLD:	No , you served your pagan gods — Sakkuth your king god and Kaiwan your star god — the images you made for yourselves .

ID:	114
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zera ▁esan ▁nion : ▁« Nirekin ▁egongo ▁zara ▁luzaro , ▁prostituzioan ▁ibili ▁gabe ▁eta ▁zeure ▁burua ▁inongo ▁gizon i ▁eman ▁gabe . ▁Nik ▁ere ▁ez ▁dizut ▁neure ▁burua ▁emango ».
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ You will be a long time with me , and you will have a young man with your prostitution . I will give you a young man to you . ”
GOLD:	Then I said to her , “ You must live in my house for many days and stop your prostitution . During this time , you will not have sexual relations with anyone , not even with me . ”

ID:	115
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Paulo ▁eta ▁Silas ▁ F ri gia ▁eta ▁Gal azia ▁eskualde etan ▁barrena ▁joan ▁ziren , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuak ▁eragotzi ▁egin ▁baitzien ▁Asia ▁probintzi an ▁mezua ▁zabal tzea .
PRED:	Paul and Silas traveled through the province of Asia and traveled through the region of the province of Asia . So they traveled through the province of Asia .
GOLD:	Next Paul and Silas traveled through the area of Phrygia and Galatia , because the Holy Spirit had prevented them from preaching the word in the province of Asia at that time .

ID:	116
INPUT:	▁Larrialdi - ▁eta ▁piztuera - garaia
PRED:	The Coming of the Coming
GOLD:	The Time of the End

ID:	117
INPUT:	▁Behin , ▁Jesus ▁herri ▁batean ▁zela , ▁legen az ▁josi tako ▁gizon ▁bat ▁azaldu ▁zen ; ▁Jesus ▁ikustean , ▁ahuspez ▁lurrera ▁erori ▁eta ▁erregutu ▁zion :— Jauna , ▁nahi ▁baduzu , ▁garbi ▁nazak ezu .
PRED:	One day Jesus knew that the people had been crucified with a man , and they fell to the ground . But if he saw him , he fell to the ground , he said , “ If you are clean and heal me . ”
GOLD:	In one of the villages , Jesus met a man with an advanced case of leprosy . When the man saw Jesus , he bowed with his face to the ground , begging to be healed . “ Lord , ” he said , “ if you are willing , you can heal me and make me clean . ”

ID:	118
INPUT:	▁« G aria ▁jaso ▁eta ▁ardoa ▁u p el eratu ▁ondoren , ▁Etxola ▁Jaia ▁ospatuko ▁duzue ▁zazpi ▁egunez .
PRED:	“ If you build the new wine and drinking the Festival of Shelters , you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters for seven days .
GOLD:	“ You must observe the Festival of Shelters for seven days at the end of the harvest season , after the grain has been threshed and the grapes have been pressed .

ID:	119
INPUT:	▁« Horregatik , ▁hau ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : ▁Nire ▁hitzak ▁aditu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁ez ▁dituzuelako ,
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says :
GOLD:	And now the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Because you have not listened to me ,

ID:	120
INPUT:	▁erantzun ▁nion :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁ongi ▁baderitz ozu ▁eta ▁begiko ▁baldin ▁banauzu , ▁bidal ▁nazazu ▁Judara , ▁nire ▁gurasoak ▁hilobi ratuak ▁dauden ▁hirira , ▁berriro ▁eraiki ▁dezadan .
PRED:	“ Well , my lord , ” the king replied . “ If you go to the city , let me go to the city . If I have built a long time , I will rebuild the city . ”
GOLD:	I replied , “ If it please the king , and if you are pleased with me , your servant , send me to Judah to rebuild the city where my ancestors are buried . ”

ID:	121
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁jarraitu ▁zuen ▁Jaunak : ▁« Judako ▁jendea ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunak ▁azpi joko an ▁ari ▁dira ▁nire ▁aurka .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to the people of Judah , “ The people of Judah are making against the people of Judah .
GOLD:	Again the Lord spoke to me and said , “ I have discovered a conspiracy against me among the people of Judah and Jerusalem .

ID:	122
INPUT:	▁« Horregatik ▁maite ▁nau ▁Aitak , ▁neure ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁dudalako ▁eta ▁horrela ▁eskuratzen ▁berriro .
PRED:	“ That is why my Father loves me , ” he said .
GOLD:	“ The Father loves me because I sacrifice my life so I may take it back again .

ID:	123
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Egun ▁bakoitzean ▁familiaburu ▁des berdin ak ▁eramango ▁du ▁oparia ▁aldarearen ▁inau gu raz i orako ».
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ In this way , you will be given to the priests , and you will bring your offerings to the altar . ”
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Let one leader bring his gift each day for the dedication of the altar . ”

ID:	124
INPUT:	▁hilarazteko ▁garaiaeta ▁sendatzeko ▁garaia , hon datzeko ▁garaiaeta ▁eraikitzeko ▁garaia ,
PRED:	A time to harvest a time to harvest , a time for a time to harvest .
GOLD:	A time to kill and a time to heal.A time to tear down and a time to build up .

ID:	125
INPUT:	▁Beren ▁abereak ▁eta ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldean ▁pilatu tako ▁ondasunak ▁ere ▁eraman ▁zituzten .
PRED:	They took all the livestock and livestock in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	They also took all their livestock and all the personal belongings they had acquired in the land of Canaan . So Jacob and his entire family went to Egypt —

ID:	126
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁agertu ▁zitzaion ▁Abrami ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Hau ▁da ▁zure ▁ondorengoei ▁emango ▁diedan ▁lurraldea ». Eta ▁aldarea ▁eraiki ▁zion ▁bertan ▁Abramek ▁agertu ▁zitzaion ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	The Lord appeared to Abram and said , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what I have built to the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord appeared to Abram and said , “ I will give this land to your descendants. ” And Abram built an altar there and dedicated it to the Lord , who had appeared to him .

ID:	127
INPUT:	▁« As ko ▁dira ▁emakume ▁jator rak , baina ▁zuk ▁ez ▁duzu ▁parekorik !»
PRED:	“ In the old age , O women , ” says the Lord. “ There is no one of you ! ”
GOLD:	“ There are many virtuous and capable women in the world , but you surpass them all ! ”

ID:	128
INPUT:	▁Ai , ▁basamortuan ▁egon lekua aurki tuko ▁banu , neure ▁herria ▁utzi eta ▁harengandik ▁urruti ▁bizitzeko ! Des leial ak ▁baitira ▁guztiak , tra idore ▁hutsak ▁denak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me in the wilderness , and I would not let the nations become as far as though they have deserted me .
GOLD:	If only my head were a pool of waterand my eyes a fountain of tears , I would weep day and nightfor all my people who have been slaughtered .

ID:	129
INPUT:	▁Zabaldu ▁zuen ▁Esdras ek ▁liburua ▁herri ▁osoaren ▁aurrean , ▁denak ▁begira ▁zituela ; ▁liburua ▁zabal tze arekin ▁batera , ▁herri ▁osoa ▁zutitu ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	So Ezra looked at the Book of all the people , and all the people looked at the scroll . When all the people saw it , he stood up in front of the town .
GOLD:	Ezra stood on the platform in full view of all the people . When they saw him open the book , they all rose to their feet .

ID:	130
INPUT:	▁eta ▁erregeari ▁jakinarazi ▁zion ▁oihuka . ▁Erregeak ▁esan ▁zuen :— B ak arrik ▁baldin ▁badator , ▁berri ▁onak ▁dakar tza . Las ter karia ▁hurbildu ▁ahala , ▁ordea ,
PRED:	When the king told the king , he said to the king , “ If the king is coming , it is true ! ” But the king said to the king .
GOLD:	He shouted the news down to David , and the king replied , “ If he is alone , he has news. ” As the messenger came closer ,

ID:	131
INPUT:	▁“ Zoritx arren ▁bat , ▁gerra ▁nahiz ▁zigorra , ▁izurritea ▁nahiz ▁gosetea , ▁gertatzean , ▁zu ▁zauden eko ▁tenplu ▁honetara ▁zure ▁aitzinera ▁etorri ▁eta ▁geure ▁atsekabean ▁zuri ▁oihu ▁eginez ▁gero , ▁zuk ▁entzun ▁eta ▁salbatu ▁egingo ▁gaituzu ”.
PRED:	‘ This is what the famine says : If a famine has been killed , you and disease and disease , you will come to this Temple , and you will come to this Temple and hear your word . '
GOLD:	They said , ‘ Whenever we are faced with any calamity such as war , plague , or famine , we can come to stand in your presence before this Temple where your name is honored . We can cry out to you to save us , and you will hear us and rescue us . '

ID:	132
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zien ▁Josuek ▁herriko ▁funtzionarioei :
PRED:	Then Joshua gave them this command :
GOLD:	Joshua then commanded the officers of Israel ,

ID:	133
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁esan ▁zion :— Zergatik ▁hartu ▁duzue ▁elkar ▁Jaunaren ▁Espiritua ▁ten tatzeko ? ▁Hara , ▁atean ▁dira ▁dagoeneko ▁zure ▁senarrari ▁lur ▁eman ▁diotenak ; ▁zu ▁eramango ▁zaituzte ▁orain .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Why are you trying to take advantage of the Lord 's Spirit ? ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	134
INPUT:	▁baina ▁Jainkoak , ▁handikiak ▁mespretxatzen eta ▁biderik ▁gabeko ▁basamortuan ▁nora gab ei bil arazten ▁dituenak ,
PRED:	But God will punish them in the wilderness , but they are not allowed to live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	the Lord pours contempt on their princes , causing them to wander in trackless wastelands .

ID:	135
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ikara , ▁ardura gabeok ! Egin ▁dardara , ▁axol agabe ok ! Er antzi , ▁kendu ▁soineko ▁horiek , eta ▁estali ▁dolu - jantziz .
PRED:	Look , you look at your feet , and your clothes are clothed in mourning .
GOLD:	Tremble , you women of ease ; throw off your complacency.Strip off your pretty clothes , and put on burlap to show your grief .

ID:	136
INPUT:	▁Lehen ▁ase ▁zirenek , orain ▁ogi ▁or de ▁egin ▁behar ▁lan ; gose tu ek , ▁aldiz , ats eden ▁har ▁dezakete . Agor ▁zena , ▁haur ▁askoz ▁erdi ▁da ; asko ren ▁ama , ▁berriz , ▁agortu .
PRED:	For the first food you have dried up , but the same way gives birth to the others . In fact , the birth of many years , the baby who lived long enough to rise again .
GOLD:	Those who were well fed are now starving , and those who were starving are now full.The childless woman now has seven children , and the woman with many children wastes away .

ID:	137
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁gaitu ▁bere ▁haserre - zigorra ▁jas ateko ▁nahi , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunaren ▁bitartez ▁salbamena ▁iristeko ▁baizik .
PRED:	For God has not been able to suffer with us . He must be put to work with us , for we want us to share the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	For God chose to save us through our Lord Jesus Christ , not to pour out his anger on us .

ID:	138
INPUT:	▁harroputz ei ▁iseka ▁egiten ▁die eta ▁apal ▁direnei ▁babesa ▁ematen .
PRED:	He gives justice to those who are wise ; he leads to the poor .
GOLD:	The Lord mocks the mockersbut is gracious to the humble .

ID:	139
INPUT:	▁Mundu arentzat ▁gatz ▁eta ▁argi
PRED:	Noah and the Light
GOLD:	Teaching about Salt and Light

ID:	140
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁esan ▁zion :— Zeure ▁erruz ▁hiltzen ▁zara ! ▁Zeure ▁ahoak ▁salatu ▁zaitu , ▁Jaunaren ▁gantzutua ▁hil ▁duzula ▁esatean .
PRED:	David said to him , “ You are your sword ! You have killed you , and you will kill you . ”
GOLD:	“ You have condemned yourself , ” David said , “ for you yourself confessed that you killed the Lord 's anointed one . ”

ID:	141
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁kontu ! ▁Erabat ▁suntsitu ▁behar ▁da ▁guztia . ▁Zeu entzat ▁zerbait ▁hartuko ▁bazenute , ▁suntsipena ▁eta ▁ezbeharra ▁ekarriko ▁zeni tuzkete ▁israeldar ron ▁kanpalekura .
PRED:	“ But you must be destroyed by the old time , ” says the Lord . “ In this way , you will turn away from the camp of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Do not take any of the things set apart for destruction , or you yourselves will be completely destroyed , and you will bring trouble on the camp of Israel .

ID:	142
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zuen ▁sinesmenaren ▁kultu - zerbitzua ▁burutzeko ▁nire ▁bizia ▁opari ▁eskaini ▁behar ▁badut ▁ere , ▁pozik ▁nago ▁eta ▁alaitu ▁egiten ▁naiz ▁zuekin ▁guztiokin .
PRED:	And if you worship the worship of your ancestors , I must offer sacrifices to you . And I will make you holy . I know that I am with you . ”
GOLD:	But I will rejoice even if I lose my life , pouring it out like a liquid offering to God , just like your faithful service is an offering to God . And I want all of you to share that joy .

ID:	143
INPUT:	▁Apaizen ▁lurrak ▁bakarrik ▁utzi ▁zituen ▁erosi ▁gabe , ▁haien ▁alde ▁lege ▁bat ▁baitzuen ▁faraoiak ▁emana ; ▁honek ▁ematen ▁zien ▁jateko ▁behar ▁zutena . ▁Hon engatik , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁beren ▁lurrak ▁saldu ▁beharrik ▁izan .
PRED:	So Moses gave the area to the area , however , and he gave them food to eat . So Pharaoh gave them food for them .
GOLD:	The only land he did not buy was the land belonging to the priests . They received an allotment of food directly from Pharaoh , so they did n't need to sell their land .

ID:	144
INPUT:	▁zapuztu ▁egin ▁dut ▁eta ▁munduko ▁erregerik ▁ahaltsu en aren ▁esku ▁utzi , ▁beraren ▁gaiztakeriak ▁merezi ▁bezala ▁erabil ▁dezan .
PRED:	I have made a great king and powerful king , and he has given you victory over your sins .
GOLD:	I will hand it over to a mighty nation that will destroy it as its wickedness deserves . I have already discarded it .

ID:	145
INPUT:	▁Denbora ldi ▁luze ▁baten ▁ondoren , ▁hil ▁zen ▁Judaren ▁emaztea , ▁X uaren ▁alaba . ▁Dolu aldia ▁bukatu ▁zuenean , ▁Timn ara ▁igo ▁zen ▁Juda ▁ardi - moz tera ▁Adul amgo ▁bere ▁adiskide ▁H ir arekin .
PRED:	When he returned to search for a long time , the daughter of Judah returned to the town of Judah . When the daughter of Judah arrived with her , he went to the town of Adullam .
GOLD:	Some years later Judah 's wife died . After the time of mourning was over , Judah and his friend Hirah the Adullamite went up to Timnah to supervise the shearing of his sheep .

ID:	146
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁ikus ▁nire ▁larri aldia ! ▁I rak iten ▁daukat ▁barrua . I ra ul ia ▁dut ▁bihotza ▁barnean , ▁errebelde ▁izan ▁bainaiz , ▁errebelde . K al ean ▁ezpatak ▁hil ▁dizkit ▁haurrak , ▁etxean ▁herio a ▁jabe .
PRED:	My heart is true , and my heart is troubled , and my heart is filled with violence .
GOLD:	“ Lord , see my anguish ! My heart is brokenand my soul despairs , for I have rebelled against you.In the streets the sword kills , and at home there is only death .

ID:	147
INPUT:	▁zure ▁aurrean ▁alaitzen ▁da ▁egunero , zure ▁justizia ▁du ▁bozkari o .
PRED:	Your faithfulness reaches to you , for your unfailing love is filled with joy .
GOLD:	You are their glorious strength.It pleases you to make us strong .

ID:	148
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zan goa ▁edo ▁besoa ▁hauts irik ▁duena ,
PRED:	The king detests them with orphans , or those who hate them .
GOLD:	or has a broken foot or arm ,

ID:	149
INPUT:	▁Korn elio ▁begira ▁gelditu ▁zitzaion ▁eta , ▁beldurrak ▁harturik , ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Zer ▁duzu , ▁Jauna ? A in ger uak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Zure ▁otoitz ▁eta ▁limos nak ▁atsegin ▁izan ▁zaizkio ▁Jainkoari ▁eta ▁gogoan ▁ditu .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter looked at him and said to him , “ What is the Lord your God ? ”
GOLD:	Cornelius stared at him in terror . “ What is it , sir ? ” he asked the angel.And the angel replied , “ Your prayers and gifts to the poor have been received by God as an offering !

ID:	150
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁aingeruak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« L o tu ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁jantzi ▁oinetakoak ». ▁Hala ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁aingeruak , ▁berriro : ▁« J antzi ▁soingainekoa ▁eta ▁jarraitu ▁niri ».
PRED:	Then the angel said to him , “ Take your clothes and fine linen clothing , and wear your clothes and clothing . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel told him , “ Get dressed and put on your sandals. ” And he did . “ Now put on your coat and follow me , ” the angel ordered .

ID:	151
INPUT:	▁Irain du ▁zuen arentzat ▁barkamena
PRED:	Faith in Faith
GOLD:	Forgiveness for the Sinner

ID:	152
INPUT:	▁Xunem go ▁emakumearen ▁is to ri oa ▁bukatu
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	The Woman from Shunem Returns Home

ID:	153
INPUT:	▁Burua ▁galduko ▁duteeta ▁beren ▁asmoak ▁hautsiko ▁dizkiet . Orduan , ▁idolo ▁eta ▁zori lari engana , hildakoen ▁espiritu ▁eta ▁azti engana joko ▁dute ▁kontseil u ▁eske .
PRED:	Then I will punish them with their idols , and they will bow before the Lord . They will bow before the dead .
GOLD:	The Egyptians will lose heart , and I will confuse their plans.They will plead with their idols for wisdomand call on spirits , mediums , and those who consult the spirits of the dead .

ID:	154
INPUT:	▁Zatoz kit ▁lehenbailehen ,
PRED:	Come , listen to what you have done to him !
GOLD:	Timothy , please come as soon as you can .

ID:	155
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁Daniel , ▁Babiloniako ▁jakitun ak ▁hiltzeko ▁erregearen ▁agindua ▁hartua ▁zuen ▁Ariok engana ▁joan ▁zen , ▁esanez : ▁« Ez ▁hil ▁Babiloniako ▁jakitun ik ! ▁Aur kez ▁nazazu ▁erregeagana , ▁neuk ▁argituko ▁baitiot ▁ametsa ».
PRED:	Then Daniel said to the king of Babylon , “ Do n't tell anyone about the king of Babylon , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , ” he said . “ Do n't let me tell me what I say . ”
GOLD:	Then Daniel went in to see Arioch , whom the king had ordered to execute the wise men of Babylon . Daniel said to him , “ Do n't kill the wise men . Take me to the king , and I will tell him the meaning of his dream . ”

ID:	156
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁herriak ▁aho ▁batez ▁erantzun ▁zuen : ▁« Jaunak ▁agindu ▁guztia ▁beteko ▁dugu ». Herri aren ▁erantzuna ▁Jaunari ▁eramatera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Moises .
PRED:	Then the people said to Moses , “ We must obey all the commands the Lord had commanded Moses . ” So Moses said to Moses .
GOLD:	And all the people responded together , “ We will do everything the Lord has commanded. ” So Moses brought the people 's answer back to the Lord .

ID:	157
INPUT:	▁Errege ▁hauek ▁gudu ▁egin ▁zieten ▁Sodomako ▁Bera , ▁Gomor rako ▁B ir xa , ▁Ad mako ▁Xin ab , ▁Tz ebo imgo ▁X eme ber ▁erregeei ▁eta ▁B elako , ▁hau ▁da , ▁Tzoar ko , ▁erregeari .
PRED:	So all the people went to the king of Egypt , along with their surrounding villages . These were all from the territory of the Euphrates River , named after their ancestor River , from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	fought against King Bera of Sodom , King Birsha of Gomorrah , King Shinab of Admah , King Shemeber of Zeboiim , and the king of Bela ( also called Zoar ) .

ID:	158
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁nik , ▁zure ▁zerbitzari ▁honek , ▁neure ▁gain ▁hartua ▁dut ▁mutiko aren ▁erantzukizuna ; ▁hitza ▁eman ▁nion ▁aitari ; ▁berekiko ▁errudun ▁izango ▁nintzateke ▁betiko , ▁itzuliko ▁ez ▁ban io .
PRED:	And now I gave you a servant to your servant . I was a boy named him , for she would not be guilty .
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	159
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bere ▁bizia ▁gorde ▁nahi ▁duenak ▁galdu ▁egingo ▁du ; ▁bere ▁bizia ▁niregatik ▁galtzen ▁duenak , ▁ordea , ▁eskuratu ▁egingo ▁du .
PRED:	If you turn your life , you will lose your life , you will lose your life . But you will lose your life .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake , you will save it .

ID:	160
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁dio : ▁« Hara , ▁laster ▁nator . ▁Zorionekoa ▁liburu ▁honetan ▁ematen ▁den ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezua ▁kontuan ▁hartzen ▁duena !»
PRED:	“ Look , ” Jesus said , “ I am coming in this book . I am coming to the word of God . ”
GOLD:	“ Look , I am coming soon ! Blessed are those who obey the words of prophecy written in this book . ”

ID:	161
INPUT:	▁Jo ▁bularra ▁eta ▁egin ▁dolu : lan da ▁zoragarri eta ▁mahasti ▁eman korrak am aitu ▁dira ▁eta ;
PRED:	My heart is in mourning ; she has given them the vineyards of the vineyard .
GOLD:	Beat your breasts in sorrow for your bountiful farmsand your fruitful grapevines .

ID:	162
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Izan ▁bedi ▁sab aia ▁uren ▁artean , ▁goiko ▁eta ▁beheko ▁urak ▁bereiz ▁ditzan ». Eta ▁hala ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ May the water be poured out from the water from the water . ”
GOLD:	Then God said , “ Let there be a space between the waters , to separate the waters of the heavens from the waters of the earth . ”

ID:	163
INPUT:	▁otoitza ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁« Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁ez ▁da ▁zu ▁bezalako ▁beste ▁jainkorik , ▁ez ▁goian ▁zeruan , ▁ez ▁behean ▁lurrean . ▁Bete tzen ▁duzu ▁ituna ▁eta ▁onbera ▁zara ▁zure ▁aurrean ▁bihotzez ▁zintzo ▁dabiltzan ▁zeure ▁mirabe entzat .
PRED:	“ Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , says to you , “ You have no mercy on earth . You have never seen your covenant with all your hearts .
GOLD:	and he prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven above or on the earth below . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	164
INPUT:	▁Kim uak ▁botako ▁ditu ; haren ▁ederra ▁olibondo aren abez alako a ▁izango ▁da , haren ▁usaina Liban o koa ▁bezain ▁gozoa .
PRED:	The godless are as beautiful as beautiful as beautiful as beautiful as the cedars of Lebanon . It is as beautiful as beautiful as the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	My people will again live under my shade.They will flourish like grain and blossom like grapevines.They will be as fragrant as the wines of Lebanon .

ID:	165
INPUT:	▁Abimelekek ▁bere ▁talde arekin ▁aurreratu ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁sarrera ▁hartu ▁zuen ; ▁bitartean , ▁beste ▁bi ▁talde ek ▁landara ▁atera ▁zirenei ▁eraso ▁eta ▁xehatu ▁egin ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Abimelech left the town and went out to the town of the town , and the other side of the town . He attacked the other side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Abimelech and his group stormed the city gate to keep the men of Shechem from getting back in , while Abimelech 's other two groups cut them down in the fields .

ID:	166
INPUT:	▁Atera tzean , ▁Ziren eko ▁gizon ▁bat ▁aurkitu ▁zuten , ▁Simon ▁zeritzana , ▁eta ▁Jesusen ▁gurutzea ▁eramatera ▁behartu ▁zuten .
PRED:	When they arrived , they found Simon , a man named Simon , who was staying in the region of Jesus .
GOLD:	Along the way , they came across a man named Simon , who was from Cyrene , and the soldiers forced him to carry Jesus ' cross .

ID:	167
INPUT:	▁Otoitz ean ▁sinesmen ez ▁eskatzen ▁duzuen ▁edozer ▁gauza ▁lortuko ▁duzue .
PRED:	When you pray for your faith , you will be filled with fear .
GOLD:	You can pray for anything , and if you have faith , you will receive it . ”

ID:	168
INPUT:	▁« Zeuen ▁herritarrari ▁zerbait ▁— diru a , ▁janaria ▁nahiz ▁beste ▁edozer ▁gauza — ▁maileguz ▁ematean , ▁ez ▁diozue ▁eskatuko ▁interes ik .
PRED:	“ Do not use any of your neighbor or your neighbor or your neighbor . Do not defile your neighbor with your neighbor .
GOLD:	You may charge interest to foreigners , but you may not charge interest to Israelites , so that the Lord your God may bless you in everything you do in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	169
INPUT:	▁David ▁errege ▁izendatu ▁Hebronen
PRED:	David Kills David
GOLD:	David Anointed King of Judah

ID:	170
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁hitz - hotsa ▁entzutean , ▁kon or te ▁gabe ▁gelditu ▁nintzen ▁eta ▁ahuspez ▁lurrera ▁erori .
PRED:	When I heard his voice , I looked at the ground and looked at the ground .
GOLD:	Then I heard the man speak , and when I heard the sound of his voice , I fainted and lay there with my face to the ground .

ID:	171
INPUT:	▁Goizean ▁goiz ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁hiri - sarrerako ▁ate ▁ondoan ▁jarri ▁ohi ▁zen . ▁Norbaitek ▁araz oren ▁batengatik ▁erregeagana ▁zuzenbide ▁eske ▁etorri ▁beharra ▁zuenean , ▁Absalomek ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁galdetu ▁ohi ▁zion :— Zein ▁hiri takoa ▁zara ? Eta ▁besteak ▁erantzuten :— Israelgo ▁halako ▁leinukoa .
PRED:	When he got up early the next morning , he went out to the gate to the king . “ What is you going to go to the king ? ” he asked . “ What is you doing ? ”
GOLD:	He got up early every morning and went out to the gate of the city . When people brought a case to the king for judgment , Absalom would ask where in Israel they were from , and they would tell him their tribe .

ID:	172
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁non ▁datoz ki gun ▁eraso an ▁orain ▁amondarrak , ▁moabdarrak ▁eta ▁Seir ▁mendi etakoak . ▁Gure ▁arbasoei , ▁Egiptotik ▁etortzean , ▁ez ▁zenien ▁haien ▁lurraldeetan ▁sartzen ▁utzi ; ▁israeldarrek ▁itzul ingurua ▁egin ▁zuten ▁eta ▁ez ▁zituzten ▁hondatu .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ You are going to attack the land of Moab , the land of Moab , and the people of Israel did not abandon them .
GOLD:	“ And now see what the armies of Ammon , Moab , and Mount Seir are doing . You would not let our ancestors invade those nations when Israel left Egypt , so they went around them and did not destroy them .

ID:	173
INPUT:	▁Aingeruak ▁adierazi ▁zidan :— Gaiz tak eria ▁da . On tzi ▁barrura ▁bultza ▁egin ▁zion ▁emakumeari ▁eta ▁berun ezko ▁estalkia ▁ezarri ▁gainean .
PRED:	Then the angel said to me , “ It is so hard to give birth to the body . He placed it on the side of the atonement . ”
GOLD:	The angel said , “ The woman 's name is Wickedness , ” and he pushed her back into the basket and closed the heavy lid again .

ID:	174
INPUT:	▁Zintzoa ▁zara ▁zu , ▁Jauna , ▁zuzena ▁zeure ▁erabaki etan .
PRED:	O Lord , you are your regulations ; you are your regulations .
GOLD:	O Lord , you are righteous , and your regulations are fair .

ID:	175
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ez ▁dut ▁atsegin ▁inoren ▁heriotza ; ▁itzuli , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁bizi ▁zaitezte ! ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	I will not turn away from sin , and do n't turn to death . I am the Sovereign Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	I do n't want you to die , says the Sovereign Lord . Turn back and live !

ID:	176
INPUT:	▁Israeli ▁buruzko ▁Jaunaren ▁mezua . ▁Jaunak ▁zabaldu ▁du ▁zerua , ▁berak ▁oinarritu ▁lurra , ▁berak ▁eman ▁dio ▁gizakiari ▁bizi - arnasa .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to Israel , and he has given the heavens to the earth . He gives the earth to the earth .
GOLD:	This message concerning the fate of Israel came from the Lord : “ This message is from the Lord , who stretched out the heavens , laid the foundations of the earth , and formed the human spirit .

ID:	177
INPUT:	▁herri ▁guztien ▁aurrean ▁zuk ▁aurkez tua :
PRED:	Then you will stand before all the people , and you will stand before you .
GOLD:	which you have prepared for all people .

ID:	178
INPUT:	▁Akab , ▁Israelgo ▁errege
PRED:	Ahab Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Ahab Rules in Israel

ID:	179
INPUT:	▁aitak ▁ez ▁bezala : ▁sasikultu - lekuetako ▁otordu etan ▁parte ▁hartzen ▁du , ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ▁emaztea ▁desohoratzen ;
PRED:	He does not commit adultery on the mountains . He does not commit adultery .
GOLD:	And that son does all the evil things his father would never do — he worships idols on the mountains , commits adultery ,

ID:	180
INPUT:	▁ez ▁ilunpetan ▁zabaltzen ▁den ▁izurri ari , ez ▁egun - argitan ▁jotzen ▁duen ▁gaitz ari .
PRED:	Anyone who does not spread on the darkness , but he does not repent of the darkness .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	181
INPUT:	▁Baina , ▁Jesus ▁bera ▁ez ▁zen ▁fidatzen ▁haietaz , ▁guztiak ▁ezagutzen ▁baitzituen ,
PRED:	But Jesus did n't know how he did n't know them .
GOLD:	But Jesus did n't trust them , because he knew all about people .

ID:	182
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁jaitsiko ▁bazina , sas traka ▁erretzen edo ▁ur ari ▁irak in arazten ▁dion sua ▁bezala ! Horrela , ▁zure ▁etsaiek nor ▁zaren ▁jakingo ▁lukete , nazio ek ▁zure ▁aurrean ▁dar - dar ▁egingo ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you ? Why did you think you were trying to attack your enemies ? They will know that you would know that your enemies would know your enemies , and you will know your enemies .
GOLD:	Oh , that you would burst from the heavens and come down ! How the mountains would quake in your presence !

ID:	183
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Jerusalemera ▁bidaliko ▁dudan ▁hondamen ▁hori ▁ikusi ▁baino ▁lehen ▁zeure ▁guraso engana ▁bilduko ▁zaitut , ▁eta ▁bakean ▁ehortziko ▁zaituzte ▁zeure ▁hilobian ”». Hala , ▁mandatari ek ▁eraman ▁zioten ▁erregeari ▁erantzuna .
PRED:	So I will send you back to Jerusalem , and you will die before your ancestors . I will bring you back to the grave . ”
GOLD:	So I will not send the promised disaster until after you have died and been buried in peace . You will not see the disaster I am going to bring on this city . ' ” So they took her message back to the king .

ID:	184
INPUT:	▁Betsabe ▁ahuspeztu ▁egin ▁zen ▁erregearen ▁aurrean . ▁Honek ▁esan ▁zion :— Zer ▁duzu ?
PRED:	Then she bowed low before the king . “ What have you done ? ” she asked .
GOLD:	Bathsheba bowed down before the king. “ What can I do for you ? ” he asked her .

ID:	185
INPUT:	▁Berriro ▁ere ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁Saulek ▁mandatariak , ▁David ▁ikus ▁zezaten . ▁Esan ▁zien : ▁« Ekar dazue ▁ohean ▁bada ▁ere , ▁hil ▁egin ▁behar ▁dut ▁eta ».
PRED:	When Saul sent messengers to ask him , he sent me to see me , he said , “ I will kill you and kill me . ”
GOLD:	But Saul sent the troops back to get David . He ordered , “ Bring him to me in his bed so I can kill him ! ”

ID:	186
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁gure ▁Aitak ▁eta ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁Jaunak ▁eman ▁biezazkizuete ▁grazia ▁eta ▁bakea .
PRED:	May the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .
GOLD:	May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	187
INPUT:	▁Jendea ▁marmarrean ▁hasi ▁zen ▁Moisesen ▁aurka , ▁esanez : ▁« Zer ▁edan ▁behar ▁dugu ?»
PRED:	So the people began to argue with Moses and said , “ What do we drink ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people complained and turned against Moses . “ What are we going to drink ? ” they demanded .

ID:	188
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁handik ▁irtenarazi ▁zuen , haren ▁maitasuna ▁betikoa ▁baita ;
PRED:	Give thanks to the people of Israel ; faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	He brought Israel out of Egypt.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	189
INPUT:	▁Zen tza ▁gaitzazu ▁neurriz , ez ▁haser rez , ez ▁gaitz azun ▁ezereztu .
PRED:	Come , let us be disgraced ; do n't let us live in your presence .
GOLD:	So correct me , Lord , but please be gentle.Do not correct me in anger , for I would die .

ID:	190
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁izenean ▁eskatuko ▁duzuen ▁guztia ▁emango ▁dizuet ▁nik .
PRED:	I will ask you everything I say .
GOLD:	Yes , ask me for anything in my name , and I will do it !

ID:	191
INPUT:	▁H ustu ▁zuen ▁pegarra ▁as kan , ▁eta ▁lasterka ▁joan ▁zen ▁putzura ▁ur ▁gehiago ▁hartzera , ▁gamelu ▁guztiei ▁eman ▁zien ▁arte .
PRED:	He ran to the water and ran to the water of water , and he ran down to the water .
GOLD:	So she quickly emptied her jug into the watering trough and ran back to the well to draw water for all his camels .

ID:	192
INPUT:	▁Batz l it , ▁Meh i da ▁eta ▁Har x arenak ;
PRED:	The citizens of Adullam
GOLD:	Bazluth , Mehida , Harsha ,

ID:	193
INPUT:	▁Paxhur , ▁Amarias , ▁Malkias ,
PRED:	Amariah , Amariah ,
GOLD:	Hattush , Shebaniah , Malluch ,

ID:	194
INPUT:	▁Zab al ean ▁sobera ▁dutena ▁bi ▁albo etatik ▁zintzilik ▁geldituko ▁da ▁— m etro ▁erdia ▁alde ▁bakoitzetik —, ▁egoitza ▁estaltzeko .
PRED:	When they open open open open fields , it will be open to the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	Allow 18 inches of remaining material to hang down over each side , so the Tabernacle is completely covered .

ID:	195
INPUT:	▁Libn atik ▁Lakix era ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Josuek ▁israeldar ▁guztiekin ; ▁hiria ▁inguratu ▁eta ▁eraso ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	Then Joshua left Libnah and attacked the town of Israel .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	196
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁beraz , ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldea ▁ikertzera ▁bidali ▁zituen , ▁esanez :— Zoazte ▁Negev etik ▁eta ▁igo ▁mendialdera .
PRED:	So Moses sent the land to the land of Canaan , “ Go up to the hill country of Canaan , and go into the hill country . ”
GOLD:	Moses gave the men these instructions as he sent them out to explore the land : “ Go north through the Negev into the hill country .

ID:	197
INPUT:	▁Agur ▁ezazue ▁elkar ▁besar kada ▁santuaz . ▁Kristoren ▁eliz ▁elkarte ▁guztiek ▁agurtzen ▁zaituztete .
PRED:	Greet each other with each other with a kiss of Christ .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss . All the churches of Christ send you their greetings .

ID:	198
INPUT:	▁Dar - dar ▁egingo ▁du ▁zeru aketa ▁lurrak ▁oinarri tik ▁ikara , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun ▁honek neure ▁haserrea ▁eta ▁sumin ▁gori a az alduko ▁dudan ▁egunean .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the heavens of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	For I will shake the heavens.The earth will move from its placewhen the Lord of Heaven 's Armies displays his wrathin the day of his fierce anger . ”

ID:	199
INPUT:	▁« Norbaitek ▁bere ▁esklaboa , ▁gizasemea ▁nahiz ▁emakumea , ▁begi an ▁jotzen ▁badu ▁eta ▁begia ▁hondatzen , ▁libre ▁utziko ▁du ▁hondatu tako ▁begiaren ▁ordain .
PRED:	“ If a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave , a woman is a slave , a slave , a woman , a woman must be a slave for a woman .
GOLD:	“ If a man hits his male or female slave in the eye and the eye is blinded , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the eye .

ID:	200
INPUT:	▁U s ain ez ▁gozatzeko ▁antzeko ▁intsentsu rik ▁egiten ▁duena , ▁herritik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁dute ».
PRED:	It must be like a pleasing aroma to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Anyone who makes incense like this for personal use will be cut off from the community . ”

ID:	201
INPUT:	▁Aho a ▁bai , ▁eta ▁hitzik ▁ez ▁dute ; ▁begiak ▁bai , ▁eta ▁ikusten ▁ez ;
PRED:	They can not speak , but they can not see .
GOLD:	They have mouths but can not speak , and eyes but can not see .

ID:	202
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁dira ▁Ismaelen ▁semeen ▁izenak ; ▁hamabi ▁buruzagi ▁beste ▁hainbeste ▁le in ur entzat ; ▁izen ▁horiek ▁eman ▁zitzaizkien ▁haien ▁bizileku ▁eta ▁kanpaleku ei ▁ere .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of the family of the tribe of Levi , who had been given to the tribe of Levi . They were given to the camp .
GOLD:	These twelve sons of Ishmael became the founders of twelve tribes named after them , listed according to the places they settled and camped .

ID:	203
INPUT:	▁Biho a ▁ene ▁jauna ▁bere ▁zerbitzari ▁honen ▁aurretik , ▁eta ▁nik ▁pol iki - pol iki ▁egingo ▁dut ▁bidea , ▁aurrean ▁doazen ▁abereen ▁eta ▁haurren ▁mar txan , ▁Seir rera , ▁ene ▁jaun arengana , ▁iritsi ▁arte .
PRED:	My lord , my lord the king 's servant , and I will send your servants to the other side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Please , my lord , go ahead of your servant . We will follow slowly , at a pace that is comfortable for the livestock and the children . I will meet you at Seir . ”

ID:	204
INPUT:	▁Booz , ▁jan ▁eta ▁edan ▁ondoren , ▁um ore tsu ▁jarri ▁zen , ▁eta ▁jarra ian ▁garagar - pila ▁baten ▁ondoan ▁etzan ▁zen ▁lotarako . ▁Rut ▁isilka ▁hurbildu , ▁haren ▁estalkia ▁altxatu ▁eta ▁haren ▁oinetan ▁etzan ▁zen .
PRED:	Then Boaz drank the wine and drank the wine of barley and ate it . He went down to the place of barley , and he sat down in his bed . He sat down in his bed .
GOLD:	After Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in good spirits , he lay down at the far end of the pile of grain and went to sleep . Then Ruth came quietly , uncovered his feet , and lay down .

ID:	205
INPUT:	▁geuk ▁entzun ▁diogu ▁esaten , ▁Jesus ▁Nazaretarra ▁delako ▁horrek ▁tenplua ▁suntsituko ▁duela ▁eta ▁Moisesek ▁eman ▁zizki gun ▁ohiturak ▁aldatuko ▁dituela ».
PRED:	We say , ‘ We have heard that the Lord our God will destroy us and destroy us . ' ”
GOLD:	We have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy the Temple and change the customs Moses handed down to us . ”

ID:	206
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« G aza ▁herriak gaiztakeriarik ▁asko ▁egin ▁du , zein ▁baino ▁zein ▁handiago . Eta ▁beraz , ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁dut ! Herri ▁osoak ▁erbesteratu ▁baititu , edo m darren ▁esku ▁uzteko ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel have sinned , ” says the Lord . “ I will punish them , and I will give them victory over the nations .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Gaza have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They sent whole villages into exile , selling them as slaves to Edom .

ID:	207
INPUT:	▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁dioen ▁bezala : ▁Jainkoak ▁adimena ▁itsutu ▁egin ▁zien . ▁Begiak ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁baina ▁ez ▁ikusteko , ▁belarriak ▁ere ▁bai , ▁baina ▁ez ▁entzuteko ▁Eta ▁horrela ▁gaur ▁arte .
PRED:	The Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say , but God spoke to them , but he did n't listen to the words of the Lord , but he did n't listen to me . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ God has put them into a deep sleep.To this day he has shut their eyes so they do not see , and closed their ears so they do not hear . ”

ID:	208
INPUT:	▁Al tx or ▁bikain ▁eta ▁oparoa ▁zuhur raren ▁etxean ; zentzugabeak ▁dena ▁era l gi tzen ▁du .
PRED:	Lazy people make rich rich and rich , but fools make them rich .
GOLD:	The wise have wealth and luxury , but fools spend whatever they get .

ID:	209
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁guztien ▁gainetik , ▁jantz ▁zaitezte ▁maitasunez , ▁hau ▁baita ▁elkartasun ▁bete aren ▁lok arria .
PRED:	May all be clothed with love with love , and take delight in other side .
GOLD:	Above all , clothe yourselves with love , which binds us all together in perfect harmony .

ID:	210
INPUT:	▁Gorets ia ▁Zu ! Dei ▁egin ▁nion ▁Jaunari , eta ▁etsaiengandik ▁salbatu ▁ninduen .
PRED:	I rescued you from the Lord ; he rescued me from my enemies .
GOLD:	I called on the Lord , who is worthy of praise , and he saved me from my enemies .

ID:	211
INPUT:	▁« Israel , ▁Jakoben ▁herri ▁horrek , gogoan ▁izan ▁nire ▁zerbitzari ▁zarela . Nik ▁eratu ▁zaitut , eta ▁nire ▁zerbitzari ▁zara . Israel , ▁ez ▁zaitut ▁ahaztuko .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You are my servant , my servant , my servant , my servant , and I will not forget you .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention , O Jacob , for you are my servant , O Israel.I , the Lord , made you , and I will not forget you .

ID:	212
INPUT:	▁Senideok , ▁epea ▁lab urtu ▁egin ▁dela ▁diotsuet . ▁Beraz , ▁gelditzen ▁zaigun ▁den bor an , ▁ezkon duak ▁bizi ▁bitez ▁ezkon durik ▁ez ▁baleude ▁bezala ;
PRED:	Dear brothers , dear brothers and sisters , when you have come , let us get up , let 's be allowed to live , just as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as long as you live .
GOLD:	But let me say this , dear brothers and sisters : The time that remains is very short . So from now on , those with wives should not focus only on their marriage .

ID:	213
INPUT:	▁« Or tzi tik ▁trumoia jo arazi ▁zuen ▁Jaunak , deiadar ▁egin ▁Goi - goikoak .
PRED:	When the Lord saw his voice , he threw his enemies into their depths .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resounded .

ID:	214
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁non ▁datozen ▁urrutitik : i par ▁eta ▁mendebaldetik ▁datoz , Egipto ▁aldetik ▁ere ▁bai .
PRED:	Look , I will send them from distant lands , from distant lands .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	215
INPUT:	▁Gantz ▁guztiak ▁aldarean ▁erreko ▁ditu , ▁elkartasun - opari gaien ▁gantzak ▁bezala . ▁Era ▁honetan ▁egingo ▁du ▁apaizak ▁bekatuaren ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁eta ▁barkatua ▁izango ▁du ▁buruzagiak ▁bekatua .
PRED:	He must burn all the fat on the altar on the altar , just as the fat of the fat of the fat of the Lord , the priest will purify the fat of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then he must burn all the goat 's fat on the altar , just as he does with the peace offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the leader from his sin , making him right with the Lord , and he will be forgiven .

ID:	216
INPUT:	▁L ein uen ▁ko k agun ea ▁kanpalekuan
PRED:	The Widow and the Ethiopian
GOLD:	Organization for Israel 's Camp

ID:	217
INPUT:	▁Zeren , ▁goian ger uaren ▁ahots ez ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁turuta - hots ez ▁seinalea ▁emanik , ▁Jauna ▁bera ▁jaitsiko ▁baita ▁zerutik , ▁eta ▁aurrena ▁Kristorekin ▁bat ▁eginik ▁hildakoak ▁piztuko ▁dira ;
PRED:	For when the trumpet trumpet trumpet trumpet , the voice of God spoke to him , and the Lord will come to you , for you will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a commanding shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trumpet call of God . First , the believers who have died will rise from their graves .

ID:	218
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁sua ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁eta ▁dena ▁kiskali : ▁erre - oparigaia , ▁egurra , ▁baita ▁harriak ▁eta ▁errautsa ▁ere , ▁eta ▁erre ten eko ▁ura ▁id ortu ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent this fire on the fire , and the fat of the grain offering to the Lord . He also sent a plague on the ground , and it is a spring .
GOLD:	Immediately the fire of the Lord flashed down from heaven and burned up the young bull , the wood , the stones , and the dust . It even licked up all the water in the trench !

ID:	219
INPUT:	▁zure ▁gora l penak ▁kontatu ▁ahal ▁ditzadan Sion ▁hiri ▁eder reko ▁sarreran , alaitu ▁ahal ▁nadin ▁zuk ▁emaniko ▁garaipen az .
PRED:	Then you will tell your words , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you will sing your praises to you .
GOLD:	The nations have fallen into the pit they dug for others.Their own feet have been caught in the trap they set .

ID:	220
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁ere ▁esan ▁zidan ▁Jaunak : ▁« Ez ▁joan ▁hiletak ▁egiten ▁ari ▁diren ▁etxera , ▁dol uan ▁parte ▁hartzeko ▁eta ▁atsekabean ▁lagun ▁egiteko : ▁ukatu ▁egin ▁baitizki ot ▁herri ▁honi ▁neure ▁bakea , ▁maitasuna ▁eta ▁errukia .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Do n't weep for those who are dead . They have not been faithful to those who have mercy on me . They have mercy on me , and they have mercy on me .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do not go to funerals to mourn and show sympathy for these people , for I have removed my protection and peace from them . I have taken away my unfailing love and my mercy .

ID:	221
INPUT:	▁Nehem iasek ▁Jerusalemera ▁itzultzeko ▁baimena ▁lortu
PRED:	Nehemiah 's Call to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Nehemiah Goes to Jerusalem

ID:	222
INPUT:	▁Sin esten ▁eta ▁bataiatzen ▁den ▁oro ▁salbatua ▁izango ▁da ; ▁sinesten ▁ez ▁duena , ▁berriz , ▁kondenatua .
PRED:	Anyone who believes in God will be baptized , but anyone who believes in him will be saved .
GOLD:	Anyone who believes and is baptized will be saved . But anyone who refuses to believe will be condemned .

ID:	223
INPUT:	▁Des ira tzen ▁zuena ▁eman ▁diozu eta ▁eskatua ▁ez ▁diozu ▁ukatu .
PRED:	You have sold yourself , and you have nothing . ”
GOLD:	You welcomed him back with success and prosperity.You placed a crown of finest gold on his head .

ID:	224
INPUT:	▁Hatzar - X u al , ▁Beer - Xeba ▁eta ▁inguruak ,
PRED:	Ziklag , and Beersheba in Beersheba ,
GOLD:	Hazar-shual , Beersheba , Biziothiah ,

ID:	225
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zu , ▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁egon ▁urrun ! Ene ▁indar , ▁lagundu ! ▁Ez ▁luzatu !
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let your unfailing love , O Lord ! Do n't let me save them .
GOLD:	Save me from the sword ; spare my precious life from these dogs .

ID:	226
INPUT:	▁B ih urri tu ▁zaitez , ▁bai , egin ▁aiene , ▁Siongo ▁herri , emakumeak ▁erdiminetan ▁bezala ; orain ▁hiritik ▁aterako ▁baitzarete eta ▁landan ▁biziko . Babiloni ara ▁joango ▁zarete , baina ▁han ▁salbatuko ▁zaituzte Jaunak , zeuen ▁etsaien ▁eskuetatik ▁askatuko .
PRED:	“ O Jerusalem , you are coming from Jerusalem ; your people will live in the land of Jerusalem . You will live in the land of the Lord , but you will be saved .
GOLD:	Writhe and groan like a woman in labor , you people of Jerusalem , for now you must leave this cityto live in the open country.You will soon be sent in exileto distant Babylon.But the Lord will rescue you there ; he will redeem you from the grip of your enemies .

ID:	227
INPUT:	▁Gainerako ▁gudariak ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Abix airen ▁gidaritzapean ▁utzi ▁zituen ▁lerrotan .
PRED:	The rest of his brother 's family was killed by the Philistine army .
GOLD:	He left the rest of the army under the command of his brother Abishai , who was to attack the Ammonites .

ID:	228
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁zaitezte ▁Jaunarengana . ▁Bera ▁da ▁harri ▁bizia , ▁gizonek ▁baztertua , ▁baina ▁Jainkoaren ▁begietan ▁aukeratua ▁eta ▁bikaina .
PRED:	May the glory of the Lord is your God , and he has chosen a gift to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	You are coming to Christ , who is the living cornerstone of God 's temple . He was rejected by people , but he was chosen by God for great honor .

ID:	229
INPUT:	▁Jakinduria , ▁altxor ▁prez iatua
PRED:	He overlaid them in bronze chains
GOLD:	The Benefits of Wisdom

ID:	230
INPUT:	▁Manasesen ▁beste ▁sei ▁semeen ▁ondorengoei ▁ere , ▁Abi ezer , ▁H elek , ▁As riel , ▁Sikem , ▁Hef er ▁eta ▁Xem i daren ▁ondorengoei , ▁alegia , ▁beren ▁ondarea ▁izendatu ▁zieten , ▁senitarteka ▁banatua . ▁Horiek ▁ziren ▁Joseren ▁seme ▁Manasesen ▁semeak .
PRED:	These were the clans of the clans of Manasseh , the descendants of Manasseh , Manasseh , the half-tribe of Manasseh , the half-tribe of Manasseh . These were the clans of Manasseh . These were the clans of Manasseh .
GOLD:	So the allotment on the west side of the Jordan was for the remaining families within the clans of the tribe of Manasseh : Abiezer , Helek , Asriel , Shechem , Hepher , and Shemida . These clans represent the male descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph .

ID:	231
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁erregeak ▁harturiko ▁erabakia , ▁hain ▁zabala ▁den ▁in p erio ▁osora ▁hedatuko ▁da . ▁Orduan , ▁emazte ▁guztiek ▁beren ▁sen arrei , ▁nola ▁handien ei ▁hala ▁apal en ei , ▁begirune ▁izanen ▁diete ».
PRED:	So the king gave Hebron to his wife , and all the nobles of his wife . He will show his wives to those who fear him . ”
GOLD:	When this decree is published throughout the king 's vast empire , husbands everywhere , whatever their rank , will receive proper respect from their wives ! ”

ID:	232
INPUT:	▁Jakinarazi ▁zieten ▁israeldarrei ▁Ruben ▁eta ▁Gaden ▁leinuetako ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁leinu ▁erdiko ▁gizonek ▁aldarea ▁eraiki ▁zutela ▁Jordan ▁ibai ▁inguruan , ▁Kanaanen ▁aurrez ▁aurre , ▁israeldar ▁lurraldeaz ▁beste ▁aldera ;
PRED:	When the people of Israel heard the tribes of Reuben and Gad , the half-tribe of Manasseh , the half-tribe of Manasseh , he built an altar to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The rest of Israel heard that the people of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh had built an altar at Geliloth at the edge of the land of Canaan , on the west side of the Jordan River .

ID:	233
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁ahuspeztu ▁haien ▁aurrean , ▁ezta ▁gur tzarik ▁eman ▁ere , ▁ni , ▁Jauna , ▁zure ▁Jainkoa , ▁Jainko ▁jelos korra ▁bainaiz : ▁gorroto ▁didaten ▁gurasoen ▁gaiztakeria ▁ondorengoen gan ▁zigortzen ▁dut ▁hirugarren ▁eta ▁laugarren ▁belaunaldiraino ▁ere ;
PRED:	Do not bow before them , for I am the Lord your God . I am the Holy One , the Holy One of your parents , and I am the Holy One .
GOLD:	You must not bow down to them or worship them , for I , the Lord your God , am a jealous God who will not tolerate your affection for any other gods . I lay the sins of the parents upon their children ; the entire family is affected — even children in the third and fourth generations of those who reject me .

ID:	234
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁agurra
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	235
INPUT:	▁Batzuek ▁atxilotu ▁egin ▁nahi ▁zuten , ▁baina ▁inork ▁ez ▁zion ▁eskurik ▁ezarri .
PRED:	Some of the others wanted to arrest him , but they did n't kill him .
GOLD:	Some even wanted him arrested , but no one laid a hand on him .

ID:	236
INPUT:	▁Babilonia ▁hori , bi ▁ibai ▁handiren ▁artean ▁zaude , aberas tasun ▁handiak ▁dituzu ! Iri tsi ▁zaizu , ▁ordea , ▁azkena , akab o ▁zure ▁irabaziak !
PRED:	O Babylon , you are rich among the sea , and all the wild animals are filled with joy . But you are all around your way !
GOLD:	You are a city by a great river , a great center of commerce , but your end has come.The thread of your life is cut .

ID:	237
INPUT:	▁Gizon ▁bakarraren ▁bekatuagatik ▁heriotza ▁nagusi ▁gertatu ▁bazen , ▁zenbatez ▁gehiago ▁ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁bakar ▁batengatik , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo gatik , ▁nagusi ▁izango ▁betiko ▁bizitzan ▁Jainkoaren ▁salbazio aren ▁dohain ▁oparoa ▁hartzen ▁dutenak !
PRED:	It is a man who has been raised to death , for there is no one who lives in Christ Jesus . And all who belong to God , who gives us great joy for us .
GOLD:	For the sin of this one man , Adam , caused death to rule over many . But even greater is God 's wonderful grace and his gift of righteousness , for all who receive it will live in triumph over sin and death through this one man , Jesus Christ .

ID:	238
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁mendi - gai lurra ▁igaro ▁zueneko , ▁Tzib a , ▁Mefi - Boxeten ▁morroia , ▁atera ▁zitzaion ▁bidera . ▁Berekin ▁zekar tzan ▁bi ▁asto ▁tx alm aturik ▁eta ▁berrehun ▁ogiz , ▁ehun ▁mahas p asa - mordo z , ▁garaiko ▁ehun ▁fruitu - multz oz ▁eta ▁ardo - zah agi ▁batez ▁zam aturik .
PRED:	David went out to the ground with the young young young young men , and she brought her out to the ground with her , and she took some of them with two quarts of wine .
GOLD:	When David had gone a little beyond the summit of the Mount of Olives , Ziba , the servant of Mephibosheth , was waiting there for him . He had two donkeys loaded with 200 loaves of bread , 100 clusters of raisins , 100 bunches of summer fruit , and a wineskin full of wine .

ID:	239
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	This was the Lord 's reply to Moses .

ID:	240
INPUT:	▁Aitaren ▁testigantza ▁eta ▁Joan ▁Bataia tzaile arena
PRED:	Jesus and John the Baptist
GOLD:	Witnesses to Jesus

ID:	241
INPUT:	▁goretsi ▁Jaunaren ▁izen ▁ospetsua ! Ah uspez tu ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁bere ▁santu tasunez ▁agertzean !
PRED:	May the glorious name of the Lord praise his name ; he will praise his holy name .
GOLD:	Honor the Lord for the glory of his name.Worship the Lord in the splendor of his holiness .

ID:	242
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁hamar ▁urte ▁zituela , ▁Pel eg ek ▁Reu ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	When Shelah was 70 years old , he became the father of Shelah .
GOLD:	When Peleg was 30 years old , he became the father of Reu .

ID:	243
INPUT:	▁Roboamek , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁aintzat ▁hartu ▁kontseilari en ▁aholkua ; ▁baizik ▁eta ▁berarekin ▁batera ▁hazi ▁ziren ▁eta ▁bere ▁zerbitzura ▁zituen ▁gazte ei ▁galdegin ▁zien :
PRED:	But Rehoboam did not think about his advisers , but he was young men who were young men .
GOLD:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the older men and instead asked the opinion of the young men who had grown up with him and were now his advisers .

ID:	244
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ez ▁bakarrik ▁haren ▁etorrer arekin , ▁baita ▁zuengandik ▁ekarri ▁zizkidan ▁berri ▁pozgarri ekin ▁ere : ▁berak ▁jakinarazi ▁zizkidan ▁ni ▁ikusteko ▁duzuen ▁irrika , ▁zuen ▁damu - n egarra ▁eta ▁nirekiko ▁maitasuna . ▁Horrek ▁oraindik ▁gehiago ▁poztu ▁ninduen .
PRED:	He did n't be afraid of you , for I have brought you out of the earth . And when I heard the joy of your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	His presence was a joy , but so was the news he brought of the encouragement he received from you . When he told us how much you long to see me , and how sorry you are for what happened , and how loyal you are to me , I was filled with joy !

ID:	245
INPUT:	▁As to ▁zuri ▁baten ▁gainean , ta piz ▁gainean ▁eseriak ▁zoazten ok eta ▁oinez ▁zoazten ok , ▁entzun
PRED:	They left Jesus and sat down on the shore of a little while you heard about them .
GOLD:	“ Consider this , you who ride on fine donkeys , you who sit on fancy saddle blankets , and you who walk along the road .

ID:	246
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁artean ▁diot : ▁Jauna ▁da ▁nire ▁on ▁guztia ! Haren gan ▁dut , ▁beraz , ▁itxaropen .
PRED:	I am the Lord , who is my rock ; I hope in my hope .
GOLD:	I say to myself , “ The Lord is my inheritance ; therefore , I will hope in him ! ”

ID:	247
INPUT:	▁« Bar au ▁egitean , ▁ez ▁zaitezte ▁ager ▁kopetilun , ▁itxura zaleek ▁ohi ▁duten ▁bezala : ▁aurpegia ▁itsus ten ▁dute , ▁barau ▁egiten ▁dutela ▁jendeari ▁azaltzeko . ▁Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Har tua ▁dute ▁beren ▁ordaina .
PRED:	“ If you do n't say , ‘ If you do n't know what is happening , you are so angry with me , you know that you are still trying to hide . '
GOLD:	“ And when you fast , do n't make it obvious , as the hypocrites do , for they try to look miserable and disheveled so people will admire them for their fasting . I tell you the truth , that is the only reward they will ever get .

ID:	248
INPUT:	▁Arro tzen ▁esku ▁utziko ▁dut ▁lurraldea , so il ▁dezaten ; herri aldeko ▁gaizkile en ▁esku , harrapakin ▁gerta ▁dadin . Eta ▁profanatu ▁egingo ▁dute .
PRED:	Your enemies will trample them into the land of the nations , and they will be cut off from the nations .
GOLD:	I will give it as plunder to foreigners , to the most wicked of nations , and they will defile it .

ID:	249
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁izena ▁aipatuko ▁duten ire ▁aukeratu ek nor bait ▁madarika tzean , ▁eta ▁esango :“ Halaxe ▁hilko ▁ahal ▁zaitu Jainko ▁Jaunak !” Nire ▁zerbitzarien ▁gain , ▁ordea , beste ▁izen ▁bat ▁aipatuko ▁da , guz tiz ▁bestelako a .
PRED:	Your name will be my name , and my name will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	Your name will be a curse word among my people , for the Sovereign Lord will destroy youand will call his true servants by another name .

ID:	250
INPUT:	▁J atu n ▁handia ▁bazara , ▁eutsi ▁zeure ▁jan gur ari .
PRED:	If you go with your heart , you may eat your neck .
GOLD:	If you are a big eater , put a knife to your throat ;

ID:	251
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Judako ▁herriak ▁hil ▁egin ▁zituen ▁Amon ▁erregearen ▁aurka ▁jaiki ▁ziren ▁guztiak , ▁eta ▁beraren ▁seme ▁Josias ▁izendatu ▁zuten ▁errege , ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁ordez .
PRED:	But the people of Judah rebelled against the king of Judah and assassinated him .
GOLD:	But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King Amon , and they made his son Josiah the next king .

ID:	252
INPUT:	▁haize - oih alak , ▁zure ▁ezau garriz iren ak , ▁Egiptoko ▁liho ▁bordatu z ; zure ▁gain estal kiak El ix a ▁uharte etako ▁purpura eta ▁gorrimin ezko ▁oihal ez .
PRED:	Your eyes are filled with fear , and your wings are covered with blue , purple , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Your sails were made of Egypt 's finest linen , and they flew as a banner above you.You stood beneath blue and purple awningsmade bright with dyes from the coasts of Elishah .

ID:	253
INPUT:	▁Zintzoaren ▁nahia ▁bete ▁egiten ▁da , gaiztoaren ▁itxaropenak ▁huts ▁egiten .
PRED:	The words of the godly will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	The godly can look forward to a reward , while the wicked can expect only judgment .

ID:	254
INPUT:	▁Sedekias ▁erregeari
PRED:	A Message to King Zedekiah
GOLD:	No Deliverance from Babylon

ID:	255
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁dute ▁berreskuratuko ▁behi , ▁ardi ▁nahiz ▁ahun tzen ▁lehen - k umerik : ▁niretzat ▁sagaratuak ▁dira . ▁Hil ▁egingo ▁dituzu , ▁odola ▁aldare ▁gainean ▁isuri ▁eta ▁gantza ▁nire ▁ohorez ▁erre . ▁Nik ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁dut ▁oparia .
PRED:	“ But you must not commit adultery , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , goats , sheep , and goats , and goats , and your burnt offerings are a pleasing aroma to me .
GOLD:	“ However , you may not redeem the firstborn of cattle , sheep , or goats . They are holy and have been set apart for the Lord . Sprinkle their blood on the altar , and burn their fat as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	256
INPUT:	▁« Otoitz ▁egitean , ▁ez ▁ari ▁esan ▁eta ▁esan , ▁jentilek ▁ohi ▁duten ▁bezala , ▁uste ▁baitute ▁beren ▁hitz - jario ari ▁esker ▁entzungo ▁di ela ▁Jainkoak .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , just as you say . They say , ‘ The Lord lives among those who do n't listen to him . '
GOLD:	“ When you pray , do n't babble on and on as the Gentiles do . They think their prayers are answered merely by repeating their words again and again .

ID:	257
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁eta ▁jentilak
PRED:	The Authority of Moses
GOLD:	God 's Mercy Is for Everyone

ID:	258
INPUT:	▁Ap ur tua ▁baituzu ▁lepoan ▁zeramaten uz tarri ▁astuna , zapal tzailearen ▁aginte - makila , M adi ango ▁gudarostea ap urtu ▁zenuen ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	For the high priest has appointed you to carry the yoke of the firstborn son . You had been poured out the battle in the battle .
GOLD:	You will enlarge the nation of Israel , and its people will rejoice.They will rejoice before youas people rejoice at the harvestand like warriors dividing the plunder .

ID:	259
INPUT:	▁Aitak , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zien ▁morroiei : ▁“ Ekarri ▁bizkor ▁jantzirik ▁onena ▁eta ▁jantz io zue , ▁ipin io zue ▁eraztuna ▁eta ▁jantzi ▁oinetakoak ;
PRED:	But the Father said to his servants , ‘ Take your clothes and put it on your neck . '
GOLD:	“ But his father said to the servants , ‘ Quick ! Bring the finest robe in the house and put it on him . Get a ring for his finger and sandals for his feet .

ID:	260
INPUT:	▁Bet oz ▁opari ▁bikainak ▁Egiptotik , dak ar zki ola ▁arin ▁E <unk> p iak ▁esku - erakutsiak ▁Jainkoari .
PRED:	They are young men of Egypt , waiting for those who are young men .
GOLD:	Sing to God , you kingdoms of the earth.Sing praises to the Lord.Interlude

ID:	261
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁emazte ▁Zer ex i ▁eta ▁adiskide ▁guztiei ▁adierazi ▁zien ▁gertatu ▁zitzaiona . ▁Bere ▁adiskide ▁jakintsu ▁haiek ▁eta ▁emazteak ▁esan ▁zioten :— Mar doke o ▁judu ▁izanik , ▁beraren ▁aurrean ▁atzer aka ▁hasi ▁baldin ▁bazara , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁duzu ▁deus ▁ere ▁horren ▁aurka . ▁Aitzitik , ▁hondo raino ▁eroriko ▁zara ▁horren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	So he told his wife , his wife , and he told all the people . He said , “ If the wise men of the Jews , you will die before him , ” he said . “ If you do n't fall on the ground . ”
GOLD:	When Haman told his wife , Zeresh , and all his friends what had happened , his wise advisers and his wife said , “ Since Mordecai — this man who has humiliated you — is of Jewish birth , you will never succeed in your plans against him . It will be fatal to continue opposing him . ”

ID:	262
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁garbitzat ▁aitor tua ▁izan ▁ondoren , ▁ezkabia ▁larruazalean ▁zabaltzen ▁bazaio ,
PRED:	But if the affected area has been finished , the skin has spread on the skin .
GOLD:	But if the scabby sore begins to spread after the person is pronounced clean ,

ID:	263
INPUT:	▁Abrahamekin ▁mintzatu ▁ondoren , ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak .
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ May God be with him . ”
GOLD:	When God had finished speaking , he left Abraham .

ID:	264
INPUT:	▁Zu tarri ▁eta ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁ezarri ▁zituzten ▁muino ▁guztietan ▁eta ▁zuhaitz ▁handi ▁guztien ▁azpian ;
PRED:	You set up the Asherah poles from all the mountains and every green tree on every green tree .
GOLD:	They set up sacred pillars and Asherah poles at the top of every hill and under every green tree .

ID:	265
INPUT:	▁— Zergatik ▁hausten ▁dute ▁zure ▁ikasleek ▁zaharren ▁ohitura ? ▁Ez ▁dute ▁otordu ▁aurretik ▁eskuen ▁garbikuntza ▁egiten .
PRED:	“ Why are your brothers ? ” they asked . “ Why do n't you turn away from the Jewish leaders ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why do your disciples disobey our age-old tradition ? For they ignore our tradition of ceremonial hand washing before they eat . ”

ID:	266
INPUT:	▁Hurrengo ▁goizean , ▁jaikitzean , ▁Dag on ▁aurp egiz ▁aurrera ▁lurrean ▁eroria ▁aurkitu ▁zuten ▁berriro , ▁Jaunaren ▁kutxaren ▁aitzinean . ▁Dag onen ▁burua ▁eta ▁bi ▁besoak ▁hautsi ak ▁zeuden ▁atarian ; ▁soin - en b orra ▁baino ▁ez ▁zuen ▁osorik ▁Dag onek .
PRED:	When the next morning they found the Ark of the Lord 's Armies , they discovered that the Ark of the Lord 's Armies was standing on the ground , and the Ark of the Lord had placed it on the ground .
GOLD:	But the next morning the same thing happened — Dagon had fallen face down before the Ark of the Lord again . This time his head and hands had broken off and were lying in the doorway . Only the trunk of his body was left intact .

ID:	267
INPUT:	▁Egizue ▁otoitz ▁guregatik . ▁Gure ▁ustez , ▁garbi ▁daukagu ▁kontzientzia , ▁gauza ▁guztietan ▁zintzo ▁jokatu ▁nahian ▁baik abiltza .
PRED:	You must pray for us , for we are pure with Christ . If we want us to be patient with Christ , we want us to marry us .
GOLD:	Pray for us , for our conscience is clear and we want to live honorably in everything we do .

ID:	268
INPUT:	▁Joanek ▁ez ▁zion ▁utzi ▁nahi ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : - Neu ▁naiz ▁zuk ▁bataiatu ▁beharrekoa , ▁eta ▁zu ▁zatoz ▁niregana ?
PRED:	John refused to listen to John and said to him , “ I am baptized with you ? ”
GOLD:	But John tried to talk him out of it . “ I am the one who needs to be baptized by you , ” he said , “ so why are you coming to me ? ”

ID:	269
INPUT:	▁Denak ▁hilko ▁zirelako aren ▁beldurrez , ▁pres a ▁eman ▁zieten ▁egiptoarrek ▁israeldarrei , ▁ahal ik ▁eta ▁laster ren ▁abia ▁zitezen ▁beren ▁lurraldetik .
PRED:	The people of Israel did not recognize the Egyptians , for they were afraid to turn to the land of the Egyptians .
GOLD:	All the Egyptians urged the people of Israel to get out of the land as quickly as possible , for they thought , “ We will all die ! ”

ID:	270
INPUT:	▁Hiri ok ▁hauek ▁ziren : ▁Be tzer , ▁basamortuan , ▁lautadan , ▁Rubenen ▁leinuko entzat ; ▁Ramot , ▁Galaaden , ▁Gaden ▁leinuko entzat , ▁eta ▁G olan , ▁Bax anen , ▁Manasesen ▁leinu - er diko entzat .
PRED:	These towns were the clans of the tribe of Reuben , who lived in the wilderness in the wilderness of the tribe of Reuben , who lived in the wilderness of Gilead .
GOLD:	These were the cities : Bezer on the wilderness plateau for the tribe of Reuben ; Ramoth in Gilead for the tribe of Gad ; Golan in Bashan for the tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	271
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Age ok , ▁Jaunaren ▁mandatariak , ▁hau ▁adierazi ▁zion ▁herriari ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean : ▁« Jaunak ▁dio : ▁Zuekin ▁naiz ▁ni ».
PRED:	Then Jephthah sent this message to the Lord : “ I am sending you to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Haggai , the Lord 's messenger , gave the people this message from the Lord : “ I am with you , says the Lord ! ”

ID:	272
INPUT:	▁Alderantziz ▁baizik , ▁maitasunean <unk> etakoak ▁izanez , ▁hazi ▁gaitezen ▁gauza ▁guztietan , ▁Kristori ▁gero ▁eta ▁gehiago ▁egoki tuz . ▁Bera ▁da ▁burua
PRED:	Instead , you are your love , we are the one of your faith . And we are the one of Christ , who gives us glory to God .
GOLD:	Instead , we will speak the truth in love , growing in every way more and more like Christ , who is the head of his body , the church .

ID:	273
INPUT:	▁honek ▁esan ▁zuen :— Adizu , ▁Ahituben ▁seme ! Honek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Hemen ▁nauzu , ▁jauna .
PRED:	“ Well , ” she said to him , “ I am here ! ”
GOLD:	When they arrived , Saul shouted at him , “ Listen to me , you son of Ahitub ! ” “ What is it , my king ? ” Ahimelech asked .

ID:	274
INPUT:	▁oinetako ▁zahar ▁eta ▁birj os iak ▁jantzi ▁zituzten ▁oinetan ▁eta ▁zar pa ▁zaharrak ▁soinean ; ▁zeramaten ▁ogia ▁gogorra ▁eta ▁apur ▁egina ▁zegoen .
PRED:	They were given to the priests and his clothes , and they were allowed to take care of the young men .
GOLD:	They put on worn-out , patched sandals and ragged clothes . And the bread they took with them was dry and moldy .

ID:	275
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁badut ▁konfiantza , ▁Jauna ▁lagun , ▁neu ▁ere ▁zuengana ▁laster ▁joango ▁naizela .
PRED:	But if I am the Lord , I will come to you .
GOLD:	And I have confidence from the Lord that I myself will come to see you soon .

ID:	276
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregea ▁haserre ▁gorritan ▁jarri ▁zen , ▁eta ▁Babiloniako ▁jakitun ▁guztiak ▁hiltzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon became angry with his advisers , and he commanded them to kill him .
GOLD:	The king was furious when he heard this , and he ordered that all the wise men of Babylon be executed .

ID:	277
INPUT:	▁erre - opariak , ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opariak ▁egin ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁elkartasun - oparien ▁odolaz ▁zirtatu ▁zuen ▁aldarea .
PRED:	He made burnt offerings and liquid offerings , grain offerings , grain offerings , and peace offerings .
GOLD:	He presented a burnt offering and a grain offering , he poured out a liquid offering , and he sprinkled the blood of peace offerings on the altar .

ID:	278
INPUT:	▁ez ▁naiz ▁zintzo ei ▁dei ▁egitera ▁etorri , ▁bekatari ei ▁baizik , ▁bihozberri ▁daitezen .
PRED:	I have come to those who come to speak to the truth , but they will turn to God .
GOLD:	I have come to call not those who think they are righteous , but those who know they are sinners and need to repent . ”

ID:	279
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁ihardetsi ▁zien :— Ez ▁ari ▁marmarka ▁zeuen ▁artean .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ Stop complaining about what I said .

ID:	280
INPUT:	▁Salomon ▁erregeak ▁ere , ▁Sabako ▁erreginak ▁nahi ▁zuen ▁eta ▁eskatu ▁zion ▁guztia ▁eman ▁zion ; ▁gainera , ▁erregeak ▁ohi ▁zuen ▁eskuzabal tasunez , ▁erregal i ▁ugari ▁egin . ▁Ondoren , ▁erregina ▁bere ▁lurraldera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁bere ▁zerbitzariekin .
PRED:	King Solomon asked the king of Sheba , and he gave him everything he wanted to give him . Then she gave birth to her . Then she returned to the land of Sheba . Then she returned to the land .
GOLD:	King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba whatever she asked for , besides all the customary gifts he had so generously given . Then she and all her attendants returned to their own land .

ID:	281
INPUT:	▁Saia ▁gaitezen , ▁bada , ▁atseden ▁horretan ▁sartzen , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dadila ▁inor ▁sinesgogor kerian ▁eror , ▁gure ▁aurreko en ▁ets enpl uari ▁jarraituz .
PRED:	So let us live in the place of rest , and let us live in the place of worship . Instead , we know that we are in the Temple of our God .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	282
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁gurasoak ▁ere ▁alai ▁daitezela ▁zuregatik , eta ▁poz ▁dadila ▁mundura ▁ekarri ▁zintuen ▁ama !
PRED:	May your father be filled with joy , and let your mother be filled with joy .
GOLD:	So give your father and mother joy ! May she who gave you birth be happy .

ID:	283
INPUT:	▁Eraman ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁ehuntariak ▁gudalburu agana ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— P aul o ▁presoak ▁deitu ▁dit ▁eta ▁gazte ▁hau ▁zuregana ▁ekartzeko ▁eskatu ; ▁zerbait ▁omen ▁du ▁zuri ▁esateko .
PRED:	Then the officer named him , the commander of his officers , and he said to him , “ He is a young man who want you to ask me . ”
GOLD:	So the officer did , explaining , “ Paul , the prisoner , called me over and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you . ”

ID:	284
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zegoen ▁oraindik ▁landar erik ▁lurrean , ▁ezta ▁bel arrik ▁ere ▁ern eta , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁ez ▁baitzion ▁oraindik ▁lurrari ▁euririk ▁eman , ▁eta ▁ez ▁baitzen ▁lurra ▁lantz eko ▁gizakirik .
PRED:	When they were still still still in the land , the Sovereign Lord , the God of the earth was no rain , and there is no rain .
GOLD:	neither wild plants nor grains were growing on the earth . For the Lord God had not yet sent rain to water the earth , and there were no people to cultivate the soil .

ID:	285
INPUT:	▁eta ▁jabetza ▁zeuen ▁ondorengoei ▁betiko ▁utzi . ▁Horiek , ▁bai , ▁esklabotzat ▁eduki ▁ditzakezue , ▁baina ▁herritarren ▁artean , ▁israeldarren ▁artean , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁batak ▁bestea ▁gogor ▁hartuko .
PRED:	“ You must not leave the land of the land of Canaan , but you must not sell any of the people of Israel . You must not sell any of the land among the Israelites .
GOLD:	passing them on to your children as a permanent inheritance . You may treat them as slaves , but you must never treat your fellow Israelites this way .

ID:	286
INPUT:	▁Jendea ▁igarotzen ▁sum aturik , ▁zer ▁gertatzen ▁zen ▁galdetu ▁zuen .
PRED:	So the people asked him what was happening to him ?
GOLD:	When he heard the noise of a crowd going past , he asked what was happening .

ID:	287
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁erantzun :— Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁inoiz ▁irakurri ▁zer ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Davidek ▁beharra ldi ▁batean , ▁bera ▁eta ▁bere ▁lagunak ▁goseak ▁aurkitu ▁zirenean ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you read it ? Do n't we know that David do n't know how to find him ? ” So they found him .
GOLD:	Jesus said to them , “ Have n't you ever read in the Scriptures what David did when he and his companions were hungry ?

ID:	288
INPUT:	▁Mu tila ▁zetorrela , ▁deabruak ▁lurrera ▁bota ▁eta ▁gogor ▁astindu ▁zuen . ▁Jesusek ▁mehatxu ▁egin ▁zion ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoari , ▁mutikoa ▁sendatu ▁zuen ▁eta ▁aitari ▁itzuli ▁zion .
PRED:	When Jesus came down from the sea , he threw the demon from the demon from the sea , he threw his father to the ground .
GOLD:	As the boy came forward , the demon knocked him to the ground and threw him into a violent convulsion . But Jesus rebuked the evil spirit and healed the boy . Then he gave him back to his father .

ID:	289
INPUT:	▁Abnerrek ▁Ix - Boxet ▁utzi
PRED:	Ishbosheth Becomes Abner 's Judge
GOLD:	Abner Joins Forces with David

ID:	290
INPUT:	▁jan ▁errege , ▁gudalburu ▁eta ▁gudari ▁indartsuen ▁haragia , ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁zaldizko en ▁haragia , ▁era ▁guztietako ▁jendearen , ▁libre ▁nahiz ▁esklab oen , ▁txiki ▁nahiz ▁handien , ▁haragia ».
PRED:	The king of Babylon and the army of the army of Babylon — all kinds of wood , iron , and Abednego . ”
GOLD:	Come and eat the flesh of kings , generals , and strong warriors ; of horses and their riders ; and of all humanity , both free and slave , small and great . ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁otoitzean ▁hasi ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁mezu ▁bat ▁eman ▁du ▁Jainkoak , ▁eta ▁horren ▁berri ▁ematera ▁nat orkizu , ▁bereziki ▁maite ▁baitzaitu ▁Jainkoak . ▁Ahal egin ▁zaitez , ▁beraz , ▁mezua ▁eta ▁ikuskari aren ▁esanahia ▁ulertzen .
PRED:	When you pray , you are like a vision , God gave him a message to the throne . When God heard the sound of the beast , you know that the voice of God is coming .
GOLD:	The moment you began praying , a command was given . And now I am here to tell you what it was , for you are very precious to God . Listen carefully so that you can understand the meaning of your vision .

ID:	292
INPUT:	▁Aitak ▁Semea ▁maite ▁du , ▁eta ▁haren ▁esku ▁jarri ▁du ▁dena .
PRED:	He loves the Son of Man , and he loves his hand .
GOLD:	The Father loves his Son and has put everything into his hands .

ID:	293
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁kez ka ▁gehieg ik ames gaiztoa ▁dakar , eta ▁hitz - jari oak z oro - berri ketak ▁egitea .
PRED:	When they heard about this , they learned that the day of the pride of their rebellion .
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	294
INPUT:	▁Abner ▁Hebronera ▁itzuli ▁zenean , ▁Joabek ▁aparte ▁hartu ▁zuen , ▁hiri - sarreran ▁bertan , ▁isilpean ▁hitz ▁egiteko ▁bezala . ▁Orduan , ▁sabelean ▁jo ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Asah elen ▁odola ▁mendekatu z .
PRED:	When Joab returned to Hebron to Hebron , he shouted to Hebron to the elders of the town . Then he shouted to his brother and killed him in front of the blood .
GOLD:	When Abner arrived back at Hebron , Joab took him aside at the gateway as if to speak with him privately . But then he stabbed Abner in the stomach and killed him in revenge for killing his brother Asahel .

ID:	295
INPUT:	▁Gogor tu ▁haien ▁barrena : ▁madarika ▁itzazu !
PRED:	Let them curse them ; let them curse them .
GOLD:	Give them hard and stubborn hearts , and then let your curse fall on them !

ID:	296
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁zilar ▁landu zko ▁bi ▁turuta : ▁elkartea ▁biltzeko ▁eta ▁kanpalekua ▁utzi ▁eta ▁abiatzeko ▁seinalea ▁emateko ▁izango ▁dira .
PRED:	“ Make the ram of silver and gold , and tell them what the Lord says : The Lord has commanded you to enter the camp .
GOLD:	“ Make two trumpets of hammered silver for calling the community to assemble and for signaling the breaking of camp .

ID:	297
INPUT:	▁eta ▁fariseuak ▁eta ▁lege - maisuak ▁marmarrean ▁ari ▁ziren ▁esanez : ▁« Horre k ▁harrera ▁ona ▁egiten ▁die ▁bekatari ei , ▁baita ▁beraiekin ▁jan ▁ere !»
PRED:	The Pharisees and the teachers of religious law said to them , “ These are the other religious law who belong to us . ”
GOLD:	This made the Pharisees and teachers of religious law complain that he was associating with such sinful people — even eating with them !

ID:	298
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁kontu ▁zeure ▁buruari ▁eta ▁irakasten ▁duzun ari ; ▁eutsi ▁tinko , ▁hori ▁eginez , ▁bai ▁zeure ▁burua , ▁bai ▁entzu leak ▁salbatuko ▁baitituzu .
PRED:	Make sure that you have taught you . Do n't understand what you have done . They will be saved .
GOLD:	Keep a close watch on how you live and on your teaching . Stay true to what is right for the sake of your own salvation and the salvation of those who hear you .

ID:	299
INPUT:	▁Den etan ▁aberats ▁zarete , ▁denetan ▁eskuzabal ▁izateko ; ▁horrela , ▁nire ▁bitartez , ▁zuen ▁eskuzabal tasunak ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁esker ▁ona ▁sortuko ▁du .
PRED:	For you are rich to be rich , and we are given to God . He will give glory to God , and he will give them good .
GOLD:	Yes , you will be enriched in every way so that you can always be generous . And when we take your gifts to those who need them , they will thank God .

ID:	300
INPUT:	▁Zenbat ▁egunez ▁bizi ▁naiteke ▁oraindik ? Noiz ▁zigortuko ▁dituzu ▁nire ▁pertsegi tzaileak ?
PRED:	How long will I live ? How long will you look ? How long will you look ?
GOLD:	How long must I wait ? When will you punish those who persecute me ?

ID:	301
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁auzia
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	The Final Judgment

ID:	302
INPUT:	▁Danen ▁leinuko ▁Ah is amak en ▁seme ▁Ohol iab ▁eman ▁diot ▁lankide . ▁Gainera , ▁artisau ▁guztiak ▁treb eago ▁egiten ▁ditut , ▁agindu ▁dizudan ▁guztia ▁egin ▁dezaten :
PRED:	These are the clans of the tribe of Dan , the tribe of Dan , who were given to the clans of the tribe of Dan . I have given them everything I commanded you .
GOLD:	“ And I have personally appointed Oholiab son of Ahisamach , of the tribe of Dan , to be his assistant . Moreover , I have given special skill to all the gifted craftsmen so they can make all the things I have commanded you to make :

ID:	303
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁azalduko ▁Jaunaren ▁egintza ▁handiak ? Nork ▁aski ▁goretsiko ▁hura ?
PRED:	Who will ask the Lord ? Who will rescue you ? Who will rescue him ?
GOLD:	Who can list the glorious miracles of the Lord ? Who can ever praise him enough ?

ID:	304
INPUT:	▁Etsaiak ▁bidaliko ▁ditut Babiloniaren ▁aurka : garia ▁bezala ▁haiz era tuko ▁duteeta ▁herrialde ▁osoa ▁hustuko . Zoritx ar - egunean , alde ▁guztietatik ▁erasoko ▁diote .
PRED:	I will send them into exile , ” says the Lord. “ I will send them into exile , for I will send them into exile . ”
GOLD:	Foreigners will come and winnow her , blowing her away as chaff.They will come from every sideto rise against her in her day of trouble .

ID:	305
INPUT:	▁Zuen gatik ▁esan ▁ditut ▁gauza ▁hauek , ▁Apol oren ▁eta ▁neure ▁adi bidea ▁jarriz , ▁guregandik ▁ikas ▁dezazuen ▁idatzirik ▁dagoena ▁baino ▁harantzago ▁ez ▁joaten , ▁eta ▁inor ▁ez ▁dadin ▁batengatik ▁harro ▁besteren ▁bizkar .
PRED:	I say to you , ‘ This is what you say to me , and you are going to walk along the way of those who are going . We are going to go to you . '
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I have used Apollos and myself to illustrate what I 've been saying . If you pay attention to what I have quoted from the Scriptures , you wo n't be proud of one of your leaders at the expense of another .

ID:	306
INPUT:	▁Bo torik ▁egiten ▁ez ▁baduzue , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁izango ▁errudun .
PRED:	But if you are not guilty , you will not be guilty .
GOLD:	But once you have voluntarily made a vow , be careful to fulfill your promise to the Lord your God .

ID:	307
INPUT:	▁Espiritu ▁batek ▁hartzen ▁du ▁menpean , ▁eta ▁bat - batean ▁garrasika ▁hasten ▁da ; ▁gogor ▁astintzen ▁du ▁eta ▁ler dea ▁dari ola ▁jartzen , ▁eta ▁oso ▁nekez ▁alde ▁egiten ▁du ▁beraren gandik , ▁hauts ▁eginda ▁uzten ▁duelarik .
PRED:	When the Holy Spirit comes from the sea , it grows up into the sea , it grows up to its mouth . When you turn away from its mouth , it will turn away from its mouth .
GOLD:	An evil spirit keeps seizing him , making him scream . It throws him into convulsions so that he foams at the mouth . It batters him and hardly ever leaves him alone .

ID:	308
INPUT:	▁Batzu etan , ▁nazio ▁edo ▁erreinu ▁bat ▁lurretik ▁erauzi , ▁irauli ▁edo ▁hondatzeko ▁erabakia ▁hartzen ▁dut .
PRED:	I will destroy the nations and the kingdoms of the earth , and I will bring disaster on the ground .
GOLD:	If I announce that a certain nation or kingdom is to be uprooted , torn down , and destroyed ,

ID:	309
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁kaleetan intz iri a ▁eta ▁dolua ▁izango ▁dira , eta ▁zu , ▁atsekabe aren ▁atsekabez , lurrean ▁eseriko .
PRED:	Your heart will be filled with joy , and your sorrow will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	The gates of Zion will weep and mourn.The city will be like a ravaged woman , huddled on the ground .

ID:	310
INPUT:	▁Omri ▁erregearen ▁aginduak eta ▁Akaben ▁famil iaren ▁ohiturak gorde tzen ▁dituzu : haien ▁esanetara ▁zabiltza . Horregatik , zuen ▁hiria ▁hondatua ▁utziko ▁duteta ▁bizilagunak ▁lotsa ▁gorrian . Nire ▁herriaren ▁lots aiz una j asan ▁beharko ▁duzue ».
PRED:	“ Therefore , the king of Ahab 's family are camped in the towns of the tribe of Ahab 's Armies , and your people will be crushed by their heads . They will be disgraced , and you will be disgraced with shame . ”
GOLD:	You keep only the laws of evil King Omri ; you follow only the example of wicked King Ahab ! Therefore , I will make an example of you , bringing you to complete ruin.You will be treated with contempt , mocked by all who see you . ”

ID:	311
INPUT:	▁Jaso ▁zeure ▁herria ▁azkenik ▁gabeko ▁hondakin ▁hauetatik : etsaiak ▁den - dena ▁erraustu ▁du ▁santutegian .
PRED:	Look at your people will be swept away from your feet , and your feet will be driven from your sanctuary .
GOLD:	Walk through the awful ruins of the city ; see how the enemy has destroyed your sanctuary .

ID:	312
INPUT:	▁Ainger u ei ▁buruz ▁hau ▁dio ▁Jainkoak : ▁Haiz earen ▁antzeko ▁egiten ▁ditu ▁bere ▁aingeruak , ▁sugar raren ▁antzeko ▁bere ▁zerbitzariak ▁.
PRED:	The Lord says , “ The Lord is like thunder ; he is like his servants . ”
GOLD:	Regarding the angels , he says , “ He sends his angels like the winds , his servants like flames of fire . ”

ID:	313
INPUT:	▁Ara unak ▁Davidi :— Har ▁beza ▁ene ▁errege ▁jaunak ▁nahi ▁duen ▁guztia ▁erre - oparia ▁eskaintzeko . ▁Horra , ▁hor ▁dituzu ▁idiak ▁erre - oparitarako , ▁e ul tzia ▁eta ▁idi en ▁uztarria ▁egur re tarako .
PRED:	The king replied to David , “ Let my lord the king as a burnt offering for your burnt offering . You must offer it as a burnt offering for your neck . ”
GOLD:	“ Take it , my lord the king , and use it as you wish , ” Araunah said to David . “ Here are oxen for the burnt offering , and you can use the threshing boards and ox yokes for wood to build a fire on the altar .

ID:	314
INPUT:	▁Gure ▁gurasoak ▁zurekin ▁fidatu ▁ziren ; fi datu ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁libratu .
PRED:	Our ancestors were filled with your ancestors , and your ancestors rescued them .
GOLD:	They cried out to you and were saved.They trusted in you and were never disgraced .

ID:	315
INPUT:	▁Hamar garren ▁urtean , ▁hamargarren ▁hilaren ▁hamabi an , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	On the second year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On January 7 , during the tenth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	316
INPUT:	▁nork ▁bere ▁makila ▁jaurti ▁eta ▁suge ▁bihurtu ▁zen . ▁Baina ▁Aaronen ▁makilak ▁irentsi ▁egin ▁zituen ▁jakitun ▁eta ▁azti enak .
PRED:	He threw his staff into his staff and threw them out of the Nile River .
GOLD:	They threw down their staffs , which also became serpents ! But then Aaron 's staff swallowed up their staffs .

ID:	317
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁ez ▁ote ▁zaituzte , ▁bada , ▁biok ▁gorputz ▁bakar ▁bat ▁eta ▁espiritu ▁bakar ▁bat ▁egin ? ▁Eta ▁zertarako ▁bat ? ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁haurrak ▁izateko . ▁Argi ▁ibili , ▁beraz , ▁eta ▁ez ▁izan ▁desleial ▁gaztetan ▁aukeratu tako ▁emazteari .
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the Lord your God is not one of you , and I have one of you . And do n't have a little child ? ”
GOLD:	Did n't the Lord make you one with your wife ? In body and spirit you are his . And what does he want ? Godly children from your union . So guard your heart ; remain loyal to the wife of your youth .

ID:	318
INPUT:	▁horrela , ▁ondaretzat ▁zuek ▁bezala ▁lursailik ▁hartu ▁ez ▁duen ▁lebitarrak ▁eta ▁zuekin ▁bizi ▁diren ▁etorkin , ▁umezurtz ▁eta ▁alargun ek ▁zer ▁jana ▁izango ▁dute ; ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁eginkizun ▁guztiak ▁ongi ▁burutzeko ▁bidea ▁emango ▁dizue .
PRED:	In this way , you must be given to the Levites as foreigners living among the foreigners living among you . They will do whatever the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	Give it to the Levites , who will receive no allotment of land among you , as well as to the foreigners living among you , the orphans , and the widows in your towns , so they can eat and be satisfied . Then the Lord your God will bless you in all your work .

ID:	319
INPUT:	▁Denbora ▁berean , ▁Jauna ▁ere ▁gurtu ▁ohi ▁zuten . ▁Kultu - lekuetako ▁apaizak ▁izendatu ▁zituzten ▁beren ▁artetik , ▁muinoetako ▁jauretxe etan ▁apaiz - zerbitzua ▁egin ▁zezaten .
PRED:	They worshiped the Lord and worshiped the pagan shrines , and they worshiped the pagan shrines . They offered sacrifices to the pagan shrines in the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	These new residents worshiped the Lord , but they also appointed from among themselves all sorts of people as priests to offer sacrifices at their places of worship .

ID:	320
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁herria ▁haiengana ▁bihurtzen ▁da , haien ▁hitz ▁guztiak ▁ura ▁bezala ▁iren tsiz .
PRED:	That is why the people of God says : “ The man of God has spoken to his people .
GOLD:	And so the people are dismayed and confused , drinking in all their words .

ID:	321
INPUT:	▁Justiz iaren ▁bidetik ▁nabil ▁ni , ▁zuzenbide aren ▁erdi - erdi tik .
PRED:	I know how much I am going on earth .
GOLD:	I walk in righteousness , in paths of justice .

ID:	322
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁jokatzen ▁du ▁emakume ▁adulterio gileak : jan , ▁ahoa ▁garbitu ▁eta « Ez ▁dut ▁ezer ▁txarrik ▁egin » ▁esaten ▁du .
PRED:	This is what a woman says : “ I have sex with such a woman , ” says . “ I am saying . ”
GOLD:	An adulterous woman consumes a man , then wipes her mouth and says , “ What 's wrong with that ? ”

ID:	323
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁aingeruak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Satan i : ▁« Is il araz ▁haz ala ▁Jaunak , ▁Satan , ▁isil araz ▁haz ala ▁Jerusalem ▁aukeratu ▁duen ▁Jaunak . ▁Josue ▁su tatik ▁ateratako ▁il in tia ▁bezala ▁da ».
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to Satan , “ This is what the Lord says : The Lord , the Lord , who has chosen you to build a fire . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Satan , “ I , the Lord , reject your accusations , Satan . Yes , the Lord , who has chosen Jerusalem , rebukes you . This man is like a burning stick that has been snatched from the fire . ”

ID:	324
INPUT:	▁El karri ▁laguntzen ▁diote ▁idolo gile eketa ▁adore - hitzak ▁esaten ▁elkarri .
PRED:	Come , let them tell them what they say to each other .
GOLD:	The idol makers encourage one another , saying to each other , “ Be strong ! ”

ID:	325
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁libratuko ▁zaitu ▁ehiztari aren ▁sar etik eta ▁izurri ▁gal garri tik .
PRED:	He will save you from the grave ; he will change you away .
GOLD:	For he will rescue you from every trapand protect you from deadly disease .

ID:	326
INPUT:	▁Gor putz - arik etek ▁ezer ▁gutx irako ▁balio ▁dute ; ▁jainkozal etasun ak , ▁berriz , ▁guztirako ▁balio ▁du , ▁oraingo ▁eta ▁geroko ▁biziaren ▁agintzaria ▁baitu ▁berekin .
PRED:	It is good to be good , but it is the time to live in the future , and it will be given to God 's life .
GOLD:	“ Physical training is good , but training for godliness is much better , promising benefits in this life and in the life to come . ”

ID:	327
INPUT:	▁Salomonek , ▁orduan :— J ator ▁jokatzen ▁badu , ▁ez ▁zaio ▁ile ▁bat ▁ere ▁eroriko ▁lurrera ; ▁baina ▁nol abai teko ▁gaiztakeriarik ▁aurkitzen ▁badiogu , ▁heriotza ▁izango ▁du .
PRED:	Then Solomon said , “ If the hair of your hair is gone , it will fall to the ground . But if we die , he will fall on the ground . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	328
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bedi ▁fi da ▁itxura ▁engain agarri az , horixe ▁izango ▁du ▁ordain sari ▁eta .
PRED:	Do n't worry about your lips , for it is good .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	329
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez , ▁atal ak ▁asko ▁dira ; ▁gorputza , ▁ordea , ▁bat ▁bakarra .
PRED:	But many parts are no part , but many parts are one part .
GOLD:	Yes , there are many parts , but only one body .

ID:	330
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zien ▁Aaroni ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeei : ▁« Ego si ▁haragia ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ; ▁han ▁bertan ▁jango ▁duzue ▁sagarapen erako ▁prestaturiko ▁sas kian ▁dagoen ▁ogi arekin ▁batera , ▁nik ▁jaso ▁nuen ▁aginduaren ▁arabera : ▁“ Aar onek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeek ▁jango ▁dute ”.
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons and his sons , “ Take it on the side of the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and it will be eaten in the Tabernacle , and it will be eaten in the Tabernacle . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Boil the remaining meat of the offerings at the Tabernacle entrance , and eat it there , along with the bread that is in the basket of offerings for the ordination , just as I commanded when I said , ‘ Aaron and his sons will eat it . '

ID:	331
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak , ▁beraz , ▁grina ▁lotsagarri etara ▁eman ▁ditu : ▁emakumezko ek ▁ber ezko ▁sexu - harremanak ▁utzi ▁eta ▁n atu raren ▁kontrako etara ▁jo ▁dute .
PRED:	Therefore , God has given her sexual relations with her . He has been unfaithful to her .
GOLD:	That is why God abandoned them to their shameful desires . Even the women turned against the natural way to have sex and instead indulged in sex with each other .

ID:	332
INPUT:	▁« Bekatu aren ▁barkamen - oparitzat ▁arkumea ▁bad akar , ▁akats ▁gabea ▁eta ▁emea ▁izango ▁da .
PRED:	“ If the lamb is as a sin offering , it will be no defects .
GOLD:	“ If the people bring a sheep as their sin offering , it must be a female with no defects .

ID:	333
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁ataria ▁egoitz ari . ▁Hego aldetik , ▁liho - hari ▁bihurri tuzko ▁oihalak ▁izango ▁ditu , ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metro ▁luz ekoak .
PRED:	“ Make the courtyard of the Tabernacle , the south side of the inner courtyard ; the curtains will be made of finely woven linen .
GOLD:	“ Then make the courtyard for the Tabernacle , enclosed with curtains made of finely woven linen . On the south side , make the curtains 150 feet long .

ID:	334
INPUT:	▁Lebitar - hiri etako ▁herri - lurrak ▁ez ▁daitezke ▁sal , ▁lebitarren ▁behin ▁betiko ▁jabetza ▁baitira .
PRED:	Levites , Levites , Levites , and the towns of the Levites will be given to the Levites .
GOLD:	The open pastureland around the Levitical towns may never be sold . It is their permanent possession .

ID:	335
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁berean , ▁Josuek ▁Make da ▁hiria ▁hartu ▁zuen . ▁Erabat ▁suntsitu ▁zuten ▁hiria , ▁eta ▁erregea ▁eta ▁bizilagunak ▁ezpataz ▁hil ▁zituzten ; ▁ez ▁zuten ▁bat ▁ere ▁bizirik ▁utzi , ▁eta ▁Make dako ari ▁Jerikoko ▁erregeari ▁egindakoa ▁bera ▁egin ▁zioten .
PRED:	So Joshua destroyed the town of Jericho , and the town of the town was destroyed . So they killed the king and killed the king of Jericho , and the king of Jericho . So they killed the king of Jericho .
GOLD:	That same day Joshua captured and destroyed the town of Makkedah . He killed everyone in it , including the king , leaving no survivors . He destroyed them all , and he killed the king of Makkedah as he had killed the king of Jericho .

ID:	336
INPUT:	▁Jende - talde ▁handi ek ▁jarraitu ▁zioten ▁alde ▁guztietatik : ▁Galilea , ▁D ek ap ol is , ▁Jerusalem ▁eta ▁Judeatik ▁eta ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldetik .
PRED:	The people of Galilee followed all the people of Galilee , along with the Jordan River , along with the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him wherever he went — people from Galilee , the Ten Towns , Jerusalem , from all over Judea , and from east of the Jordan River .

ID:	337
INPUT:	▁hauek ▁beren ▁emazteak ▁bidaltzeko ▁hitza ▁eman ▁eta ▁beren ▁erruaren ▁ordainetan ▁ahari ▁bana ▁eskaini ▁zuten .
PRED:	So they sent a man to send a young bull and a young ram for a young bull .
GOLD:	They vowed to divorce their wives , and they each acknowledged their guilt by offering a ram as a guilt offering .

ID:	338
INPUT:	▁orgak ▁eta ▁hauetan ▁ur - ontziak ;
PRED:	The capitals on the sides of the pillars ,
GOLD:	the water carts holding the basins ;

ID:	339
INPUT:	▁Sus ako ▁juduak , ▁aldiz , ▁hamahiruan ▁eta ▁hamalauan ▁bildu ▁ziren ▁etsaiak ▁hiltzeko , ▁eta ▁hamabostean ▁atseden ▁hartu ▁zuten , ▁otordu - ▁eta ▁jaiegun ▁bihurtuz .
PRED:	When the Jews were destroyed by day , they celebrated the next day of their enemies . They were destroyed by day , they were destroyed by day .
GOLD:	( The Jews at Susa killed their enemies on March 7 and again on March 8 , then rested on March 9 , making that their day of feasting and gladness . )

ID:	340
INPUT:	▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁bata ioko ▁u raz ▁eta ▁heriotz ako ▁odolaz ▁etorri ▁zen ; ▁ez ▁zen ▁u raz ▁bakarrik ▁etorri , ▁u raz ▁eta ▁odolaz ▁baizik . ▁Eta ▁Espiritua ▁da ▁horren ▁testigantza ▁egiten ▁duena , ▁Espiritua ▁egia ▁baita .
PRED:	As soon as Christ came , the blood of Christ came out of the blood of the blood . And it was the Holy Spirit , and the Holy Spirit came to you .
GOLD:	And Jesus Christ was revealed as God 's Son by his baptism in water and by shedding his blood on the cross — not by water only , but by water and blood . And the Spirit , who is truth , confirms it with his testimony .

ID:	341
INPUT:	▁Benjamin ▁eta ▁Hax ub ek ▁beren ▁etxe ▁aurreko ▁sailean ▁egin ▁zuten ▁lan , ▁eta ▁Anan iasen ▁iloba ▁eta ▁Maase iasen ▁seme ▁Azariasek , ▁aldiz , ▁bere ▁etxe ▁ondoan .
PRED:	From the family of Benjamin , who repaired another section of the wall and repaired another section of Sheba and grandson of Sheba .
GOLD:	After them , Benjamin and Hasshub repaired the section across from their house , and Azariah son of Maaseiah and grandson of Ananiah repaired the section across from his house .

ID:	342
INPUT:	▁Gora z arre ak ▁kantatu ▁ondoren , ▁Oliamendi ra ▁abiatu ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then they sang a funeral song to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Then they sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of Olives .

ID:	343
INPUT:	▁Hexbon ▁zen ▁amortarren ▁errege ▁Sih onen ▁hiriburua ; ▁honek , ▁Moabeko ▁lehengo ▁erregeari ▁eraso ▁eta ▁lurraldea ▁ken dua ▁zion ▁Arnon ▁errekaraino .
PRED:	It was the king of Heshbon , King Sihon of Moab , the Arnon River to the Arnon River . It was the Arnon River to the Arnon River .
GOLD:	Heshbon had been the capital of King Sihon of the Amorites . He had defeated a former Moabite king and seized all his land as far as the Arnon River .

ID:	344
INPUT:	▁Alfer rak ▁dio : ▁« Lehoi ▁bat ▁dago ▁bidean , ▁basapiztia ▁kalean ».
PRED:	Lazy people say , “ They are like a little animal on the road . ”
GOLD:	The lazy person claims , “ There 's a lion on the road ! Yes , I 'm sure there 's a lion out there ! ”

ID:	345
INPUT:	▁Mundu ▁guztiak ▁gorroto ▁izango ▁dizue ▁niregatik ;
PRED:	All who hate you will hate you ; you will hate me .
GOLD:	And everyone will hate you because you are my followers .

ID:	346
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁ikustean , ▁ikasleek , ▁haserre , ▁honela ▁zioten :— Zergatik ▁alferrik ▁galdu ▁horrela ?
PRED:	When the disciples saw him , they asked him , “ Why have you lost ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were indignant when they saw this . “ What a waste ! ” they said .

ID:	347
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁aingeruak ▁esan ▁zion :— Itzuli ▁zeure ▁etxekoandre agana , ▁eta ▁izan ▁zakizki o ▁menpeko .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to her , “ Return to your servant . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord said to her , “ Return to your mistress , and submit to her authority . ”

ID:	348
INPUT:	▁Bigarren ▁ikuskaria : ▁adarrak ▁eta ▁erremen tariak
PRED:	A Vision of the Covenant
GOLD:	Future Prosperity of Jerusalem

ID:	349
INPUT:	▁Lurralde ▁osoak ▁egingo ▁du ▁hileta - n egarra , ▁senitarteek ▁senitarteka , ▁gizonezkoek ▁batetik ▁eta ▁emakumeek ▁bestetik : ▁Daviden ▁senitarteak ▁eta ▁Natan enak ,
PRED:	The people of Israel will mourn for their ancestor David , the clan of David , named after the clans of David , the clan of David .
GOLD:	“ All Israel will mourn , each clan by itself , and with the husbands separate from their wives . The clan of David will mourn alone , as will the clan of Nathan ,

ID:	350
INPUT:	▁ F id agarria ▁da ▁benetan ▁eginkizun ▁horretarako ▁izendatu ▁duen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean , ▁Moises ▁ere ▁haren ▁etxeko ▁ziren ▁israeldar ▁guztientzat ▁fidagarria ▁izan ▁zen ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Moses , just as he had done . He was faithful in his household , just as he had done .
GOLD:	For he was faithful to God , who appointed him , just as Moses served faithfully when he was entrusted with God 's entire house .

ID:	351
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁jendetza ▁agurtu ▁eta ▁etxeratu ▁egin ▁zen . ▁Hurbildu ▁zitzaizkion , ▁orduan , ▁ikasleak ▁eta ▁eskatu ▁zioten : ▁« Ar gi ▁iezaguzu ▁sor oko ▁olo ▁gaiztoaren ▁parabola ».
PRED:	Then Jesus went home to home and went home to home . Then the disciples asked him , “ Come , pick up the Parable of the fish , ” they said .
GOLD:	Then , leaving the crowds outside , Jesus went into the house . His disciples said , “ Please explain to us the story of the weeds in the field . ”

ID:	352
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁gorespen ez ▁eta ▁ekintza ▁ospetsu ez betea ▁nuen ▁ahoa ▁egun ▁osoan .
PRED:	I will praise your glorious strength and praise you .
GOLD:	That is why I can never stop praising you ; I declare your glory all day long .

ID:	353
INPUT:	▁Lurreko ▁hautsa ▁bezala xeh atu ▁nituen , kal eko ▁lokatza ▁bezala oin pean ▁zapaldu .
PRED:	For I did as I had done in the dust , so I could make them innocent in the dust .
GOLD:	I ground them as fine as the dust of the earth ; I trampled them in the gutter like dirt .

ID:	354
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion , ▁gainera :— Ongi ▁ikusia ▁dut ▁nire ▁herriaren ▁atsekabea ▁Egipton ▁eta ▁entzuna ▁haien ▁oihua ▁zapal tzaileen ▁zigor pean ; ▁bai , ▁ohartu ▁naiz ▁haien ▁oinaze az .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ I have seen my people in Egypt , ” he said . “ I have seen my people in Egypt . I am saying , ‘ I am in Egypt . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ I have certainly seen the oppression of my people in Egypt . I have heard their cries of distress because of their harsh slave drivers . Yes , I am aware of their suffering .

ID:	355
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁aginduz ▁igotzen ▁al ▁da ▁arranoa ▁gora eta ▁bere ▁habia ▁gailur retan ▁egiten ?
PRED:	“ Have you come to the earth ? Who is the rocks in the sea ?
GOLD:	Is it at your command that the eagle risesto the heights to make its nest ?

ID:	356
INPUT:	▁Gogoan ▁har , ▁Jauna , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁irain dua , herri engandik ▁jasan ▁behar ▁ditudan ▁hainbat ▁ezten kada !
PRED:	O Lord , you have rescued me from the nations of the nations .
GOLD:	Your enemies have mocked me , O Lord ; they mock your anointed king wherever he goes .

ID:	357
INPUT:	▁Askok ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁dute ▁ongi ▁handik iaz , mundu ▁guztia ▁eskuzabal aren ▁lagun .
PRED:	Many of the nations are in the world , for everyone else gives them to the greatest .
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	358
INPUT:	▁Gu ▁gaitzesten ▁gintuen ▁epai - agiria ▁suntsitu ▁egin ▁du ▁eta ▁gurutzean ▁jos iz ▁deuseztatu .
PRED:	We have destroyed us and destroyed us , and we were crucified with him .
GOLD:	He canceled the record of the charges against us and took it away by nailing it to the cross .

ID:	359
INPUT:	▁Egiptotik ▁atera ▁eta ▁hirugarren ▁hila ▁bete ▁zen ▁egunean ▁iritsi ▁ziren ▁israeldarrak ▁Sinai ▁basamortura .
PRED:	When the people of Israel arrived in the wilderness , they were dead in the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	Exactly two months after the Israelites left Egypt , they arrived in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	360
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁zuek ▁ere ▁bereizi ▁egingo ▁dituzue ▁abere ▁garbiak ▁kutsatu etatik , ▁hegazti ▁garbiak ▁kutsatu etatik . ▁Ez ▁dezazuela ▁bihur ▁zeuen ▁burua ▁higuingarri , ▁abereak , ▁hegaztiak ▁eta ▁narraska ▁dabiltzan ▁piztiak ▁direla ▁eta ; ▁neuk ▁egin ▁dut ▁bereizk eta , ▁kutsatuak ▁zein ▁diren ▁jakin ▁dezazuen .
PRED:	So you must eat any of these animals that are ceremonially unclean . You must not defile yourselves by eating the animals that scurry along the ground , and you are detestable to eat the birds of the animals .
GOLD:	“ You must therefore make a distinction between ceremonially clean and unclean animals , and between clean and unclean birds . You must not defile yourselves by eating any unclean animal or bird or creature that scurries along the ground . I have identified them as being unclean for you .

ID:	361
INPUT:	▁honela ▁egin ▁zion ▁otoitz :
PRED:	Then Jesus prayed to him ,
GOLD:	And Hezekiah prayed this prayer before the Lord :

ID:	362
INPUT:	▁Beraren ▁aita ▁Ezekiasek ▁deseginak ▁zituen ▁muinoetako ▁kultu - lekuak ▁berreraiki ▁zituen ▁eta ▁aldareak ▁egin ▁Baalen ▁kulturako . ▁Zu to in ▁sakratua ▁ere ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Akabek ▁garai ▁batean ▁bezala ▁eta ▁izar ▁guztiei ▁kultu ▁eman ▁zien , ▁haien ▁aurrean ▁ahuspeztuz .
PRED:	When Hezekiah rebuilt the pagan shrines , he rebuilt the pagan shrines and restored the altars to the Lord . He also worshiped the king of Israel , just as he had commanded him . He worshiped the king of Israel .
GOLD:	He rebuilt the pagan shrines his father , Hezekiah , had destroyed . He constructed altars for Baal and set up an Asherah pole , just as King Ahab of Israel had done . He also bowed before all the powers of the heavens and worshiped them .

ID:	363
INPUT:	▁Han ▁izango ▁nauzu ▁ni , ▁Horeb ▁mendiko ▁harkaitzean . ▁Hark aitza ▁jo ▁eta ▁ura ▁sortuko ▁da , ▁herriak ▁edan ▁dezan . Hala ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Moisesek , ▁Israelgo ▁arduradunen ▁aurrean .
PRED:	There will be a place from Mount Sinai , and it will be a place of water , and it will be a place where the people of Israel will drink .
GOLD:	I will stand before you on the rock at Mount Sinai . Strike the rock , and water will come gushing out . Then the people will be able to drink. ” So Moses struck the rock as he was told , and water gushed out as the elders looked on .

ID:	364
INPUT:	▁Orduan ▁esango ▁dute : ▁“ Hon datua ▁zegoen ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁Edengo ▁baratzea ▁bezala ▁dago ▁orain . ▁Hon datu ak , ▁erraus tuak ▁eta ▁eroriak ▁zeuden ▁hiriak ▁gotor turik ▁daude ▁eta ▁jen dez ▁beterik ”.
PRED:	“ Then they will say , ‘ The land of Eden , ' they said , ‘ They are ruined , and they have abandoned them . They were filled with their towns and villages . '
GOLD:	And when I bring you back , people will say , ‘ This former wasteland is now like the Garden of Eden ! The abandoned and ruined cities now have strong walls and are filled with people ! '

ID:	365
INPUT:	▁Hamabi garren ▁urtean , ▁hamabigarren ▁hilaren ▁batean , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	On the second year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On March 3 , during the twelfth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	366
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁agin tean , ▁bidegabekeria ▁ugari ; haien ▁erork etaren ▁lekuko ▁izango ▁zintzoak .
PRED:	The wicked will be destroyed ; the wicked will fall beneath their destruction .
GOLD:	When the wicked are in authority , sin flourishes , but the godly will live to see their downfall .

ID:	367
INPUT:	▁« Betiko ▁lege ▁izango ▁duzue ▁hau : ▁zazpigarren ▁hilaren ▁hamarrean ▁barau ▁egingo ▁duzue ; ▁ez ▁duzue ▁inolako ▁lanik ▁egingo , ▁ez ▁bertako ek , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁artean ▁bizi ▁diren ▁etorkin ek ,
PRED:	“ On the seventh day , during the seventh day , during the seventh year of the first month , you must remain in the seventh year of the first month .
GOLD:	“ On the tenth day of the appointed month in early autumn , you must deny yourselves . Neither native-born Israelites nor foreigners living among you may do any kind of work . This is a permanent law for you .

ID:	368
INPUT:	▁Zorionekoa ▁beti ▁begirunez ▁jokatzen ▁duena ; bihotz ▁gogorre koa ▁zoritx arrean ▁jausiko ▁da .
PRED:	Joyful are your thoughts , but your enemies are filled with integrity .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who fear to do wrong , but the stubborn are headed for serious trouble .

ID:	369
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁aipatu ▁dugun ▁pas artean , ▁Ez ▁dira ▁nire ▁atsedenean ▁sartuko ▁esan ▁zaigu .
PRED:	But now we will enter the land of the Nile River , and we will enter my land .
GOLD:	But in the other passage God said , “ They will never enter my place of rest . ”

ID:	370
INPUT:	▁harkaitz ▁artean ▁bizi ▁ziren , ▁koba ▁eta ▁haitzul oetan ,
PRED:	They live among the rocks in the rocks , where you live in the rocks .
GOLD:	So now they live in frightening ravines , in caves and among the rocks .

ID:	371
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁duzue ▁zeuen ▁hiri ▁fes taz alea , aspaldi danik ▁eraikia ? Hau , ▁urruti an ▁kol on iak j artzen ▁zituena ?
PRED:	For you are my refuge , O God , who would not forget you ? What will you compare your precious than you ?
GOLD:	Is this silent ruin all that is left of your once joyous city ? What a long history was yours ! Think of all the colonists you sent to distant places .

ID:	372
INPUT:	▁Izu garrizko ▁eskarmentu ▁izango ▁dira ▁munduko ▁erreinu ▁guztientzat ; ▁lots aizun ▁eta ▁iseka - gai ▁izango ▁dira , ▁koplak ▁aterako ▁dizkiete ▁eta ▁madarikatu ▁egingo ▁jaurtiko ▁ditudan ▁toki ▁guztietan .
PRED:	There will be a great nation , and I will make you an object of horror and mockery . I will make you an object of horror and mockery .
GOLD:	I will make them an object of horror and a symbol of evil to every nation on earth . They will be disgraced and mocked , taunted and cursed , wherever I scatter them .

ID:	373
INPUT:	▁Seme ▁zentzugabea ▁aitaren ▁zoritxarra , emazte ▁liskar tia ▁etengabeko ▁ito gina .
PRED:	My father is sweet to your father , and a fool is useless .
GOLD:	A foolish child is a calamity to a father ; a quarrelsome wife is as annoying as constant dripping .

ID:	374
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁Rekaben ▁seme ▁Jonadab ▁gure ▁arbaso ari ▁obedi tuz , ▁ez ▁dugu ▁ardorik ▁inoiz ▁ere ▁edaten , ▁ez ▁guk , ▁ez ▁gure ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabek ▁ere ;
PRED:	Instead , our ancestor Jehonadab son of Nun , we have never forgotten our ancestor David . We have never seen our wives , and we have never seen our wives .
GOLD:	So we have obeyed him in all these things . We have never had a drink of wine to this day , nor have our wives , our sons , or our daughters .

ID:	375
INPUT:	▁Madarik azio pean ▁eroriak ▁zaudete , ▁beraz , ▁den - denok ▁iruzur ▁egiten ▁didazue ▁eta .
PRED:	I am sending you out demons , but you will know that I am saying .
GOLD:	You are under a curse , for your whole nation has been cheating me .

ID:	376
INPUT:	▁Herodesek ▁begirune ▁baitzion ; ▁gizon ▁zuzen ▁eta ▁santu tzat ▁zeukan , ▁eta ▁babestu ▁egiten ▁zuen . ▁Joanen ▁hitzek ▁buru haus terik ▁sortzen ▁baz io ten ▁ere , ▁gogoz ▁entzuten ▁zion .
PRED:	Herod continued to hear the law of Herod , and he decided to hear the law of John .
GOLD:	for Herod respected John ; and knowing that he was a good and holy man , he protected him . Herod was greatly disturbed whenever he talked with John , but even so , he liked to listen to him .

ID:	377
INPUT:	▁Jerusalem , ▁estali ▁dolu - jantziz , ira uli ▁hautsetan , egin ▁dolu ▁seme ▁bakarraren herio tzako an ▁bezala , egin ▁negar ▁saminki , bat - batean ▁etorriko ▁baita hon da tzailea ▁zure ▁gainera .
PRED:	On Jerusalem , slaughter your head in mourning ; weep for those who weep for death .
GOLD:	Oh , my people , dress yourselves in burlapand sit among the ashes.Mourn and weep bitterly , as for the loss of an only son.For suddenly the destroying armies will be upon you !

ID:	378
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁presoak ▁hiltzea ▁pentsatu ▁zuten ▁soldaduek , ▁inork ▁ere ▁i ger ian ▁ihes ▁egin ▁ez ▁zezan .
PRED:	So they killed the young men who had fled to death .
GOLD:	The soldiers wanted to kill the prisoners to make sure they did n't swim ashore and escape .

ID:	379
INPUT:	▁Hizketa ▁arrotzez ▁mintzo ▁dena , ▁bere ▁buruari ▁bakarrik ▁zaio ▁lagungarri ; ▁profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzo ▁denak , ▁berriz , ▁eliz ▁elkartea ▁haz arazten ▁du .
PRED:	For in tongues is speaking in tongues , just as the church is speaking in the church . But the church is speaking in the church .
GOLD:	A person who speaks in tongues is strengthened personally , but one who speaks a word of prophecy strengthens the entire church .

ID:	380
INPUT:	▁« El kar tasun - oparia ▁botoren ▁bat ▁betetzeko ▁edo ▁nor beraren ▁borondatez ▁egina ▁bada , ▁opari gaia ▁op aldua ▁izan ▁den ▁egunean ▁jango ▁da ; ▁sobera ▁gelditua ▁hurrengo ▁egunean ▁jan ▁daiteke ;
PRED:	“ If you present a burnt offering to the Lord , you must fulfill a vow to fulfill a vow or a vow to the Lord . If it is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ If you bring an offering to fulfill a vow or as a voluntary offering , the meat must be eaten on the same day the sacrifice is offered , but whatever is left over may be eaten on the second day .

ID:	381
INPUT:	▁esklabotza ▁eta ▁hondamendi tik ▁askatua ▁izan ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁seme - alaben ▁aintz azko ▁aska tasunean ▁parte ▁izateko .
PRED:	May all of their sins be given to God 's sons and sisters , be given to his own children .
GOLD:	the creation looks forward to the day when it will join God 's children in glorious freedom from death and decay .

ID:	382
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁mendi ▁horretan ▁hilko ▁zara ▁eta ▁zure ▁arbasoekin ▁bilduko , ▁zure ▁anaia ▁Aaron ▁Hor ▁mendian ▁hil ▁eta ▁arbasoekin ▁bildu ▁zen ▁bezala ;
PRED:	Then you will die in the hill country of Aaron and your ancestors will be killed in the hill country of Aaron , just as your ancestors died .
GOLD:	Then you will die there on the mountain . You will join your ancestors , just as Aaron , your brother , died on Mount Hor and joined his ancestors .

ID:	383
INPUT:	▁Hau ei ▁jakinarazi ▁nahi ▁izan ▁die ▁Jainkoak ▁zein ▁aberats ▁eta ▁aintzatsu ▁den ▁jentilentzat ▁asmo ▁ezkutu ▁hori ; ▁zuengan ▁den ▁eta ▁aintzarako ▁itxaropen ▁duzuen ▁Kristori ▁buruz ▁ari ▁natzaizue .
PRED:	This is what God wants to tell us , ‘ This is what God wants to happen to you . '
GOLD:	For God wanted them to know that the riches and glory of Christ are for you Gentiles , too . And this is the secret : Christ lives in you . This gives you assurance of sharing his glory .

ID:	384
INPUT:	▁Zure ak ▁dira ▁gau - egunak , ▁zuk ▁era tuak ▁eguzki - ilargiak ;
PRED:	Your days are at night , O Lord , for you have dug deep deep waters .
GOLD:	Both day and night belong to you ; you made the starlight and the sun .

ID:	385
INPUT:	▁Asu er oren ▁erregealdiaren ▁zazpigarren ▁urteko ▁hamargarren ▁hilean , ▁hots , ▁Teb et ▁hilean , ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁Ester ▁erregearen ▁aurrera .
PRED:	Uzziah 's reign , during the eleventh year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , he led Esther to Queen Esther .
GOLD:	Esther was taken to King Xerxes at the royal palace in early winter of the seventh year of his reign .

ID:	386
INPUT:	▁Zul ora ▁doazen ekin ▁bat ▁egina ▁naukate , ▁hain ▁nago ▁indargabe tua .
PRED:	My enemies are filled with violence , and I will not turn away from them .
GOLD:	They have left me among the dead , and I lie like a corpse in a grave.I am forgotten , cut off from your care .

ID:	387
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁beste ▁buruzagi ▁bat ▁hautatu : ▁Josue
PRED:	God chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen chosen Levites .
GOLD:	The Lord 's Charge to Joshua

ID:	388
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁noiz ▁onartu ▁zuen ? ▁Erdain du ▁aurretik ▁ala ▁ondotik ? ▁Aurretik , ▁noski , ▁ez ▁ondotik .
PRED:	But he asked him , “ Have you been willing to come before you ? ”
GOLD:	But how did this happen ? Was he counted as righteous only after he was circumcised , or was it before he was circumcised ? Clearly , God accepted Abraham before he was circumcised !

ID:	389
INPUT:	▁Jakin arazten ▁dizuet , ▁gainera , ▁ez ▁dela ▁zilegi ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxe ▁honetako ▁apaiz , ▁lebitar , ▁atezain , ▁laguntzaile ▁eta ▁zerbitzariei ▁zer gar ik , ▁p etx arik ▁eta ▁bide sari rik ▁ken tzea .
PRED:	I know that you are not guilty of the Temple of God , the high priest , the high priest , the high priest , the servants of God . They must be brought to the Temple of God .
GOLD:	I also decree that no priest , Levite , singer , gatekeeper , Temple servant , or other worker in this Temple of God will be required to pay tribute , customs , or tolls of any kind . '

ID:	390
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁aiene , Hiri ▁barreneko ▁bizilagunak , mer katari enak ▁egin ▁baitu , diru dunak ▁galduak ▁baitira .
PRED:	From the end of the house of the city , for the people of Israel have been judged .
GOLD:	Wail in sorrow , all you who live in the market area , for all the merchants and traders will be destroyed .

ID:	391
INPUT:	▁Zeren ▁eta ▁jende ▁zintzoa ▁atsekabetu ▁baituzue ▁gezur rekin , ▁nik ▁neuk ▁atsekabetu ▁nahi ▁ez ▁nuenean , ▁eta ▁gaiztoa ▁bere ▁asmo etan ▁sendotu ▁baituzue , ▁bere ▁jokabide ▁gaizto tik ▁itzul ▁ez ▁zedin ▁eta , ▁horrela , ▁bizirik ▁iraun ▁ez ▁zezan ;
PRED:	For the righteous people will know that I am with you , for I am giving you good . If you do n't forget the evil things I am living in the evil way , you will be able to live .
GOLD:	You have discouraged the righteous with your lies , but I did n't want them to be sad . And you have encouraged the wicked by promising them life , even though they continue in their sins .

ID:	392
INPUT:	▁Une ▁hartan , ▁suz koak ▁bezalako ▁izaki ▁haietako ▁bat ▁niregana ▁etorri ▁zen ▁hegan , ▁su - h atz ez ▁aldaretik ▁harturiko ▁txingar ▁bat ▁eskuan ▁zekarrela ,
PRED:	At that time the man came to me , a fire came to me from the altar . He came to the altar to the altar of the altar .
GOLD:	Then one of the seraphim flew to me with a burning coal he had taken from the altar with a pair of tongs .

ID:	393
INPUT:	▁« Entzun ▁Jaunaren ▁trumoi - ah o tsa , entzun ▁haren ▁ahotik ▁irteten ▁den ▁dur un dia ;
PRED:	“ Listen to the Lord , listen to the words of the Lord ; he has spoken to its mouth .
GOLD:	Listen carefully to the thunder of God 's voiceas it rolls from his mouth .

ID:	394
INPUT:	▁eta ▁barkatu ▁gure ▁bekatuak , gu k ▁ere ▁zor ▁diguten ▁guztiei bar katzen ▁baiti egu , eta ▁ez ▁utzi ▁gu <unk> ▁erortzen ».
PRED:	For we have turned away from our sins , so we can curse us . ”
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we forgive those who sin against us.And do n't let us yield to temptation . ”

ID:	395
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁bere ▁Jainkoak , ▁siriarren ▁erregearen ▁esku ▁utzi ▁zuen ▁Akaz ; ▁haiek ▁menderatu ▁egin ▁zuten ▁eta , ▁beste ▁gatibu ▁askorekin ▁batera , ▁Damaskora ▁eraman ▁zuten . ▁Israelgo ▁erregearen ▁esku ▁ere ▁utzi ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁honek ▁ere ▁hondamen ▁ikaragarria ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	The Lord gave him victory over the king of Aram and King Ahaz of Aram , and he brought them to King Ahaz of Israel , and he led them into battle .
GOLD:	Because of all this , the Lord his God allowed the king of Aram to defeat Ahaz and to exile large numbers of his people to Damascus . The armies of the king of Israel also defeated Ahaz and inflicted many casualties on his army .

ID:	396
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁Asah elek ▁ez ▁zuen ▁alde ▁egin ▁nahi ▁izan . ▁Orduan , ▁Abnerrek ▁lantz aren ▁atzeko ▁mutur ra ▁sabelean ▁sartu ▁eta ▁atze aldetik ▁atera ▁zion . ▁Bertan ▁erori ▁zen ▁hila ▁Asahel . ▁Ondoren ▁zetozen ▁guztiak , ▁Asahel ▁hila ▁erori ▁zen ▁tokira ▁heltzean , ▁gelditu ▁egiten ▁ziren .
PRED:	But Abner did n't go out to the rear of the Philistines , and he went out to the rear of the rear of the rear of the north . But Abner 's men went into the north .
GOLD:	But Asahel refused to turn back , so Abner thrust the butt end of his spear through Asahel 's stomach , and the spear came out through his back . He stumbled to the ground and died there . And everyone who came by that spot stopped and stood still when they saw Asahel lying there .

ID:	397
INPUT:	▁Mir ari ▁bat ▁bezala ▁gertatu ▁nintzen ▁askoren tzat , zu ▁zintudan ▁neure ▁babesleku ▁seguru .
PRED:	I thought to you , “ You are my refuge , and you are my refuge .
GOLD:	My life is an example to many , because you have been my strength and protection .

ID:	398
INPUT:	▁Jordan ▁ingurura ▁heldu ▁zirenean , ▁artean ▁Kanaanen ▁zirela , ▁aldare ▁handi ▁eta ▁ikus garria ▁eraiki ▁zuten .
PRED:	When they arrived at the Jordan River , they saw that the Ark of the Lord had built a great altar .
GOLD:	But while they were still in Canaan , and when they came to a place called Geliloth near the Jordan River , the men of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh stopped to build a large and imposing altar .

ID:	399
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁aitak ▁nire ▁galdera ▁egiten ▁badu , ▁esaiozu : ▁« Bere ▁sorterri ▁Belenera ▁al bait ▁lehen ▁joaten ▁uzteko ▁eskatu ▁zidan ▁Davidek , ▁urter oko ▁oparia ▁bere ▁ahaide ▁guztiekin ▁egiteko ».
PRED:	“ If you say to my father , ‘ If you want to live , let him go home to the grave , let him go home to the other family of David . ' ”
GOLD:	If your father asks where I am , tell him I asked permission to go home to Bethlehem for an annual family sacrifice .

ID:	400
INPUT:	▁Lur saila ▁Jubileu ▁Ur tetik ▁bertatik ▁sagaratzen ▁bada , ▁ezarritako ▁prezioa ▁ordainduko ▁da ;
PRED:	If a person dies , it must pay it back to the price .
GOLD:	If the field is dedicated to the Lord in the Year of Jubilee , then the entire assessment will apply .

ID:	401
INPUT:	▁Ontzi ▁haiek ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁tenplura ▁eramateko ▁esan ▁zion ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxea ▁lehengo ▁toki ▁berean ▁eraikitzeko .
PRED:	Then they took the Temple to the Lord , the God of Jerusalem , and the Temple of God .
GOLD:	The king instructed him to return the cups to their place in Jerusalem and to rebuild the Temple of God there on its original site .

ID:	402
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁jo ▁nekromante engana , ▁ez ▁ibili ▁igarleak ▁kontsul tatzen , ▁kutsaturik ▁geldi ▁ez ▁zaitezten . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna , ▁zuen ▁Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ Do not defile those who trust in the Lord 's presence , for I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not defile yourselves by turning to mediums or to those who consult the spirits of the dead . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	403
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁uso , gordeleku ▁haitzul oak , lab arreko ▁zir ri ki tuak , ▁dituzun ▁hori , ikus ▁dezadala ▁zure ▁irudia , entzun ▁dezadala ▁zure ▁ahotsa ! Goz oa ▁baita ▁zure ▁ahotsa , eder ra ▁zure ▁irudia !
PRED:	My heart is like a donkey ; I have heard your voice in your presence , O Lord , for I have heard your voice .
GOLD:	My dove is hiding behind the rocks , behind an outcrop on the cliff.Let me see your face ; let me hear your voice.For your voice is pleasant , and your face is lovely .

ID:	404
INPUT:	▁« Ea , ▁bada , ▁itzuli ▁arin ▁aitarengana ▁eta ▁esaiozue : ▁Hau ▁dio ▁zure ▁seme ▁Josek : ▁Jainkoak ▁Egipto ▁osoko ▁buru ▁jarri ▁nau . ▁Zatoz ▁niregana ! ▁Ez ▁luzatu !
PRED:	“ Get up , ” Joseph said , “ Go and see your father , and I will see your father and your father , and he will come to me . Come , and you will come to me ! ”
GOLD:	“ Now hurry back to my father and tell him , ‘ This is what your son Joseph says : God has made me master over all the land of Egypt . So come down to me immediately !

ID:	405
INPUT:	▁eta ▁eman ▁mezu ▁hau : ▁“ Honela ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonosor ▁neure ▁zerbitzaria ▁ekar raraziko ▁dut , ▁eta ▁Jeremiasek ▁lurrean ▁sartu ▁dituen ▁harri ▁horien ▁gainean ▁ezarriko ▁ditut ▁haren ▁tronua ▁eta ▁gaineko ▁oihal - estal dura .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will take my throne and put them on the ground . '
GOLD:	Then say to the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will certainly bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar , king of Babylon , here to Egypt . I will set his throne over these stones that I have hidden . He will spread his royal canopy over them .

ID:	406
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	407
INPUT:	▁X uf amen gandik ▁x uf am darrak , ▁H uf amen gandik ▁h uf am darrak ,
PRED:	The godly are named after their ancestor ; their pride are terrified .
GOLD:	The Shuphamite clan , named after their ancestor Shupham.The Huphamite clan , named after their ancestor Hupham .

ID:	408
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Herri etako ▁erregeek ▁menpean ▁hartzen ▁dituzte ▁herriak , ▁eta ▁aginte dunek ▁“ On gile ” ▁izena ▁nahi ▁izaten ▁dute ▁berentzat .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ The kings of the earth , ‘ The kings of the nations will be destroyed . '
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ In this world the kings and great men lord it over their people , yet they are called ‘ friends of the people . '

ID:	409
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁Aita , ▁emadazu ▁aintza ▁zeure ▁ondoan , ▁eman ▁mundua ▁mundu ▁izan ▁baino ▁lehen ▁zure ▁ondoan ▁nuen ▁aintza .
PRED:	Now now , my Father has given you the Son of the earth , and I gave you the glory of the earth .
GOLD:	Now , Father , bring me into the glory we shared before the world began .

ID:	410
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zu , ▁Daniel , ▁izan ▁leial ▁azkena ▁arte . ▁Orduan ▁hartuko ▁duzu ▁atseden , ▁eta ▁garai aren ▁azkenean ▁altxatuko ▁zara ▁saria ▁jasotzeko ”».
PRED:	In the same way , Daniel , will honor you until the end of the end of rest . Then you will return to the end of the end . ”
GOLD:	“ As for you , go your way until the end . You will rest , and then at the end of the days , you will rise again to receive the inheritance set aside for you . ”

ID:	411
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁Jordanen ▁zehar ▁beh erantz ▁jarraituz , ▁Itsaso ▁Hil ean ▁amaituko .« Hori ▁izango ▁duzue ▁zeuen ▁lurraldea , ▁eta ▁horiek ▁berau ▁inguratzen ▁duten ▁mugak ».
PRED:	When you set up the Jordan River on the Jordan River , you must be set up to the Jordan River . This is what the Lord says to you . ”
GOLD:	and then along the Jordan River to the Dead Sea . These are the boundaries of your land . ”

ID:	412
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hau ▁guztia , ▁Jainkoa ▁bila ▁zezaten , ▁ea ▁its umustuka ▁bederen ▁aurkitzen ▁zuten ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dago ▁gure tako ▁bakoitz arengandik ▁urruti ,
PRED:	Then they asked him to find him , for they could n't find him . But they did n't find him for him .
GOLD:	“ His purpose was for the nations to seek after God and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him — though he is not far from any one of us .

ID:	413
INPUT:	▁zeure ▁maitasunagatik , ▁suntsi ▁itzazu ▁nire ▁etsaiak , hondatu ▁nire ▁erasotzaileak , zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁nauzun ez ▁gero .
PRED:	O Lord , you have rescued me , for I am your servant .
GOLD:	In your unfailing love , silence all my enemiesand destroy all my foes , for I am your servant .

ID:	414
INPUT:	▁T re ba tzen ▁dizkit ▁eskuak ▁gudurako , eta ▁besoak b rontzezko ▁uztaia ▁ten katzeko .
PRED:	Your enemies surround me , and your enemies surround me .
GOLD:	He trains my hands for battle ; he strengthens my arm to draw a bronze bow .

ID:	415
INPUT:	▁Tesalonik arrak ▁salbamenerako ▁aukeratuak
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer for Spiritual Wisdom
GOLD:	Believers Should Stand Firm

ID:	416
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁dei ▁egineta ▁hark ▁erantzun ▁egingo ▁dizu , zuk ▁laguntza ▁eskatu eta ▁hark ▁esango : ▁« Hemen ▁nauzu !» Uz tarri ▁oro ▁baztertzen eta ▁salak etak ▁eta ▁gaizki - es ateak ux atzen ▁badituzu ,
PRED:	“ Come , ” he said , “ I will answer you , and you will say , ‘ Come , and I will pay you back . '
GOLD:	Then when you call , the Lord will answer. ‘ Yes , I am here , ' he will quickly reply. “ Remove the heavy yoke of oppression.Stop pointing your finger and spreading vicious rumors !

ID:	417
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁nagusiak : ▁“ Ez , ▁ez ▁dadila ▁gerta ▁olo ▁gaiztoa ▁bil tzean ▁garia ▁ere ▁atera tzea .
PRED:	But the master said , ‘ Do n't be enough to harvest the wheat . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , ' he replied , ‘ you 'll uproot the wheat if you do .

ID:	418
INPUT:	▁Atsegin etara ▁emanak ▁behartsu ▁bu katuko , ardo zalea ▁eta ▁lurrin zalea ▁ez ▁da ▁aberas tuko .
PRED:	Wisdom will be poor and poor , for you are rich to feed you .
GOLD:	Those who love pleasure become poor ; those who love wine and luxury will never be rich .

ID:	419
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelgo ▁Jainkoak , ▁mezua ▁zuzendu ▁zion ▁Jeremiasi ▁Neh l amgo ▁Xemaias entzat . ▁Honek ▁gutun ▁bat ▁bidalia ▁zien ▁Jerusalemen ▁gelditutako ▁jendeari , ▁Maase iasen ▁seme ▁Sofonias ▁apaizari ▁eta ▁beste ▁apaiz ▁guztiei . ▁Honela ▁idazten ▁zion ▁Sofon iasi :
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says to Jeremiah : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	The Lord sent this message to Shemaiah the Nehelamite in Babylon :

ID:	420
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁zer ▁ikusi ▁nuen : ▁Elam ▁eskualdean ▁dagoen ▁Susa ▁gotorleku an ▁aurkitzen ▁nintzen , ▁U lai ▁ibai ▁ondoan .
PRED:	This is what I had seen , says : “ I was in the fortress of Susa , the fortress of Susa .
GOLD:	In this vision I was at the fortress of Susa , in the province of Elam , standing beside the Ulai River .

ID:	421
INPUT:	▁« Ikus karia ▁neuk ▁bakarrik ▁ikusi ▁nuen . ▁Nirekin ▁zeudenek ▁ez ▁zuten ▁ezer ▁ikusi ; ▁baizik ▁eta , ▁ikara ▁handiak ▁harturik , ▁ihesi ▁joan ▁ziren ▁eta ▁ezkutatu .
PRED:	When I saw that I had seen , I saw that I had seen with my own eyes and saw nothing , and they were afraid to escape .
GOLD:	Only I , Daniel , saw this vision . The men with me saw nothing , but they were suddenly terrified and ran away to hide .

ID:	422
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁herri ▁osoak ▁Uzias , ▁hamasei ▁urteko ▁gaztea , ▁errege ▁izendatu ▁zuen , ▁bere ▁aita ▁Amatziasen ▁ordez .
PRED:	When Uzziah died , Uzziah rebuilt his father 's reign , he became king .
GOLD:	All the people of Judah had crowned Amaziah 's sixteen-year-old son , Uzziah , as king in place of his father .

ID:	423
INPUT:	▁H ots ▁handiz ▁zioen : ▁« Izan ▁begirune ▁Jainkoari ▁eta ▁eman ▁aintza ▁berari , ▁etorri ▁baita ▁berak ▁mundua ▁epaituko ▁duen ▁ordua ; ▁adora ▁ezazue , ▁zerua ▁eta ▁lurra , ▁itsasoa ▁eta ▁ur - itur riak ▁egin ▁zituena ».
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ May the glory of God be given to him , for the earth is coming , and the earth of the earth will be filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	“ Fear God , ” he shouted . “ Give glory to him . For the time has come when he will sit as judge . Worship him who made the heavens , the earth , the sea , and all the springs of water . ”

ID:	424
INPUT:	▁Siri a ▁guztian ▁zabaldu ▁zen ▁Jesusen ▁entzutea . ▁Edozein ▁gaitz ▁edo ▁oinaz ek ▁jo takoak ▁— de <unk> dun , ▁ep ilep tiko ▁nahiz ▁elb arriak — ▁eramaten ▁zizkioten , ▁eta ▁hark ▁sendatu ▁egiten ▁zituen .
PRED:	When the crowd spread out to Jesus , he took a Roman officer and broke it into a rage .
GOLD:	News about him spread as far as Syria , and people soon began bringing to him all who were sick . And whatever their sickness or disease , or if they were demon possessed or epileptic or paralyzed — he healed them all .

ID:	425
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁zer ▁oihu katzen ▁duen ▁Jaunak lur - bazter retaraino :« Esan ▁Sion ▁hiri ▁ederrari : Hara , ▁badator ▁zure ▁salbatzailea ! Ber ekin ▁dakar ▁garaipen - agiria , berak ▁askatu riko ▁herria ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The Lord is coming down ; he will save you ; the people of Jerusalem will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	The Lord has sent this message to every land : “ Tell the people of Israel , ‘ Look , your Savior is coming.See , he brings his reward with him as he comes . ' ”

ID:	426
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁inori ▁ez ▁diot ▁hiz pi derik ▁emango ▁horrenbesteko ▁diru tza ▁neure ▁esku ▁dauka dalarik .
PRED:	So I will tell anyone about to write this happen to anyone else .
GOLD:	We are traveling together to guard against any criticism for the way we are handling this generous gift .

ID:	427
INPUT:	▁Oin ▁bakoitzean ▁gelak ▁zabala goak ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁tenpluko ▁horma , ▁berriz , ▁estua goa . ▁B arren eko ▁oin etik ▁bitarteko ra ▁igarotzen ▁zen , ▁eta ▁honetatik ▁goren eko ra .
PRED:	There were two blocks of rooms from the Temple of the Temple , and the Lord came to the Temple of the Lord . Then he cast out from the wall .
GOLD:	Each level was wider than the one below it , corresponding to the narrowing of the Temple wall as it rose higher . A stairway led up from the bottom level through the middle level to the top level .

ID:	428
INPUT:	▁urre ▁eta ▁zilarrez ▁apain duak eta ▁il tzez ▁eta ▁mai luz ▁josiak , er or ▁ez ▁daitezen .
PRED:	They will be filled with silver and gold ; no one will be left .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	429
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Altxa ▁ezazu ▁eskua ▁zerurantz ▁eta ▁uki tzeko ▁moduko ▁ilunp eak ▁izango ▁dira ▁Egipton ».
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go down into the sky , and go down to the mountain of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Lift your hand toward heaven , and the land of Egypt will be covered with a darkness so thick you can feel it . ”

ID:	430
INPUT:	▁Itsas oa ▁erdibi ▁egin ▁zuen ▁haiek ▁pasa tzeko , hor ma ▁bat ▁bezala ▁u rei ▁tinko ▁eutsiz .
PRED:	Then the sea covered the sea with your enemies , just as the sea had promised .
GOLD:	For he divided the sea and led them through , making the water stand up like walls !

ID:	431
INPUT:	▁Hori entzat ▁egunsentia ▁gau ▁iluna ▁da , ohitu ak ▁baitaude ▁iluntasun eko ▁izu etara ».
PRED:	In the night the night the night , there is no darkness . ”
GOLD:	The black night is their morning.They ally themselves with the terrors of the darkness .

ID:	432
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁ekialderantz ▁jarraituz , ▁Gat - H ef er ▁eta ▁Ita - K az in dik ▁igarotzen ▁zen ▁eta ▁Rimon ▁aldera ▁hartzen ▁zuen , ▁N ea ▁aldera ▁oker tzeko .
PRED:	Then the Philistines went to the east side of the Dead Sea , and they all around the other side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Then it continued east to Gath-hepher , Eth-kazin , and Rimmon and turned toward Neah .

ID:	433
INPUT:	▁Giz ona ▁sartu ▁zenean , ▁k erubinak ▁tenpluaren ▁eskuin aldera ▁zeuden , ▁eta ▁lainoak ▁barruko ▁ataria ▁betetzen ▁zuen .
PRED:	When the Ark was finished , the place of the Covenant went down to the place of the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	The cherubim were standing at the south end of the Temple when the man went in , and the cloud of glory filled the inner courtyard .

ID:	434
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁hamalau ▁urte ▁zituela , ▁Eber rek ▁Pel eg ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	When Shelah was 70 years old , he became the father of Shelah .
GOLD:	When Eber was 34 years old , he became the father of Peleg .

ID:	435
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁deituak ▁zeruan ▁nahiz ▁lurrean ▁asko ▁izan ▁arren ▁— eta ▁benetan ▁horrelako ▁jainko ▁eta ▁jaun ▁asko ▁dago —,
PRED:	In heaven , there is many of heaven and other gods , and many gods , too , is many gods of heaven .
GOLD:	There may be so-called gods both in heaven and on earth , and some people actually worship many gods and many lords .

ID:	436
INPUT:	▁Edomen ▁aurkako ▁mendekua ▁neure ▁herri ▁Israelen ▁bidez ▁burutuko ▁dut : ▁nire ▁haserre - sum inaren ▁arabera ▁erabiliko ▁dut ▁Edom ; ▁orduan ▁ezagutuko ▁dute ▁nire ▁mendekua . ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will bring you back to you , ” says the Lord. “ I will punish you , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	I will accomplish this by the hand of my people of Israel . They will carry out my vengeance with anger , and Edom will know that this vengeance is from me . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	437
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ez ▁deitu ▁lurrean ▁inori ▁“ ai ta ”, ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁baita ▁zuen ▁aita , ▁zeru koa .
PRED:	And he called to anyone , ‘ He is one sitting on the ground . '
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	438
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁esker , ▁israeldarrek ▁egiptoarren ▁abegi ▁ona ▁irabazi ▁zuten . ▁Are ▁gehiago , ▁Moises ▁bera ▁ap arteko ▁gizon tzat ▁zeukaten , ▁bai ▁faraoiaren ▁funtzionarioek , ▁bai ▁Egiptoko ▁herri ▁osoak .
PRED:	The people of Israel followed the Lord 's sight , and all the people of Egypt were given to the Lord . The people of Egypt were given to Pharaoh 's people .
GOLD:	( Now the Lord had caused the Egyptians to look favorably on the people of Israel . And Moses was considered a very great man in the land of Egypt , respected by Pharaoh 's officials and the Egyptian people alike . )

ID:	439
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁pozaren ▁pozez , ▁Samson ▁ateratzeko ▁eskatua ▁zuten , ▁beraren ▁kontura ▁barre ▁egiteko ▁gogoz . ▁Atera ▁zuten , ▁beraz , ▁Samson ▁esp etxetik ▁eta ▁beraren ▁bizkar ▁egin ▁zuten ▁barre . ▁Gero , ▁bi ▁zuta beren ▁erdian ▁utzi ▁zuten .
PRED:	But when the man saw him , they shouted to Samson , “ Let 's tell him what you 're going to say to him , ‘ May the son of Ephraim be killed with two sons and daughters . '
GOLD:	Half drunk by now , the people demanded , “ Bring out Samson so he can amuse us ! ” So he was brought from the prison to amuse them , and they had him stand between the pillars supporting the roof .

ID:	440
INPUT:	▁Mir ariak ▁eginak ▁zituen ▁haien ▁gurasoen ▁begi ▁aurrean Egip ton , ▁Tan isko ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	He performed miraculous signs in the land of Zoan , the citizens of Zoan .
GOLD:	the miracles he did for their ancestorson the plain of Zoan in the land of Egypt .

ID:	441
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁zerbitzari etako ▁ham arri ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁hamar ▁ontzako ▁urre ▁banatu ▁zizkien , ▁esanez : ▁“ Jarri ▁irabazi an , ▁ni ▁itzuli ▁bitartean ”.
PRED:	He called the other servants to the other servants , and he took the money to the other gods . He said , ‘ Take the money for me . '
GOLD:	Before he left , he called together ten of his servants and divided among them ten pounds of silver , saying , ‘ Invest this for me while I am gone . '

ID:	442
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁etxearen ▁iparraldeko ▁ate ▁ondora ▁eraman ▁ninduen ; ▁han ▁emakumeak ▁zeuden ▁eserita ▁Tam uz ▁jainko arengatik ▁dolu ▁egiten .
PRED:	The woman took me to the Temple of the Lord , where she was sitting on her head .
GOLD:	He brought me to the north gate of the Lord 's Temple , and some women were sitting there , weeping for the god Tammuz .

ID:	443
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio :« Atzerri tar ▁jendeak ber rera ikiko ▁ditu ▁zure ▁harresiak , eta ▁haien ▁erregeak zerbitz ari ▁izango ▁dituzu ; izan ▁ere , ▁neure ▁haserre an zigor tu ▁zintudan ▁arren , neure ▁onginah ian gupi datu ▁egin ▁naiz ▁zutaz .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will bring you down your anger , and he will bring you down your anger . I will bring you back to you , but you have mercy on my anger .
GOLD:	“ Foreigners will come to rebuild your towns , and their kings will serve you.For though I have destroyed you in my anger , I will now have mercy on you through my grace .

ID:	444
INPUT:	▁ez ▁du ▁egiten ▁harekin ▁igi tariak ▁esku ta darik , ez ▁bil tzaileak ▁bes ak adarik ;
PRED:	The young men of the wicked will bow before the harvesters , but the young will be destroyed .
GOLD:	ignored by the harvester , despised by the binder .

ID:	445
INPUT:	▁aita ▁nahiz ▁ama , ▁anaia ▁nahiz ▁arreba ▁hiltzen ▁bazaio ▁ere , ▁ez ▁da ▁kutsatuko , ▁Jaunari ▁sagaratua ▁baitu ▁bere ▁burua .
PRED:	If the mother of his sister , she will die , for you are not holy , for you are holy to the Lord .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	446
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁seme ▁izan ▁zituen ▁Saulek : ▁Jonatan , ▁Ix bi ▁eta ▁Mal ki - X ua ; ▁baita ▁bi ▁alaba ▁ere : ▁Mer ab ▁zaharrena ▁eta ▁Mikal ▁gazteena .
PRED:	Saul son of Zeruiah was the father of Ishbosheth , the daughter of Ishbosheth , who was the daughter of Ner . He also gave birth to the daughter of Ner .
GOLD:	Saul 's sons included Jonathan , Ishbosheth , and Malkishua . He also had two daughters : Merab , who was older , and Michal .

ID:	447
INPUT:	▁Bene - benetan ▁diotsut : ▁G aztea go ▁zinen ean , ▁zeuk ▁lotzen ▁zenuen ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁nora ▁joan ▁erabakitzen ; ▁zahar tzean , ▁ordea , ▁zuk ▁besoak ▁luzatu ▁eta ▁beste ▁batek ▁lotuko ▁dizu ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁nahi ▁izango ▁ez ▁duzun ▁lekura ▁eramango ▁zaitu .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , you know where you were trying to go to the ground . But when you came to the ground , you sent your hand to the ground . But you wo n't be able to take it . ”
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , when you were young , you were able to do as you liked ; you dressed yourself and went wherever you wanted to go . But when you are old , you will stretch out your hands , and others will dress you and take you where you do n't want to go . ”

ID:	448
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi ▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordan ▁ondoan , ▁Jeriko ▁parean :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	449
INPUT:	▁belarriak ▁bai , ▁eta ▁entzuten ▁ez ; ▁ez ▁dute ▁arnas arik ▁ahoan .
PRED:	They hear and say , “ The breath of the bones of the bones .
GOLD:	They have ears but can not hear , and mouths but can not breathe .

ID:	450
INPUT:	▁Zain ▁eta ▁zain ▁egon ▁ondoren , ▁kez katzen ▁hasi ▁ziren , ▁goiko ▁gelako ▁ateak ▁irekitzen ▁ez ▁zirelako . ▁Gil tza ▁hartu ▁eta ▁atea ▁ireki tzean , ▁han ▁aurkitu ▁zuten ▁beren ▁nagusia ▁lurrean ▁zer ra ldo , ▁hila .
PRED:	When they returned to the city , they found the doors of the Temple . When they found it , they found it , they found the door to find him .
GOLD:	so they waited . But when the king did n't come out after a long delay , they became concerned and got a key . And when they opened the doors , they found their master dead on the floor .

ID:	451
INPUT:	▁Negev etik ▁igo ▁eta ▁Hebronera ▁iritsi ▁ziren ▁— H eb ron ▁Egiptoko ▁Tan is ▁baino ▁zazpi ▁urte ▁lehenago ▁eraikia ▁zen —. ▁Han ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁Anaken ▁ondorengo ▁Ahi man , ▁Xex ai ▁eta ▁Tal mai .
PRED:	They went to Hebron to Hebron and went to Hebron to Hebron , named after the Negev , the descendants of Josiah , who lived in the Negev .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	452
INPUT:	▁Luzaro egi ▁bizi ▁izan ▁naiz ▁hemen ▁bakea ▁gorroto ▁dutenekin !
PRED:	For I hate those who hate me ; I hate peace .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	453
INPUT:	▁Erre - opari aren ▁eskaintza ▁bukatu ▁zuenean , ▁Jehuk ▁gudari ▁eta ▁buruzagiei ▁agindu ▁zien :— Aur rera ! ▁Hil ▁itzazue ! ▁Ez ▁dezala ▁inork ▁ere ▁ihes ▁egin ! Ezpataz ▁hil ▁eta ▁kanpora ▁bota ▁zituzten . ▁Gero , ▁gudari ▁eta ▁buruzagiek , ▁Baalen ▁jauretx eko ▁barne - gelara ▁sartu ,
PRED:	When Jehu finished the burnt offering , Jehu commanded them , “ Bring them out of the temple of Baal , ” Jehu ordered . “ Take them out of the temple of Baal ! ”
GOLD:	As soon as Jehu had finished sacrificing the burnt offering , he commanded his guards and officers , “ Go in and kill all of them . Do n't let a single one escape ! ” So they killed them all with their swords , and the guards and officers dragged their bodies outside . Then Jehu 's men went into the innermost fortress of the temple of Baal .

ID:	454
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁urrezko ▁lau ▁eraztun ▁eta ▁erantsi ▁lau ▁oinen ▁ertzetan ,
PRED:	Make four gold rings and attach them to the four gold rings on the sides of the altar .
GOLD:	Make four gold rings for the table and attach them at the four corners next to the four legs .

ID:	455
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁ordea , ▁hurbil etik ▁jarraitu ▁diezu ▁nire ▁irakaspen ▁eta ▁bizi erari ; ▁zeure ▁egin ▁dituzu ▁nire ▁asmo , ▁sinesmen ▁eta ▁pazientzia , ▁nire ▁maitasun ▁eta ▁eroapena ,
PRED:	But you have heard my thoughts , and you have seen my teaching . You have seen my thoughts and sisters , and you have seen my faith .
GOLD:	But you , Timothy , certainly know what I teach , and how I live , and what my purpose in life is . You know my faith , my patience , my love , and my endurance .

ID:	456
INPUT:	▁Azkenik , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zidan :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	“ Then at last the Lord said to me ,

ID:	457
INPUT:	▁Ona ▁eta ▁zuzena ▁da ▁Jauna , eta ▁bidea ▁jakinarazten ▁die ▁bekatari ei .
PRED:	The Lord is good to those who do evil , but he delights in evil .
GOLD:	The Lord is good and does what is right ; he shows the proper path to those who go astray .

ID:	458
INPUT:	▁Behar tsuari ▁iseka ▁egiten ▁dionak ▁irain ▁egiten ▁dio ▁E gileari , haren ▁zoritxarraz ▁pozten ▁dena ▁ez ▁da ▁zigor ▁gabe ▁geratuko .
PRED:	The poor will judge those who hate themselves , but those who trust the Lord will not be punished .
GOLD:	Those who mock the poor insult their Maker ; those who rejoice at the misfortune of others will be punished .

ID:	459
INPUT:	▁haien ▁aberastasun ▁guztiak ; ▁haien ▁haur ▁eta ▁emazteak ▁bahitu ▁zituzten , ▁eta ▁etxe etako ▁gauza ▁guztiak ▁ostu .
PRED:	He gave them his wives and his wives , his wife , and his wives , and all his possessions .
GOLD:	They looted all their wealth and plundered their houses . They also took all their little children and wives and led them away as captives .

ID:	460
INPUT:	▁umezurtz ▁eta ▁zapaldu aren ▁eskubideak ▁babesteko . Ez ▁beza ▁gehiago ▁beldurrik ▁eman buztin ez ▁eginiko ▁gizakiak !
PRED:	Do n't let them bring justice to them , and let them think of gold .
GOLD:	You will bring justice to the orphans and the oppressed , so mere people can no longer terrify them .

ID:	461
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁arte ▁ah ob ero ak ▁lotsagabe ▁er ron kan , gaizkile ▁guztiak ▁harropuz turik ?
PRED:	How long will you turn to their sins ? How long will all the sins of the wicked ?
GOLD:	How long will they speak with arrogance ? How long will these evil people boast ?

ID:	462
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁muga , ▁iparraldetik , ▁Jordanen ▁hasten ▁zen , ▁Jeriko ren ▁iparraldeko ▁saihets etik ▁igo ▁eta , ▁mendi aldetik ▁mendebalderantz ▁jarraituz , ▁Bet - Aben ▁basamortura ▁heltzen ▁zen .
PRED:	The eastern boundary went to the north side of the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River . Then he went to the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	The northern boundary of Benjamin 's land began at the Jordan River , went north of the slope of Jericho , then west through the hill country and the wilderness of Beth-aven .

ID:	463
INPUT:	▁Idol oei ▁des af ioa
PRED:	Teaching about Philistia
GOLD:	Restoration for Jerusalem

ID:	464
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Sauli : ▁« Hara , ▁David ▁Ramako ▁N ai oten ▁dago !»
PRED:	The people of Israel said to Saul , “ Listen to David ! ”
GOLD:	When the report reached Saul that David was at Naioth in Ramah ,

ID:	465
INPUT:	▁« Bedein katuak on fiantza ▁niregan ▁duena , eus karri ▁ni ▁nauena !
PRED:	Your words will rejoice , and those who trust me ; I will praise you .
GOLD:	“ But blessed are those who trust in the Lordand have made the Lord their hope and confidence .

ID:	466
INPUT:	▁baina ▁Jesusek ▁eskutik ▁hartu ▁eta ▁altxarazi ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁mutikoa ▁zutitu ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	But Jesus took his hand and took the boy , and the boy got up .
GOLD:	But Jesus took him by the hand and helped him to his feet , and he stood up .

ID:	467
INPUT:	▁« Nire ▁bihotza ▁ere ▁dardar ka ▁dago bere ▁lekutik ▁irten ▁nahian .
PRED:	“ My heart is as my heart ; my heart is near .
GOLD:	“ My heart pounds as I think of this.It trembles within me .

ID:	468
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zen ▁janari rik ▁lurralde ▁osoan ▁gosete ▁larri arengatik . ▁Gos eak ▁jota ▁utzi ▁zituen ▁Egipto ▁eta ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldeak .
PRED:	He did not produce food for the land of Canaan , for all the livestock of the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the famine became so severe that all the food was used up , and people were starving throughout the lands of Egypt and Canaan .

ID:	469
INPUT:	▁Lehen danik , ▁Saul ▁gure ▁errege ▁zenean ▁ere , ▁zuk ▁zenituen ▁Israelen ▁joan - etorri ak ▁gidatzen . ▁Jaunak ▁esana ▁dizu : ▁“ Zuk ▁gidatuko ▁duzu ▁ene ▁herri ▁Israel ▁eta ▁zu ▁izanen ▁zara ▁israeldarren ▁agintari ”».
PRED:	When Saul arrived , you will attack the kings of Israel , you kings of Israel , says the Lord , ‘ You are my people of Israel ! '
GOLD:	In the past , when Saul was our king , you were the one who really led the forces of Israel . And the Lord told you , ‘ You will be the shepherd of my people Israel . You will be Israel 's leader . ' ”

ID:	470
INPUT:	▁Gizonak ▁erakutsi ▁egin ▁zien ▁nondik ▁sartzen ▁zen ▁hirira . ▁Orduan , ▁hiriko ▁guztiak ▁hil ▁zituzten ▁ezpataz , ▁gizon ▁hura ▁eta ▁beraren ▁senitartekoak ▁izan ▁ezik .
PRED:	Then the man told him what the man had happened . He told him , “ He killed everyone who was killed by the king 's family . ”
GOLD:	So he showed them a way in , and they killed everyone in the town except that man and his family .

ID:	471
INPUT:	▁Ahots ▁bat ▁oihuka ▁ari ▁da ▁basamortuan : ▁Pres tatu ▁bidea ▁Jaunari , ▁zuzendu ▁bide xkak ▁hari .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord is saying , “ The road road to the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	He is a voice shouting in the wilderness , ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord 's coming ! Clear the road for him ! ' ”

ID:	472
INPUT:	▁Jaunarentzat ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁sagaraturiko ▁herri ▁zarete : ▁berak ▁hautatu ▁zaituzte ▁munduko ▁herri ▁guztien ▁artean ▁bere ▁herri , ▁bere ▁jabego ▁berezi , ▁izateko .
PRED:	For you are the Lord your God , who has chosen you to live among the nations .
GOLD:	For you are a holy people , who belong to the Lord your God . Of all the people on earth , the Lord your God has chosen you to be his own special treasure .

ID:	473
INPUT:	▁Hazaelek ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Zergatik ▁ari ▁zara ▁negarrez , ▁ene ▁jauna ? Eliseok ▁erantzun :— Bad aki dalako ▁nolako ▁kaltea ▁eginen ▁diezun ▁israeldarrei : ▁su ▁emango ▁diezu ▁haien ▁gotorleku ei , ▁ezpataz ▁hilko ▁dituzu ▁haien ▁gazteak , ▁harri en ▁kontra ▁botako ▁haien ▁haurtxoak , ▁sabela ▁irekiko ▁diezu ▁hango ▁emakume ▁haurdun ei .
PRED:	“ Why do you look ? ” Jehu asked . “ Why are you crying out to me ? Why will you give me a sword ? ”
GOLD:	“ What 's the matter , my lord ? ” Hazael asked him.Elisha replied , “ I know the terrible things you will do to the people of Israel . You will burn their fortified cities , kill their young men with the sword , dash their little children to the ground , and rip open their pregnant women ! ”

ID:	474
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Joabek , ▁erregeagana ▁joan ▁eta ▁halaxe ▁jakinarazi ▁zion . ▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁dei ▁egin ▁zion ▁Absalomi ; ▁hau ▁erregeagana ▁etorri ▁eta ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁zitzaion . ▁Erregeak ▁besarkatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Absalom .
PRED:	So Joab went to the king and told him , “ This is what the king said to Absalom , the king of David , and he went to the ground . ”
GOLD:	So Joab told the king what Absalom had said . Then at last David summoned Absalom , who came and bowed low before the king , and the king kissed him .

ID:	475
INPUT:	▁Etxeko ▁arduradunak ▁honela ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Z audete ▁lasai ! ▁Ez ▁kezkatu ! ▁Zeuen ▁Jainkoak , ▁zeuen ▁aitaren ▁Jainkoak , ▁ezarriko ▁zizuen ▁altxor ▁hori ▁gari - zak uetan , ▁nik ▁jasoa ▁baitut ▁zuen ▁dirua ». S im eon ▁aske ▁utzi ▁eta
PRED:	Then the elders said to them , “ Do n't be afraid of your father , for you have heard your father , your father , your father , your God has taken you from our father . ”
GOLD:	“ Relax . Do n't be afraid , ” the household manager told them . “ Your God , the God of your father , must have put this treasure into your sacks . I know I received your payment. ” Then he released Simeon and brought him out to them .

ID:	476
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁galdetu ▁zidan : ▁« Nor ▁zara ?» ▁Nik ▁erantzun : ▁« Am alek tarra ▁nauzu ».
PRED:	He asked me , “ Who is you ? ” he asked . “ Who is your mother ? ”
GOLD:	“ He responded , ‘ Who are you ? ' “ ‘ I am an Amalekite , ' I told him .

ID:	477
INPUT:	▁Morroiak ▁onartu ▁zuen ▁proposamena , ▁eta ▁hamar ▁eguneko ▁proba ▁egin ▁zuen ▁haiekin .
PRED:	So the servant told him about ten days and three days .
GOLD:	The attendant agreed to Daniel 's suggestion and tested them for ten days .

ID:	478
INPUT:	▁Goraintziak ▁Jaunarengan ▁oso ▁maite ▁dudan ▁An pl <unk> ori .
PRED:	Greet me , O Lord , who loved me .
GOLD:	Greet Ampliatus , my dear friend in the Lord .

ID:	479
INPUT:	▁Paulo ▁zain pean ▁eduki tzeko ▁agindu ▁zion ▁ehuntari ari , ▁baina ▁lasai ▁sam ar ▁utziz , ▁berari ▁laguntzera ▁joatea ▁adiskide ei ▁debekatu ▁gabe .
PRED:	Paul decided to go to the Roman officer , but he said to him , “ Do n't let anyone go with him . ”
GOLD:	He ordered an officer to keep Paul in custody but to give him some freedom and allow his friends to visit him and take care of his needs .

ID:	480
INPUT:	▁saltzeko ▁niri ▁bere ▁sor oaren ▁ondoan ▁dagoen ▁Makp elako ▁har pea . ▁Eman ▁diezadala ▁balio ▁duen ▁diruaren ▁truke , ▁zuen ▁lurraldean ▁hilobi aren ▁jabetza ▁u kan ▁dezadan .
PRED:	So take charge of the cave in the land of Canaan , where you live in the land of Canaan . This is what you live in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	to let me buy his cave at Machpelah , down at the end of his field . I will pay the full price in the presence of witnesses , so I will have a permanent burial place for my family . ”

ID:	481
INPUT:	▁Senakerib ▁berriro ▁mehatx uka
PRED:	Hezekiah 's First Speech :
GOLD:	Hezekiah Seeks the Lord 's Help

ID:	482
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁denak ▁irtenarazi ▁zituen ▁eta , ▁belaunik aturik , ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen ; ▁gero , ▁gorp ura ▁bihurturik , ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Tab ita , ▁jaiki !» Hark ▁begiak ▁ireki ▁zituen ▁eta , ▁Pedro ▁ikustean , ▁eseri ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	When Peter saw them , he prayed to him , he prayed to him , “ Come , he got up to the crowd and see how he was going to see him . ”
GOLD:	But Peter asked them all to leave the room ; then he knelt and prayed . Turning to the body he said , “ Get up , Tabitha. ” And she opened her eyes ! When she saw Peter , she sat up !

ID:	483
INPUT:	▁Jesusen ▁hitzok ▁entzutean , ▁batzuek ▁zioten : ▁« Benetan ▁hauxe ▁da ▁itxaron ▁dugun ▁profeta ».
PRED:	When some of Jesus heard this , they said , “ This is what the prophet says : ”
GOLD:	When the crowds heard him say this , some of them declared , “ Surely this man is the Prophet we 've been expecting . ”

ID:	484
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁aldarean ▁aurkeztuko ▁du ▁eta , ▁burua ▁moztu ▁eta ▁odola ▁aldarearen ▁albo ▁batean ▁isuri ▁ondoren , ▁aldarean ▁erreko .
PRED:	The priest must present the priest on the altar and burn it on the altar . Then he must burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	The priest will take the bird to the altar , wring off its head , and burn it on the altar . But first he must drain its blood against the side of the altar .

ID:	485
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erantzun ▁hau ▁jasoko ▁dute : ▁“ Jaunaren , ▁beren ▁Jainkoaren , ▁ituna ▁bazter ▁utzi ▁eta ▁jainko ▁arrotzak ▁gurtu ▁eta ▁zerbitzatu ▁dituztelako ”».
PRED:	Then they replied , ‘ This is what the Lord says : They serve the gods of the Lord your God and worshiped other gods . ' ”
GOLD:	And the answer will be , ‘ Because they violated their covenant with the Lord their God by worshiping other gods . ' ”

ID:	486
INPUT:	▁Sartu ▁zen ▁Joab ▁erregearen ▁etxera ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— Lots arazi ▁egin ▁dituzu ▁gaur , ▁zuri ▁eta ▁zure ▁seme - alabei , ▁zure ▁emazte ▁eta ▁ohaide ei ▁bizia ▁salbatu ▁dizueten ▁gudari ▁guztiak .
PRED:	So Joab went home to the king and said to the king , “ You have come to your sons and your wives and mother and your wives . ”
GOLD:	You seem to love those who hate you and hate those who love you . You have made it clear today that your commanders and troops mean nothing to you . It seems that if Absalom had lived and all of us had died , you would be pleased .

ID:	487
INPUT:	▁Zuei ▁dagokizuenez , ▁egin ▁bira ▁eta ▁jo ▁basamorturantz , ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri rantz .
PRED:	I went to the Red Sea and camped at the Red Sea .
GOLD:	As for you , turn around now and go on back through the wilderness toward the Red Sea . '

ID:	488
INPUT:	▁O to iz lekura ▁gin do azen ▁batean , ▁neskatxa ▁bat ▁atera ▁zitzaigun ▁bidera : ▁gero a ▁igar tzeko ▁ahalmena ▁ematen ▁zion ▁espiritu ▁batek ▁hartua ▁zen , ▁eta ▁bere ▁igar pen en ▁bidez ▁irabazi ▁ederra ▁ematen ▁zien ▁nagusi ei .
PRED:	When he heard this , he took a virgin named him . He said to him , “ He has given us the spirit of his brother , who gives us his power to the devil . ”
GOLD:	One day as we were going down to the place of prayer , we met a slave girl who had a spirit that enabled her to tell the future . She earned a lot of money for her masters by telling fortunes .

ID:	489
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁beste ▁erroilu ▁bat ▁eta ▁idatzi ▁bertan ▁Judako ▁errege ▁Joiakimek ▁erretako an ▁zetorren ▁mezu ▁bera .
PRED:	“ Take a scroll on the scroll and write it on the second day , the king of Judah .
GOLD:	“ Get another scroll , and write everything again just as you did on the scroll King Jehoiakim burned .

ID:	490
INPUT:	▁« Bizi ▁bedi ▁Ruben , ▁ez ▁bedi ▁hil , gu txi ▁izan ▁arren ▁beraren ▁gizonak ».
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone die , ” says the Lord . “ May his men be killed . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Reuben : “ Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out , though they are few in number . ”

ID:	491
INPUT:	▁Itzuli ▁zen ▁Balaam ▁Balak engana ▁eta ▁erre - oparien ▁ondoan ▁aurkitu ▁zuen ▁moabdar ▁buruzagi ▁guztiekin .
PRED:	So Balak went to Balaam and found Balaam and found all the kings of Israel .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	492
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁Hebron , ▁Jefuneren ▁seme ▁Kaleb ▁ken iz tarraren ▁ondorengo ena ▁da ▁gaurdaino , ▁hau ▁Jaunarekiko , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoarekiko , ▁leial ▁izan ▁zelako .
PRED:	These are the descendants of Jephunneh and the descendants of Caleb son of Jephunneh . This is what the Lord had promised to the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Hebron still belongs to the descendants of Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite because he wholeheartedly followed the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	493
INPUT:	▁Josuek ▁bost ▁mila ▁inguru ▁gudari ▁hartu ▁eta ▁zelatan ▁ipini ▁zituen ▁Betel ▁eta ▁Ai ▁artean , ▁hiriaren ▁mendebaldera .
PRED:	So Joshua set five men from Bethel and set them out to the town of Bethel and west .
GOLD:	That night Joshua sent about 5,000 men to lie in ambush between Bethel and Ai , on the west side of the town .

ID:	494
INPUT:	▁« P er tsia , ▁L ud ▁eta ▁Pu t ▁herrialde etako ▁ger l ariak ▁zen e uzkan ▁zeure ▁arma dan , ▁babeski ▁eta ▁buru - oskol ak ▁zintzilik atuz ▁apaintzen ▁zintuzten .
PRED:	“ When you heard this , you brought out of a great army and harp , a great army of battle , and a large army of safety .
GOLD:	“ Men from distant Persia , Lydia , and Libya served in your great army . They hung their shields and helmets on your walls , giving you great honor .

ID:	495
INPUT:	▁Mu tikoak ▁jarriko ▁dizkie ▁nagusi , beren ▁nahi erara ▁goberna ▁ditzaten .
PRED:	If they refuse to bow before him , he will judge him to judge him .
GOLD:	I will make boys their leaders , and toddlers their rulers .

ID:	496
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁Ezekiasen ▁alde ▁egon ▁zenez , ▁onik ▁atera ▁zen ▁hau ▁bere ▁egintza ▁guztietan . ▁Asiriako ▁erregearen ▁kontra ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁haren ▁menpeko ▁izateari ▁utzi ▁zion .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah left the Lord 's presence , the king of Assyria , and he refused to follow the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	So the Lord was with him , and Hezekiah was successful in everything he did . He revolted against the king of Assyria and refused to pay him tribute .

ID:	497
INPUT:	▁Inork , ▁tentaldi rik ▁duenean , ▁ez ▁beza ▁esan ▁Jainkoak ▁tentatzen ▁duenik . ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁gaizki rako ▁ten taz <unk> ▁eta ▁ez ▁du ▁inor ▁gaizki rako ▁tentatzen ▁ere .
PRED:	We know that God has not been able to speak , so he can not be able to live among you . ”
GOLD:	And remember , when you are being tempted , do not say , “ God is tempting me. ” God is never tempted to do wrong , and he never tempts anyone else .

ID:	498
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁erantzun ▁zioten :— Ju de ako ▁Belenen , ▁honela ▁idatzi ▁baitzuen ▁profetak :
PRED:	They said to him , “ He wrote this message to Bethlehem in Bethlehem ,
GOLD:	“ In Bethlehem in Judea , ” they said , “ for this is what the prophet wrote :

ID:	499
INPUT:	▁Eguzkia ▁sartzean , ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da ▁eta ▁jan ▁ahal ▁izango ▁ditu ▁opari ▁sakratuak , ▁beraren tzako ▁janari ▁baitira .
PRED:	When the sun goes into the sun , it will be allowed to eat the food to eat .
GOLD:	When the sun goes down , he will be ceremonially clean again and may eat from the sacred offerings , for this is his food .

ID:	500
INPUT:	▁Al dika ▁lozorroan , ▁al dika ▁erdi ▁lo , al dika ▁besoak ▁uztartu ▁eta ▁atsedenean :
PRED:	A little little little while a little little while , a little little while the rest of the earth .
GOLD:	A little extra sleep , a little more slumber , a little folding of the hands to rest —

ID:	501
INPUT:	▁egundoko ▁altxorrak ▁eskuratu eta ▁harrapakin ez ▁beteko ▁dugu ▁etxea ;
PRED:	We have captured all the treasures of silver , and we have taken away your homes .
GOLD:	Think of the great things we 'll get ! We 'll fill our houses with all the stuff we take .

ID:	502
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁hori , ▁berriz , ▁Espiritua ▁da , ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁Espiritua ▁non , ▁askatasuna ▁han .
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ The Spirit of the Lord is in the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	For the Lord is the Spirit , and wherever the Spirit of the Lord is , there is freedom .

ID:	503
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁bitez ▁ezpataz , ▁bihur ▁az eri en ▁janari !
PRED:	Let them be cut off with food , and let them eat food .
GOLD:	But the king will rejoice in God.All who swear to tell the truth will praise him , while liars will be silenced .

ID:	504
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁morroi ▁honek ▁haietan ▁du ▁argia , benetan ▁onura garri ▁haiek ▁betetzea .
PRED:	Your servant is a servant who gives justice to you .
GOLD:	How can I know all the sins lurking in my heart ? Cleanse me from these hidden faults .

ID:	505
INPUT:	▁Sedekiasen ▁erregealdiko ▁hamargarren ▁urtean , ▁Nabukodonos orren ▁erregealdiko ▁hemezortzi garren ean , ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁mezua ▁adierazi ▁zion ▁Jeremiasi .
PRED:	During the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon 's reign , the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah .
GOLD:	The following message came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the tenth year of the reign of Zedekiah , king of Judah . This was also the eighteenth year of the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	506
INPUT:	▁ez ▁dira ▁nekatzen , ez ▁estropezu ▁egiten ; ez ▁ditu ▁loak , ez ▁lo gal eak ▁geldi arazten ; ez ▁zaie ▁gerrikoa ▁askatzen , ez ▁eta ▁oinetako ▁lok arria ▁ete ten .
PRED:	They look for themselves , but they are n't asleep . They look to the ground , but they are not asleep . They are not going down to the ground .
GOLD:	They will not get tired or stumble.They will not stop for rest or sleep.Not a belt will be loose , not a sandal strap broken .

ID:	507
INPUT:	▁Ibai ko ▁ura ▁jo ▁zuenetik ▁zazpi ▁egunera , ▁Jaunak
PRED:	After seven days after the Lord had finished seven days ,
GOLD:	Seven days passed from the time the Lord struck the Nile .

ID:	508
INPUT:	▁Jazer gatik ▁egin ▁nuen ▁bain on egar ▁gehiago ▁dagit ▁zuregatik , S ib mako ▁mahasti ▁horrengatik . Zure ▁aih enak Itsaso ▁Gorri raino ▁luzatzen ▁ziren , J azer eraino ▁iristen : zure ▁gain ▁ere oldar tu ▁da ▁suntsitzailea , uzta ▁eta ▁mahats - bilketa ▁hondatu z .
PRED:	So I did not forget your vineyards , for I have destroyed your vineyards . They were in the Red Sea in the Red Sea , and they were scattered in the Red Sea .
GOLD:	“ You people of Sibmah , rich in vineyards , I will weep for you even more than I did for Jazer.Your spreading vines once reached as far as the Dead Sea , but the destroyer has stripped you bare ! He has harvested your grapes and summer fruits .

ID:	509
INPUT:	▁Israeldarren ▁elkarte ▁osoa ▁Elim dik ▁irten ▁eta ▁Elim ▁eta ▁Sinai ▁artean ▁dagoen ▁Sin ▁basamortura ▁heldu ▁zen . ▁Bigarren ▁hilaren ▁hamabos ta ▁zen ▁Egiptotik ▁irten ez ▁gero .
PRED:	They left the whole community of Israel and camped at Mount Sinai and camped at Mount Sinai . When the whole community of Israel arrived in the wilderness , he left the wilderness of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the whole community of Israel set out from Elim and journeyed into the wilderness of Sin , between Elim and Mount Sinai . They arrived there on the fifteenth day of the second month , one month after leaving the land of Egypt .

ID:	510
INPUT:	▁Jakizue ▁Jaunak ▁harrigarri ro ▁jokatzen ▁du el abere ▁fededun aren ▁alde , entzun ▁egiten ▁didala ▁deitzen ▁diodan ean .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The Lord has spoken to me , for I have spoken to you . ”
GOLD:	Do n't sin by letting anger control you.Think about it overnight and remain silent.Interlude

ID:	511
INPUT:	▁« Aditu ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁marm ari oak ▁eta , ▁sumindurik , ▁honela ▁egin ▁zuen ▁zin :
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to them , and he vowed ,
GOLD:	“ When the Lord heard your complaining , he became very angry . So he solemnly swore ,

ID:	512
INPUT:	▁Jariodunak ▁zaldiz ▁ibil tzean ▁erabilitako ▁zela ▁kutsatua ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	When the man is ceremonially unclean , it will be ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	Any saddle blanket on which the man rides will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	513
INPUT:	▁gure ▁salbatzaile ▁den ▁Jainko ▁bakarrari , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunaren ▁bitartez , ▁aintza , ▁handitasuna , ▁ahalmena ▁eta ▁agintea ▁betidanik , ▁orain ▁eta ▁beti ! ▁Amen .
PRED:	For the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ , the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ . He gives glory to the glory of the glory of the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	All glory to him who alone is God , our Savior through Jesus Christ our Lord . All glory , majesty , power , and authority are his before all time , and in the present , and beyond all time ! Amen .

ID:	514
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁baliotsu tzat ▁nituen ▁gauza ▁guztiok , ▁baliogabe tzat ▁jo ▁nituen ▁Kristorengatik .
PRED:	But I gave you a gift to you , and I took care of Christ .
GOLD:	I once thought these things were valuable , but now I consider them worthless because of what Christ has done .

ID:	515
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bakar ▁batzuk bizirik ▁geldituko ▁dira ▁Jerusalemen , onik ▁aterako ▁Sion ▁mendian . Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren maite min ▁sutsuak ▁egingo ▁du ▁hori !
PRED:	For those who are left in Jerusalem will be scattered on Mount Zion , for the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is a gift of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	For a remnant of my people will spread out from Jerusalem , a group of survivors from Mount Zion.The passionate commitment of the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill make this happen !

ID:	516
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁jarraitu ▁zuen :— Lasai ▁z oko ratzen ▁duzue ▁Jainkoaren ▁agindua ▁zeuen ▁usadioak ▁ezartzeko !
PRED:	“ Be careful to follow the example of your ancestors , ” he said .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ You skillfully sidestep God 's law in order to hold on to your own tradition .

ID:	517
INPUT:	▁« Zuk ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeek , ▁elkarketa - etxolan ▁sartu ▁behar ▁duzuenean , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁ardorik , ▁ez ▁al ko hol - edari rik ▁edango , ▁hil ▁nahi ▁ez ▁baduzue .
PRED:	“ When you enter the Tabernacle and your sons , you must not enter the Tabernacle , you must not drink the other alcoholic drink from the Holy Place .
GOLD:	“ You and your descendants must never drink wine or any other alcoholic drink before going into the Tabernacle . If you do , you will die . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation .

ID:	518
INPUT:	▁Negar - kanta
PRED:	The Lord 's Second Reply
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	519
INPUT:	▁beste ▁Elam ▁batekoak ▁ 1 . 254 ;
PRED:	The family of Jorah112
GOLD:	The citizens of West Elam1,254

ID:	520
INPUT:	▁Samarian ▁bizitzen ▁hastean , ▁arrotz ▁haiek ▁ez ▁zuten ▁Jauna ▁gurtzen ; ▁orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁lehoiak ▁bidali ▁zizkien , ▁jendea ▁hiltzeko .
PRED:	When they lived in Samaria , the Lord sent them to kill them . Then the Lord sent them to kill them .
GOLD:	But since these foreign settlers did not worship the Lord when they first arrived , the Lord sent lions among them , which killed some of them .

ID:	521
INPUT:	▁On ▁egiozu ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁honi , Jauna , ▁zeure ▁promesaren ▁arabera !
PRED:	May your servant become your servant , Lord , as you promised .
GOLD:	You have done many good things for me , Lord , just as you promised .

ID:	522
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , zenbat ▁eta ▁jakinduria ▁ugariago , ats ek abea ▁handiago , zenbat ▁eta ▁ezaguera ▁sakona go , nahi gabea ▁larri ago .
PRED:	For the words of the wise , knowledge , and knowledge of knowledge .
GOLD:	The greater my wisdom , the greater my grief.To increase knowledge only increases sorrow .

ID:	523
INPUT:	▁Hark , ▁orduan , ▁eskua ▁jaso ▁eta ▁zin ▁egin ▁zuen basamortuan ▁hilko ▁zituela ,
PRED:	He took his hand and put it in the wilderness , and he would die in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Therefore , he solemnly sworethat he would kill them in the wilderness ,

ID:	524
INPUT:	▁Ben - Hinom ▁deritzan ▁haranean ▁zegoen ▁Tof eteko ▁erre tegia ▁ere ▁profanatu ▁zuen ; ▁horrela , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁zion ▁inork ▁ere ▁su ari ▁eman ▁bere ▁seme ▁nahiz ▁alab arik , ▁Molok ▁sasijainko ari ▁eskaintzeko .
PRED:	Then the boundary went to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and there was no defects . It would not be offered to the gods of Baal , or no defects .
GOLD:	Then the king defiled the altar of Topheth in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , so no one could ever again use it to sacrifice a son or daughter in the fire as an offering to Molech .

ID:	525
INPUT:	▁Bet - Aben eraino ▁zabaldu ▁zen ▁gatazka . ▁Egun ▁hartan ▁Israeli ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁garaipena .
PRED:	When the battle heard that the Lord had told him , “ At that day the Lord gave him victory over Israel . ”
GOLD:	So the Lord saved Israel that day , and the battle continued to rage even beyond Beth-aven .

ID:	526
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁begiratzean , ▁erregea ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁ohol tza ▁gainean ▁zutik , ▁ohi ▁zen ▁bezala . ▁Buruzagiak ▁eta ▁turuta - jo tzaileak ▁erregearen ▁ondoan ▁zeuden ; ▁herriko ▁jendea , ▁berriz , ▁pozez ▁beterik ▁zebilen , ▁turu ten ▁soin ura . ▁Ataliak , ▁bere ▁soinekoak ▁ur ratuz , ▁garrasi ▁egin ▁zuen :— Tra izioa ! ▁Tra izioa !
PRED:	When the king saw that the king was standing on the altar , he saw the king sitting on the throne of the king 's reign . The elders were filled with joy , shouting , “ You are filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	When she arrived , she saw the newly crowned king standing in his place of authority by the pillar , as was the custom at times of coronation . The commanders and trumpeters were surrounding him , and people from all over the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets . When Athaliah saw all this , she tore her clothes in despair and shouted , “ Treason ! Treason ! ”

ID:	527
INPUT:	▁Hirugarren ▁ikuskaria : ▁lihoz ▁jantzitako ▁gizona
PRED:	A Vision of a Man
GOLD:	Daniel 's Vision of a Messenger

ID:	528
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁bedeinkatu ▁zuen ▁Jose :« Nire ▁guraso ▁Abrahamek ▁eta ▁Isaakek zerbitz atu ▁duten ▁Jainkoak , jaio ▁nintzen etik ▁gaurdaino artzain ▁gisa ▁gidatu ▁nauen ▁Jainkoak ,
PRED:	Then Isaac blessed Isaac and his ancestors , Isaac , and his ancestors were born to Abraham . “ I am the God who rescued me from the tribe of Levi . ”
GOLD:	Then he blessed Joseph and said , “ May the God before whom my grandfather Abrahamand my father , Isaac , walked — the God who has been my shepherdall my life , to this very day ,

ID:	529
INPUT:	▁Gizonaren ▁Semearen ▁kontra ▁zerbait ▁esaten ▁duenari ▁barkatuko ▁dio ▁Jainkoak ; ▁baina ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaren ▁kontra ▁birao ▁egiten ▁duenari , ▁ez ▁dio ▁barkatuko .
PRED:	Anyone who speaks against the Son of Man will be forgiven , but the Holy Spirit is forgiven . Anyone who does n't repent of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Anyone who speaks against the Son of Man can be forgiven , but anyone who blasphemes the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven .

ID:	530
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁Asaren ▁erregealdiko ▁hogeita ▁hamaikagarren ▁urtea ▁zen ▁Omri ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hasi ▁zenean . ▁Hamabi ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁eta ▁horietatik ▁sei ▁Tirtzan .
PRED:	During the reign of King Asa 's reign in Judah , during the reign of King Asa 's reign . He reigned in the reign of King Asa 's reign in Judah .
GOLD:	Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-first year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned twelve years in all , six of them in Tirzah .

ID:	531
INPUT:	▁Kanp oko ▁atari ▁eta ▁sarrer ak
PRED:	The entrance to the Tabernacle
GOLD:	The East Gateway

ID:	532
INPUT:	▁« Beraz , ▁urtean ▁hiru ▁aldiz ▁aurkeztuko ▁dira ▁gizaseme ▁guztiak ▁Jainko ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrera .
PRED:	“ Each year you must present this offering to the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	At these three times each year , every man in Israel must appear before the Sovereign , the Lord .

ID:	533
INPUT:	▁Egun ez ▁deika ▁ari ▁natzaizu , ▁ene ▁Jainko , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁erantzunik ▁ez ; baita ▁gauez ▁ere , ▁eta ▁bakerik ▁ez ▁dut .
PRED:	I am saying to you , “ I am the Sovereign Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , and I have no peace .
GOLD:	Yet you are holy , enthroned on the praises of Israel .

ID:	534
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁inolako ▁ordain ik ▁onartuko , ezta ▁zeure ▁eskaintza ▁bider katu ta ▁ere .
PRED:	He must not take a lamb for your burnt offering .
GOLD:	He will accept no compensation , nor be satisfied with a payoff of any size .

ID:	535
INPUT:	▁ F araoiak , ▁zure ▁izenean ▁mintzatzera ▁etorri ▁natzai on etik , ▁are ▁gaiz k iago ▁erabili ▁du ▁zure ▁herria ▁eta ▁zuk ▁ez ▁duzu ▁deus ▁ere ▁egin ▁libratzeko .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said to you , “ I have come to the name of your people , for you have sinned against you . You have not turned away from your people .
GOLD:	Ever since I came to Pharaoh as your spokesman , he has been even more brutal to your people . And you have done nothing to rescue them ! ”

ID:	536
INPUT:	▁Arratsean , ▁deabrudun ▁asko ▁eraman ▁zizkioten ▁Jesusi . ▁Honek ▁deabruak ▁bere ▁hitzez ▁bota ▁eta ▁gaixo ▁guztiak ▁sendatu ▁zituen .
PRED:	So the man took him to the devil , and many of the devil came to the devil . He healed all the sick .
GOLD:	That evening many demon-possessed people were brought to Jesus . He cast out the evil spirits with a simple command , and he healed all the sick .

ID:	537
INPUT:	▁Are ▁gehiago , ▁Rebekak ▁bik iak ▁izan ▁zituen ▁Isaak ▁gure ▁arbaso agandik .
PRED:	But Rebekah was more valuable than the ancestor of Jacob , the ancestor of Jacob .
GOLD:	This son was our ancestor Isaac . When he married Rebekah , she gave birth to twins .

ID:	538
INPUT:	▁Bes o ▁eta ▁kop ek ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egiten ▁zuten ▁argimutil arekin . ▁Guztia ▁urre ▁garbiz ▁landua ▁zen .
PRED:	The weight of the cherubim was made of pure gold , and it was made of pure gold .
GOLD:	The almond buds and branches were all of one piece with the center stem , and they were hammered from pure gold .

ID:	539
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁guztiok ▁ikusi ▁ahal ▁izan ▁baduzue , zergatik ▁hainbeste ▁jardun ▁hutsal ?
PRED:	You have seen all these things ? How are you trying to live ?
GOLD:	But you have seen all this , yet you say all these useless things to me .

ID:	540
INPUT:	▁Zuen gan ▁espirituzko ▁ondasunak ▁erein ▁baditugu , ▁gehiegi ▁ote ▁da ▁zuengandik ▁lurreko ▁ondasunak ▁jaso tzea ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you so much to enjoy your wealth ? If you have enough food to eat your money ?
GOLD:	Since we have planted spiritual seed among you , are n't we entitled to a harvest of physical food and drink ?

ID:	541
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁laster , ▁babiloniar ▁batzuk ▁juduak ▁sala tzera ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Nabukodonosor ▁erregeagana .
PRED:	Some of the Babylonians came to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , and they went to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .
GOLD:	But some of the astrologers went to the king and informed on the Jews .

ID:	542
INPUT:	▁Nik , ▁Paulok ▁, ▁Jainkoak ▁hala ▁nahirik ▁eta ▁berak ▁deiturik , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁apostolu ▁naizen ▁honek , ▁eta ▁S osten es ▁anaiak
PRED:	This is what Paul says : “ I am writing to the apostles , and I am writing to you . I am writing to the brothers and sisters . ”
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus , and from our brother Sosthenes .

ID:	543
INPUT:	▁Aspaldi ko ▁garai ez ▁gogoratzen ▁naiz , antzinako ▁urte ez ▁oroitzen ;
PRED:	I would not forget the years of the wicked ; I would not forget the years of the wicked .
GOLD:	when my nights were filled with joyful songs.I search my soul and ponder the difference now .

ID:	544
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁orain , ▁gure ▁Jainko , ▁zer ▁esan ▁hori ▁guztia ▁ikus ita ? ▁Bazter ▁utzi ▁ditugu ▁zure ▁aginduak ,
PRED:	“ Now we are our God , ” he said , “ we have seen your commands ? ”
GOLD:	“ And now , O our God , what can we say after all of this ? For once again we have abandoned your commands !

ID:	545
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁ni ▁hil ▁nahian ▁zabiltzate , ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁ikasi ▁nuen ▁egia ▁esan ▁dizu ed alako ; ▁Abrahamek ▁ez ▁zuen ▁horrelakorik ▁egin .
PRED:	You know that I was trying to tell you the truth , Abraham said , ‘ I am the truth of God . '
GOLD:	Instead , you are trying to kill me because I told you the truth , which I heard from God . Abraham never did such a thing .

ID:	546
INPUT:	▁Ananias ▁eta ▁S af ira
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Ananias and Sapphira

ID:	547
INPUT:	▁Ikusi ▁orduko ▁ezagutu ▁zituen ▁Josek ▁bere ▁senideak . ▁Baina ▁ez ▁zien ▁bere ▁burua ▁ezagutarazi ; ▁gainera , ▁zakar ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien :— Nondik ▁zatozte ? Haiek ▁erantzun :— Kanaan ▁lurraldetik , ▁garia ▁erostera .
PRED:	When Joseph saw them , he saw his brothers and sisters , he said to them , “ Where are you going to buy the land ? ” “ Where are you going to buy food ? ”
GOLD:	Joseph recognized his brothers instantly , but he pretended to be a stranger and spoke harshly to them . “ Where are you from ? ” he demanded. “ From the land of Canaan , ” they replied . “ We have come to buy food . ”

ID:	548
INPUT:	▁Urias ▁apaizak , ▁beraz , ▁Akaz ▁erregeak ▁Damasko tik ▁bidali ▁zion ▁ereduaren ▁arabera ▁egin ▁zuen ▁aldarea , ▁Akaz ▁erregea ▁itzuli ▁baino ▁lehen .
PRED:	So King Ahaz sent this message to the king of Damascus , and he sent the altar to the king .
GOLD:	Uriah followed the king 's instructions and built an altar just like it , and it was ready before the king returned from Damascus .

ID:	549
INPUT:	▁Ham asei ▁urte ▁zituen ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hastean , ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁bi ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Jerusalemen . ▁Amak ▁J eko l ias ▁zuen ▁izena ▁eta ▁Jerusalem goa ▁zen .
PRED:	He was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years .
GOLD:	Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem .

ID:	550
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁gogortu ▁bihotzak ▁zuen ▁gurasoek ▁Merib an ▁bezala , M as ako ▁egun ▁hartan ▁basamortuan ▁bezala ,
PRED:	“ Do not forget your ancestors , just as the Lord had predicted .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Do n't harden your hearts as Israel did at Meribah , as they did at Massah in the wilderness .

ID:	551
INPUT:	▁esan ▁zion :— Jainkoaren ▁Semea ▁zarenez , ▁bota ▁zeure ▁burua ▁behera , ▁idatzia ▁baitago : ▁Bere ▁aingeruei ▁aginduko ▁die ▁zu ▁zaintzeko . ▁Eta ▁beso etan ▁eramango ▁zaituzte , ▁harri ekin ▁estropezu ▁egin ▁ez ▁dezazun .
PRED:	Then the Son of God said to him , “ If you are the Son of God , you will bring you into the dust , and you will bring you into the dust . ”
GOLD:	and said , “ If you are the Son of God , jump off ! For the Scriptures say , ‘ He will order his angels to protect you.And they will hold you up with their handsso you wo n't even hurt your foot on a stone . ' ”

ID:	552
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁zerua ▁lurraren ▁gainetik ▁garai , halaxe ▁nire ▁jokabide azuen aren ▁gainetik eta ▁nire ▁egitasmoak ▁zuen en ▁gainetik .
PRED:	How long the heavens are in the heavens , and everything I do .
GOLD:	For just as the heavens are higher than the earth , so my ways are higher than your waysand my thoughts higher than your thoughts .

ID:	553
INPUT:	▁bai , ▁bizitza ▁guztian ▁bedeinkatuko ▁zaitut , zuri ▁dei ▁eginez ▁altxatuko ▁eskuak .
PRED:	I will praise you for your life , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	You satisfy me more than the richest feast.I will praise you with songs of joy .

ID:	554
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zein ▁egunetan ▁edo ▁ordu tan ▁gertatuko ▁den , ▁ez ▁daki ▁inork , ▁ez ▁zeruko ▁aingeruek , ▁ez ▁Semeak , ▁Aitak ▁baizik .
PRED:	But if there is no time , no one will know that no one will happen to the Father , the Son of heaven .
GOLD:	“ However , no one knows the day or hour when these things will happen , not even the angels in heaven or the Son himself . Only the Father knows .

ID:	555
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁ordea , ▁irakatsi ▁doktrina ▁osasun garria .
PRED:	But you must speak to the teaching of Jesus .
GOLD:	As for you , Titus , promote the kind of living that reflects wholesome teaching .

ID:	556
INPUT:	▁Goretsazue , ▁eguzki ▁eta ▁ilargi , ▁goretsi , ▁izar ▁argi tsu !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the heavens and the stars of the heavens .
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	557
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁zekor , ▁ahari ▁bat ▁eta ▁urtebeteko ▁zazpi ▁arkume ▁eskainiko ▁dituzue ▁erre - oparitzat , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁ditu .
PRED:	You must present a young bull as a pleasing aroma to the Lord , a burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present a special burnt offering on that day as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs .

ID:	558
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁larrialdian ▁Jaunari ▁oihu ▁egin ▁eta ▁salbatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁estu alditik .
PRED:	But they cried out to the Lord , and he saved them from their distress .
GOLD:	“ Lord , help ! ” they cried in their trouble , and he saved them from their distress .

ID:	559
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁honetan ▁ere ▁ez ▁zetozen ▁bat ▁beren ▁esan etan .
PRED:	But no one left them in this time , spoke to them .
GOLD:	But even then they did n't get their stories straight !

ID:	560
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁indartsu ▁izanez ▁gero , ▁ni ▁pozik ▁nago , ▁ahula ▁izan ▁arren . ▁Hau ▁da ▁Jainkoari ▁eskatzen ▁diodana : ▁zuek ▁bete - beteko ▁izatea .
PRED:	For you are strong , and my strength will be strong , but I will pray to God .
GOLD:	We are glad to seem weak if it helps show that you are actually strong . We pray that you will become mature .

ID:	561
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁zera ! ▁Sen idea ▁senide arekin ▁auzitan ▁zabiltzate , ▁eta ▁epaile ▁jentilen ▁aurrean ▁gainera !
PRED:	“ Yes , the people of Israel ! Even the Jews who are wise to help the Jews .
GOLD:	But instead , one believer sues another — right in front of unbelievers !

ID:	562
INPUT:	▁esan ▁zion ▁Amnonek ▁Tam arri :— Ekar ▁iezadazu ▁janaria ▁gelara . ▁Zure ▁eskutik ▁nahi ▁dut ▁jan ▁eta . T am arrek ▁eginiko ▁opilak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁gelara ▁eraman ▁zizkion ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Amn oni .
PRED:	But Amnon said to her , “ I want me to eat your sacred offerings . I want to eat it with your brother , and she brought him to David . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to Tamar , “ Now bring the food into my bedroom and feed it to me here. ” So Tamar took his favorite dish to him .

ID:	563
INPUT:	▁Jo ▁dezadan ▁handikien gana , ber aiei ▁hitz ▁egiteko ; haiek ▁bai ▁ezagutuko ▁dutela Jaunaren ▁bidea , beren ▁Jainkoaren ▁agindua . Baina ▁era ▁berean ▁hautsi ▁dute ▁denek Jaunaren ▁uztarria , eten ▁har ekiko ▁lokarriak .
PRED:	I will go to the land of the Lord your God , and they will know what the Lord has commanded us . But all who worship the yoke of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	So I will go and speak to their leaders.Surely they know the ways of the Lordand understand God 's laws. ” But the leaders , too , as one man , had thrown off God 's yokeand broken his chains .

ID:	564
INPUT:	▁Joseren ▁ametsak
PRED:	The Birth of Joseph
GOLD:	Joseph 's Dreams

ID:	565
INPUT:	▁Pen inak , ▁arerio ak , ▁gogor ki ▁iraindu ▁eta ▁nahigabetu ▁ohi ▁zuen ▁Ana , ▁Jaunak ▁haurrik ▁ematen ▁ez ▁ziolako .
PRED:	You know what the Lord says : “ The Lord has given birth to his children , and she gave birth to her children .
GOLD:	So Peninnah would taunt Hannah and make fun of her because the Lord had kept her from having children .

ID:	566
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁Ahal tsu ▁bezala ▁agertu ▁nintzaien ▁Abrahami , ▁Isaaki ▁eta ▁Jakobi ; ▁baina ▁ez ▁nintzaien ▁nire ▁egiazko ▁izen az , ▁Jauna ▁bezala ▁alegia , ▁ezagutzera ▁eman .
PRED:	This is what God had appeared to Abraham , for I was born to Abraham . But I was not born , for I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I appeared to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob as El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty ' — but I did not reveal my name , Yahweh , to them .

ID:	567
INPUT:	▁« Gauza ▁txiki etan ▁fidagarria , ▁handi etan ▁ere ▁fidagarri ▁da , ▁eta ▁gauza ▁txiki etan ▁zuzen gabea , ▁handi etan ▁ere ▁zuzen gabe .
PRED:	“ A wise person is wise , but a great person who lives are wise .
GOLD:	“ If you are faithful in little things , you will be faithful in large ones . But if you are dishonest in little things , you wo n't be honest with greater responsibilities .

ID:	568
INPUT:	▁Zenbatu ▁ondoren , ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁egiten ▁ari ▁ziren ▁lanen ▁arduradunei ▁ematen ▁zieten ▁dirua , ▁eta ▁hauek ▁Jaunaren ▁etxea ▁konpon tzen ▁ari ▁ziren ▁langileei ▁ordaintzen : ▁zur gin , ▁etx egile ,
PRED:	After this , they went back to the Temple of the Lord and gave them to the Lord . They also gave them money to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	the masons , and the stonecutters . They also used the money to buy the timber and the finished stone needed for repairing the Lord 's Temple , and they paid any other expenses related to the Temple 's restoration .

ID:	569
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁askatuko ▁du ▁Israel ▁erru ▁guztietatik .
PRED:	For this is a sin from all Israel ; it is no peace .
GOLD:	He himself will redeem Israelfrom every kind of sin .

ID:	570
INPUT:	▁Hartan , ▁ziren ear ▁eta ▁al ex an d ri arrez ▁os atua ▁zegoen ▁eta ▁« As katu ena » ▁zeritzan ▁sinagog akoak , ▁zil izi ar ▁eta ▁as i ar ▁batzuekin ▁batera , ▁Esteban ekin ▁eztabaidan ▁hasi ▁ziren .
PRED:	One day the Roman officer and a Roman officer named Paul , and there was a Roman officer and Silas , and there was a Roman believer .
GOLD:	But one day some men from the Synagogue of Freed Slaves , as it was called , started to debate with him . They were Jews from Cyrene , Alexandria , Cilicia , and the province of Asia .

ID:	571
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁sei ▁egunera , ▁Jesusek ▁Pedro , ▁Santiago ▁eta ▁Joan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁mendi ▁garai ▁batera ▁eraman ▁zituen ▁aparte . ▁Eta ▁antz aldatu ▁egin ▁zen ▁haien ▁aurrean :
PRED:	The Three days later Jesus took Peter and went to the mountain of James and John . Then he took them before the people .
GOLD:	Six days later Jesus took Peter , James , and John , and led them up a high mountain to be alone . As the men watched , Jesus ' appearance was transformed ,

ID:	572
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁guda - gurdi ▁beren ▁zaldi ekin ▁prestatu ▁eta ▁siriar ▁gudarostearen ▁aztar na ▁bila ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁erregeak , ▁esanez :— Zoazte ▁eta ▁ikus !
PRED:	When the chariot chariot chariot chariot horses , the king sent them to attack the army of the army and sent them out to ask , “ Go and see the king ! ”
GOLD:	So two chariots with horses were prepared , and the king sent scouts to see what had happened to the Aramean army .

ID:	573
INPUT:	▁Joram , ▁Judako ▁errege
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	574
INPUT:	▁Hasi eratik ▁sendo ▁ezarri ▁zenuen ▁lurra , zure ▁eskuek ▁egina ▁da ▁zerua :
PRED:	You made the heavens as the heavens , the earth made the heavens .
GOLD:	They will perish , but you remain forever ; they will wear out like old clothing.You will change them like a garmentand discard them .

ID:	575
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁gauza ▁gorrotatzen ▁ditu ▁Jaunak eta ▁zazpigarren ▁bat ▁erabat ▁du ▁higuingarri :
PRED:	The Lord detests no ordinary work , and he detests the detestable thing .
GOLD:	There are six things the Lord hates — no , seven things he detests :

ID:	576
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁israeldarrak ▁itzuli ▁ziren ▁eta ▁benjamindarrak ▁izuturik ▁gelditu , ▁ikusi ▁baitzuten ▁nolako ▁hondamena ▁zetor kien .
PRED:	So the people of Benjamin returned to Jezreel and saw that the people of Benjamin had seen what had happened .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	577
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁zerua ▁itxi ▁eta ▁euririk ▁ez ▁egitean , ▁larrapo te ei ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁irensteko ▁agin tzean ▁edota ▁nire ▁herriari ▁izurritea ▁bidal tzean ,
PRED:	For when the heavens is empty , the heavens will not be broken , or the earth will be destroyed , or the land of the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	At times I might shut up the heavens so that no rain falls , or command grasshoppers to devour your crops , or send plagues among you .

ID:	578
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁sorrarazi ▁zintuen ▁aitari , ez ▁mespretxatu ▁ama , ▁zahartu ▁egin ▁dela ▁eta .
PRED:	Listen to my father ; do n't forget the father of my father and mother .
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	579
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak
PRED:	The Most Holy Place
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	580
INPUT:	▁Bat - batean , ▁giza ▁esku ▁bat ▁agertu ▁zen ▁eta ▁aret oko ▁par etan , ▁argimutilaren ▁atzean , ▁behatzez ▁idazten ▁hasi ▁zen . ▁I daz ten ▁ari ▁zen ▁eskua ▁ikustean ,
PRED:	There was a man who had been in human hands , and there was a lamp in his own eyes . When he saw him , he sat down in the center of his hand .
GOLD:	Suddenly , they saw the fingers of a human hand writing on the plaster wall of the king 's palace , near the lampstand . The king himself saw the hand as it wrote ,

ID:	581
INPUT:	▁Ai , ▁Jainkoak ▁suntsituko ▁banindu eta ▁bere ▁eskuaz ▁desegin !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , my God , and I would destroy them .
GOLD:	I wish he would crush me.I wish he would reach out his hand and kill me .

ID:	582
INPUT:	▁Hiriko ▁gizonak ▁oihuka ▁atera ▁ziren ▁israeldarren ▁ondoren ▁eta ▁Josueri ▁segika ▁hiritik ▁urrutiratu ▁egin ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the men of the town went out to Joshua and followed the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then all the men in the town were called out to chase after them . In this way , they were lured away from the town .

ID:	583
INPUT:	▁Han ▁bildutako ▁guardi en ▁eta ▁jendearen ▁zarata - hotsa ▁entzutean , ▁Jaunaren ▁etxera ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Ataliak , ▁jendearengana .
PRED:	When the people heard the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , he went to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When Athaliah heard the noise made by the palace guards and the people , she hurried to the Lord 's Temple to see what was happening .

ID:	584
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁faraoiak :— Zenbat ▁urte ▁dituzu ?
PRED:	Then Pharaoh asked , “ How long will you ? ”
GOLD:	“ How old are you ? ” Pharaoh asked him .

ID:	585
INPUT:	▁Egoitzaren ▁beste ▁aldera , ▁iparraldera , ▁beste ▁hogei ▁ohol ▁jarriko ▁dituzu ,
PRED:	Make the frames of the Tabernacle , the rear of the Tabernacle ,
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , make another twenty frames ,

ID:	586
INPUT:	▁Judak ▁erantzun :— Ar taldeko ▁antxume ▁bat ▁bidaliko ▁dizut . T am arrek , ▁orduan :— Baina ▁beste ▁zerbait ▁utzi ▁beharko ▁didazu ▁bahituran , ▁antxumea ▁bidali ▁bitartean .
PRED:	Judah replied , “ I will send a young donkey with a young donkey , a young donkey , but she sent her to her . ”
GOLD:	“ I 'll send you a young goat from my flock , ” Judah promised. “ But what will you give me to guarantee that you will send the goat ? ” she asked .

ID:	587
INPUT:	▁Sara ▁ehun ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁zazpi ▁urtez ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	Abraham lived seven years old and lived for seven years .
GOLD:	When Sarah was 127 years old ,

ID:	588
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁huts ▁egin ▁dizute hodei - zap arra dek , ez ▁da ▁u dab erriko ▁euririk ▁izan . Baina ▁zuk emagaldu aren ▁ko peta ▁zenuen , eta ▁zeure ▁izen ▁txarrak ▁axolarik ▁ez .
PRED:	That is why you have done to you , O God , for it is no rain . But you have no rain , but you have no rain .
GOLD:	That 's why even the spring rains have failed.For you are a brazen prostitute and completely shameless .

ID:	589
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁elkartea ▁bildurik ▁dagoenean , ▁nahiago ▁dut ▁beste entzat ▁irakas garri ▁izango ▁diren ▁bost ▁hitz ▁uler garri ▁esan , ▁hizkera ▁uler tez inean ▁hamar ▁mila ▁baino .
PRED:	But I have finished saying , “ I will speak to them ; I will speak to you . They will hear the meaning of the earth . ”
GOLD:	But in a church meeting I would rather speak five understandable words to help others than ten thousand words in an unknown language .

ID:	590
INPUT:	▁Go ibel ▁jarri ▁zen ▁erregea , ▁baina , ▁mahaikide en ▁aurrean ▁egindako ▁zin arengatik , ▁eskatua ▁emateko ▁agindu ▁zuen ,
PRED:	He built a banquet for the king , but it was a vow to you . ”
GOLD:	Then the king regretted what he had said ; but because of the vow he had made in front of his guests , he issued the necessary orders .

ID:	591
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁gertatzen ▁zen ▁beti : ▁egunez ▁lainoak ▁estaltzen ▁zuen ▁egoitza ▁eta ▁gauez ▁su - itxura ▁hartzen ▁zuen .
PRED:	It was in the evening , and the cloud covered the pillar of fire . When it was finished , it covered with fire .
GOLD:	This was the regular pattern — at night the cloud that covered the Tabernacle had the appearance of fire .

ID:	592
INPUT:	▁Elon
PRED:	The Land Given to Caleb
GOLD:	Elon Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	593
INPUT:	▁Jo pe ▁osoak ▁izan ▁zuen ▁gertatuaren ▁berri , ▁eta ▁askok ▁sinetsi ▁zuten ▁Jaunarengan .
PRED:	When all the people heard what had happened , many believed in the Lord .
GOLD:	The news spread through the whole town , and many believed in the Lord .

ID:	594
INPUT:	▁Bete ▁haien ▁aurpegia ▁lotsa ▁gorriz , zeure ▁burua ▁mendekatu z , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	May your bow bow down with your bow ; praise your name .
GOLD:	Let them be ashamed and terrified forever.Let them die in disgrace .

ID:	595
INPUT:	▁eta ▁beste ▁hiru ▁litro ▁ardo ▁isur - oparitarako . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁du ▁bere ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁oparia .
PRED:	and two quarts with olive oil . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	and give two quarts of wine as a liquid offering . This will be a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	596
INPUT:	▁Honen gan ▁bakarrik ▁dugu ▁salbamena , ▁ez ▁baitigu ▁Jainkoak ▁gizon - emakume oi ▁beste ▁inor ▁eman ▁eguzkiaren ▁azpian , ▁salba ▁gaitzak een ik ».
PRED:	We have been able to rescue us ; we have not been able to save us from God . ”
GOLD:	There is salvation in no one else ! God has given no other name under heaven by which we must be saved . ”

ID:	597
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁zulatu ▁horma ▁hor txe ▁bertan ». ▁Zul atu ▁nuen ▁horma ▁eta ▁ireki dura ▁bat ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , have broken its walls and broken its walls . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall. ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	598
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁esan ▁dit : ▁“ S abel ean ▁sortu ▁eta ▁semea ▁izanen ▁duzu . ▁Ez ▁edan ▁ardorik , ▁ez ▁beste ▁edari ▁mozkor garririk , ▁eta ▁ez ▁jan ▁ezer ▁kutsaturik ; ▁amaren ▁sabelean ▁sortu ▁eta ▁hil ▁arte , ▁“ naz ireu ” ▁izan ▁behar ▁baitu ▁haurrak , ▁hau ▁da , ▁Jaunarentzat ▁sagaratua ”».
PRED:	But he said to me , ‘ You must not drink wine and drink wine . You must not drink wine with wine and drink wine . '
GOLD:	But he told me , ‘ You will become pregnant and give birth to a son . You must not drink wine or any other alcoholic drink nor eat any forbidden food . For your son will be dedicated to God as a Nazirite from the moment of his birth until the day of his death . ' ”

ID:	599
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁egin ▁hitzarmen ik ▁haiekin , ▁ezta ▁haien ▁jainko ekin ▁ere .
PRED:	Do not defile them with their idols with their gods .
GOLD:	“ Make no treaties with them or their gods .

ID:	600
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁erantzun ▁zioten : ▁“ Jauna , ▁lehen dik ▁hamar ▁ontzako ▁ez ▁ditu , ▁bada ?”
PRED:	They replied , ‘ Lord , ' they replied , ‘ What is you stolen ? '
GOLD:	“ ‘ But , master , ' they said , ‘ he already has ten pounds ! '

ID:	601
INPUT:	▁ilea ▁moz teko ▁aginduko ▁dio ▁gaixo ari , ▁ezkabia ▁duen ▁lekuan ▁izan ▁ezik , ▁eta ▁aparte ▁edukiko ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁egunez .
PRED:	If he finds that she has been ceremonially unclean , he must be ceremonially unclean for seven days . He must be ceremonially unclean for seven days .
GOLD:	the person must shave off all hair except the hair on the affected area . Then the priest must quarantine the person for another seven days .

ID:	602
INPUT:	▁Orduan txe ▁kendu ▁behar ▁izan ▁zituen ▁Judako ▁errege ▁Ezekiasek , ▁berak ▁lehen ▁urrez ▁jantziak ▁zituen ▁Jaunaren ▁tenpluko ▁ateak ▁eta ▁ate - eus karriak , ▁Asiriako ▁erregeari ▁emateko .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah sent this message to Hezekiah : “ May the doors of the Lord be taken from the Temple of King Hezekiah of Assyria and Jerusalem . He overlaid them in the Temple of King Sennacherib of Assyria .
GOLD:	Hezekiah even stripped the gold from the doors of the Lord 's Temple and from the doorposts he had overlaid with gold , and he gave it all to the Assyrian king .

ID:	603
INPUT:	▁Erru ▁asko ▁eta ▁bidegabeko ▁merkatari tzaz ▁profanatu ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁santutegia . ▁Zeure ▁baita tik ▁sua ▁sorrarazi ▁dut ▁eta ▁irentsi ▁egin ▁zaitu ; ▁errauts ▁bihurtu ▁zaitut , ▁guztien ▁begi ▁aurrean .
PRED:	You have made your wine wine with you , and you have made your blood . I gave you a fire to bring you down from the dust .
GOLD:	You defiled your sanctuarieswith your many sins and your dishonest trade.So I brought fire out from within you , and it consumed you.I reduced you to ashes on the groundin the sight of all who were watching .

ID:	604
INPUT:	▁Denbora ▁asko ▁galdua ▁genuen , ▁eta ▁arrisku ▁handia ▁zuen ▁ordu tik ▁aurrera ▁bideak , ▁negua ▁gainean ▁baitzen . ▁Paulok ▁ohar ▁hau ▁egin ▁zien :
PRED:	So we stayed there for many days and went out to the wall . Then Paul stayed on the wall .
GOLD:	We had lost a lot of time . The weather was becoming dangerous for sea travel because it was so late in the fall , and Paul spoke to the ship 's officers about it .

ID:	605
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁egunean ▁batzar ▁sakratua ▁izango ▁duzue ▁berriro ▁eta ▁ez ▁da ▁ohiko ▁lan ▁arruntik ▁egingo .
PRED:	On the seventh day the seventh day you must be set apart for holy days .
GOLD:	The seventh day of the festival will be another official day for holy assembly , and no ordinary work may be done on that day .

ID:	606
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁ihardetsi ▁zion :— Nire gatik ▁jeloskor ? ▁Nahiago ▁nuke ▁herri ▁osoa ▁profeta ▁bihur tzea , ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁espiritua ▁denei ▁ematea !
PRED:	Moses replied , “ If I have a young prophet , I am willing to be with you ? ”
GOLD:	But Moses replied , “ Are you jealous for my sake ? I wish that all the Lord 's people were prophets and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them all ! ”

ID:	607
INPUT:	▁esanez :— Zil arra ▁zuretzat . ▁Herri ▁horri ▁buruz , ▁egizu ▁nahi ▁duzuna .
PRED:	“ I am sending you to you , ” he said .
GOLD:	The king said , “ The money and the people are both yours to do with as you see fit . ”

ID:	608
INPUT:	▁izu aren ▁eraso tik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁dezan azu l oan ▁jausiko ▁da ; zulotik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁dezan az ep oan ▁harrapatua ▁geldituko . Zigor ra ▁bidaliko ▁diot ▁Moab ikon tuak ▁hartzeko ▁egunean . Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	My enemies will flee from the dust , ” says the Lord. “ I will send them out of trouble , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will step into a snare.I will see to it that you do not get away , for the time of your judgment has come , ” says the Lord .

ID:	609
INPUT:	▁Al bis tariak ▁erantzun :— Israeldar rek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁behar ▁izan ▁dute ▁filistearren ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁hondamena ▁izugarria ▁izan ▁da ▁gure ▁gudaros tean . ▁Zure ▁bi ▁seme ▁H ofni ▁eta ▁Pinhas ▁ere ▁hilak ▁dira , ▁eta ▁harrapatu ▁egin ▁digute ▁Jainkoaren ▁kutxa .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel have fled to the land of the Philistines , ” they said . “ The people of the Philistines were killed by the Philistines , and they were killed by the Ark of the Philistines and killed by the Ark of God . ”
GOLD:	“ Israel has been defeated by the Philistines , ” the messenger replied . “ The people have been slaughtered , and your two sons , Hophni and Phinehas , were also killed . And the Ark of God has been captured . ”

ID:	610
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁lurraldea ▁hegoaldeko ▁basamortutik ▁iparraldean ▁dagoen ▁Libano raino ▁eta ▁ekialdeko ▁ibai ▁handi tik , ▁Eufrates etik , ▁hititen ▁lurraldean ▁zehar , ▁mendebaldean ▁dagoen ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoraino ▁hedatuko ▁da .
PRED:	Your land will extend from the north to the north of the north to the west of the Jordan River , from the north to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	from the Negev wilderness in the south to the Lebanon mountains in the north , from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west , including all the land of the Hittites . '

ID:	611
INPUT:	▁Nagusiak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁“ Ederki , ▁morroi ▁on ▁eta ▁leiala ! ▁Gauza ▁gutx ian ▁leial ▁izan ▁zara , ▁askoren ▁buru ▁ipiniko ▁zaitut ; ▁sartu ▁zeure ▁jaunaren ▁festa ▁ospatzera ”.
PRED:	“ The king said to him , ‘ You are faithful and faithful to him , and you have been faithful to this time . You have been faithful to celebrate with you . '
GOLD:	“ The master was full of praise . ‘ Well done , my good and faithful servant . You have been faithful in handling this small amount , so now I will give you many more responsibilities . Let 's celebrate together ! '

ID:	612
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁entzungo ▁dizuet ▁niri ▁dei ▁egitera ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egitera ▁etorriko ▁zaretenean .
PRED:	Then I will listen to you and pray to me .
GOLD:	In those days when you pray , I will listen .

ID:	613
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁haiek ▁erregeari :— Ba , ▁errege ▁jauna , ▁Judatik ▁gatibu ▁ekarritako ▁Daniel ▁horrek ▁ez ▁dizue ▁batere ▁begirunerik , ▁ez ▁zuri , ▁ez ▁zure ▁aginduei : ▁bere ▁Jainkoari ▁hiru ▁aldiz ▁egiten ▁dio ▁otoitz ▁egunean .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ My lord the king , the king of Babylon will not reject you , and I will not pray for you . ”
GOLD:	Hearing this , the king was deeply troubled , and he tried to think of a way to save Daniel . He spent the rest of the day looking for a way to get Daniel out of this predicament .

ID:	614
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁egintzen ▁misterio agatik ▁zor ▁zaio ▁aintza ▁Jainkoari , araz oak ▁aztertu ▁eta ▁argi tzeagatik ▁erregeari .
PRED:	A wise person gives justice to God , and he gives justice to the king .
GOLD:	It is God 's privilege to conceal thingsand the king 's privilege to discover them .

ID:	615
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁errege ▁Joiakin , ▁hogeita ▁hamazazpi ▁urtez ▁gatibu ▁egon ▁ondoren , ▁E bil - M erodak ek ▁askatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁giltza petik , ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁egin ▁zen ▁urte ▁berean , ▁hamabigarren ▁hilaren ▁hogeita ▁bos tean .
PRED:	Jehoiachin lived in Judah , during the reign of King Jehoiachin 's reign , and he rescued them from the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of King Jehoiachin of Judah , Evil-merodach ascended to the Babylonian throne . He was kind to Jehoiachin and released him from prison on March 31 of that year .

ID:	616
INPUT:	▁« Zintz oa ▁palmondo a ▁bezala ▁gar atuko ▁da , Libanoko ▁ze d roa ▁bezala ▁haziko ;
PRED:	“ The godless will be like olive trees , like the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	For they are transplanted to the Lord 's own house.They flourish in the courts of our God .

ID:	617
INPUT:	▁ F ariseu ak ▁etorri ▁eta ▁Jesusekin ▁eztabaidan ▁hasi ▁ziren : ▁Jainkoarengan diko ▁seinale ▁bat ▁eskatzen ▁zioten ▁azpikeriaz , ▁bera ▁nola ▁harrapatuko .
PRED:	Jesus came to the Pharisees and began to argue with Jesus . They asked him to show him how to answer him .
GOLD:	When the Pharisees heard that Jesus had arrived , they came and started to argue with him . Testing him , they demanded that he show them a miraculous sign from heaven to prove his authority .

ID:	618
INPUT:	▁Daviden ▁anaia ▁Xim aren ▁seme ▁zen ▁Jonadabek , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zuen :— Ez ▁uste ▁izan , ▁ene ▁jauna , ▁erregearen ▁seme ▁guztiak ▁hilak ▁diren ik . ▁Amnon ▁bakarrik ▁hil ▁da . ▁Era bakia ▁zuen ▁hori ▁Absalomek , ▁hark ▁bere ▁arreba ▁Tamar ▁bortxatu ▁zuenez ▁geroztik .
PRED:	The older brother was named David , but she said , “ My lord the king 's brother , ‘ My lord the king is still alive . ' But Amnon was still alive . But Amnon was dead .
GOLD:	But just then Jonadab , the son of David 's brother Shimea , arrived and said , “ No , do n't believe that all the king 's sons have been killed ! It was only Amnon ! Absalom has been plotting this ever since Amnon raped his sister Tamar .

ID:	619
INPUT:	▁K akoak ▁jarriko ▁dizkizut ▁mutur retan , N iloko ▁arrainak zure ▁ez kate tan ▁eran ts araziko ▁ditut ; ib aiaren ▁erditik ▁kanpora at erako ▁zaitut , N iloko ▁arrain ▁guztiak ez kate tan ▁erantsi ak ▁dituzula .
PRED:	I will send you into the sea , and I will pour out the fish to you . I will send you out of the fish , so I would not stop you .
GOLD:	I will put hooks in your jawsand drag you out on the landwith fish sticking to your scales .

ID:	620
INPUT:	▁O de den ▁seme ▁Azariasek , ▁Jainkoaren ▁espiritu aren ▁eraginez ,
PRED:	A Call to Jeroboam son of God ,
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came upon Azariah son of Oded ,

ID:	621
INPUT:	▁Gel etatik ▁bi ▁ate ▁zeuden ▁huts arte ▁hartara : ▁bata ▁iparraldera ▁eta ▁bestea ▁hegoaldera . ▁Huts artearen ▁inguruko ▁horm aren ▁lodiera ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdikoa ▁zen .
PRED:	He measured the doors of the Temple , and the other side of the south side of the inner courtyard . The wall was 71/2 feet wide , and the wall was 71/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	Two doors opened from the side rooms into the terrace yard , which was 83/4 feet wide . One door faced north and the other south .

ID:	622
INPUT:	▁gizon ▁batzuk ▁erosi ▁zituzten , ▁zurrumurru ▁hau ▁zabal ▁zezaten : ▁Esteban i ▁Moisesen ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁kontra ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁entzun ▁ziotela , ▁alegia .
PRED:	Some of the men went to speak to Moses and said , “ This is what God said to Moses . ”
GOLD:	So they persuaded some men to lie about Stephen , saying , “ We heard him blaspheme Moses , and even God . ”

ID:	623
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunaren ▁aurretik ▁sua ▁atera ▁eta ▁kiskali ▁egin ▁zituen ; ▁hantxe ▁bertan ▁hil ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the fire of the Lord came out of fire and killed them .
GOLD:	So fire blazed forth from the Lord 's presence and burned them up , and they died there before the Lord .

ID:	624
INPUT:	▁era ▁berean , nazio ▁asko ▁harri tuko ▁dira , errege ak ▁haren ▁aurrean mu tu ▁geldituko , inoiz ▁esan ▁gabeko ▁zerbait ▁ikustean , inoiz ▁entzun ▁gab ekoa ▁aditzean ».
PRED:	In this way , many kings will be strong , and many kings will see their king , and he will see their heads , and he will hear their heads . ”
GOLD:	And he will startle many nations.Kings will stand speechless in his presence.For they will see what they had not been told ; they will understand what they had not heard about .

ID:	625
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zu ▁zara , ▁Jauna , ▁nire ▁babeski , ▁zu ▁nire ▁ohore . Zuk ▁didazu ▁burua ▁jasotzen .
PRED:	But you are my rock , O Lord , my fortress , O Lord , is my fortress .
GOLD:	I cried out to the Lord , and he answered me from his holy mountain.Interlude

ID:	626
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zuek , ▁norbait ▁hil ▁edo ▁gorp uren ▁bat ▁ukitu ▁duzuenok , ▁zazpi ▁egunez ▁kanpalekutik ▁aparte ▁egongo ▁zarete ▁etxol aturik . ▁Bai ▁zuek , ▁bai ▁gatibu ek , ▁garbikuntza ▁egingo ▁duzue ▁hirugarren ▁eta ▁zazpigarren ▁egunetan .
PRED:	When someone died , you will die in the camp , you will die in the camp , you will die in the camp , and you will die in the camp . In the third day you will be purified by the third day .
GOLD:	And all of you who have killed anyone or touched a dead body must stay outside the camp for seven days . You must purify yourselves and your captives on the third and seventh days .

ID:	627
INPUT:	▁Ni ▁ere ▁hala ▁ari tzen ▁naiz ; ▁ez ▁lasterka ▁itsu - itsu an ▁egiten ▁duena ▁edo ▁ukabil ka dak ▁hutsean ▁jotzen ▁dituen ▁borro kal aria ▁bezala ;
PRED:	I am saying , “ I am not sending them into a trap . I have no compassion on them .
GOLD:	So I run with purpose in every step . I am not just shadowboxing .

ID:	628
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁hostoak ▁ederrak ▁ziren , eta ▁fruituak ▁ugari , s <unk> ▁guztiak ▁asetzeko ▁adina . Bas apiz tiek ▁haren ▁itzalean egiten ▁zuten ▁ab aro eta ▁hegaztiek ▁haren ▁adarretan ▁habia . Bizi dun ▁ororen ▁janari ▁zen .
PRED:	The people of Israel were strong , and the fruit of the land of the land of the Babylonians , where you are hiding in the field , where you are trying to hide in the streets .
GOLD:	“ I said to him , ‘ Belteshazzar , chief of the magicians , I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and that no mystery is too great for you to solve . Now tell me what my dream means .

ID:	629
INPUT:	▁« Egizu ▁lebitarren ▁izen - bilketa , ▁senitarteka ▁eta ▁familiaka , ▁hilabetez ▁gorako ▁gizonezkoak ▁erroldatuz ».
PRED:	“ These are the names of the Levites and families of the tribe of Levi — one month old or three months . ”
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	630
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁aita ▁Asaren ▁jokabidea ▁hartu ▁zuen , ▁ezertan ▁ere ▁okertu ▁gabe . ▁Jaunaren ▁begietan ▁zuzen ▁dena ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Asa followed the example of Asa 's father , Asa , and he did not commit adultery .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat was a good king , following the ways of his father , Asa . He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .

ID:	631
INPUT:	▁metro ▁batekoa ▁zen ▁zor uan ▁zegoen ▁oinarri tik ▁lehen ▁p lata for m araino ; ▁hau ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁zen ▁zabal . ▁Bi ▁metroko ▁altuera ▁zegoen ▁p lata for ma ▁hartatik ▁hurrengo ra , ▁hura ▁ere ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁zabal ▁zelarik .
PRED:	It was built by the wall , and it was 71/2 feet wide . It was 71/2 feet wide , and it was 71/2 feet wide . It was 71/2 feet long .
GOLD:	From the gutter the altar rises 31/2 feet to a lower ledge that surrounds the altar and is 21 inches wide . From the lower ledge the altar rises 7 feet to the upper ledge that is also 21 inches wide .

ID:	632
INPUT:	▁Erregeak , ▁eta ▁Israel ▁osoak ▁harekin ▁batera , ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaini ▁zizkion ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	So the king and all Israel offered sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all Israel with him offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	633
INPUT:	▁baizik ▁eta ▁neure ▁gorputza ▁hezi ▁eta ▁menpean ▁jartzen ▁dut , ▁besteei ▁irakatsi ▁ondoren ▁neu ▁baztertua ▁gerta ▁ez ▁nadin .
PRED:	For I have put my body to death , and I have taught them to teach them .
GOLD:	I discipline my body like an athlete , training it to do what it should . Otherwise , I fear that after preaching to others I myself might be disqualified .

ID:	634
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁berez ▁ohoragarri ▁direnek ▁ez ▁dute ▁arreta ▁horien ▁beharrik . ▁Jainkoak ▁berak , ▁gorputza ▁era tzean , ▁berez ▁ohore ▁gabeko ▁ziren ▁atal ei ▁oh or erik ▁handiena ▁eman ▁zien .
PRED:	For there is no glory to your glory , and there is no part of your own body .
GOLD:	while the more honorable parts do not require this special care . So God has put the body together such that extra honor and care are given to those parts that have less dignity .

ID:	635
INPUT:	▁« Nik , ▁Artaxerxes ▁erregeak , ▁Eufrates ▁ibaiaren ▁mendebaldeko ▁diruz ain ▁guztiei ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁eman ▁diez aiozu ela ▁zehatz - mehatz ▁Esdras ▁apaizari , ▁zeruetako ▁Jainkoaren ▁lege - maisu ari , ▁eskatutako ▁guztia :
PRED:	“ I , the kings of the province west of the Euphrates River , along with the Euphrates River , along with the Euphrates River ,
GOLD:	“ I , Artaxerxes the king , hereby send this decree to all the treasurers in the province west of the Euphrates River : ‘ You are to give Ezra , the priest and teacher of the law of the God of heaven , whatever he requests of you .

ID:	636
INPUT:	▁ez ▁dago ▁ilunp erik , ▁ez ▁itzal ▁edo ▁geriz perik , gaizkileen ▁gordeleku ▁izan ▁daiteke enik .
PRED:	No one can save those who walk in darkness ; you will be safe from your power .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	637
INPUT:	▁Urruti ko ▁herri ▁bati egingo ▁dio ▁dei ▁Jaunak , bandera ▁jas oz ▁eta ▁tx istu ka , eta ▁lurraren ▁azken ▁bazter retatik etor raraziko ▁du . Hor ▁non ▁datozen ▁arin ▁eta ▁bizkor :
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The Lord says : “ They will fall down to the distant lands of the earth , and the nations of the sea will run away from the sea .
GOLD:	He will send a signal to distant nations far awayand whistle to those at the ends of the earth.They will come racing toward Jerusalem .

ID:	638
INPUT:	▁Judas ▁Iskariote , ▁Hamabietako ▁bat , ▁apaizburu engana ▁joan ▁zen , ▁Jesus ▁beraiei ▁eskuetara ▁emateko ▁asmotan .
PRED:	Judas , one of the twelve disciples went to the twelve disciples , to betray Jesus .
GOLD:	Then Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , went to the leading priests to arrange to betray Jesus to them .

ID:	639
INPUT:	▁Ardo - zah agi ▁hauek ▁berriak ▁ziren ▁bete ▁genituen ean , ▁eta ▁orain ▁urratu ak ▁daude . ▁Gure ▁jantzi ▁eta ▁oinetakoak ▁ere ▁zar p ail du ▁egin ▁zaizkigu ▁hain ▁bide ▁luz ean .
PRED:	We were made old when we arrived , we tore our backs on your clothing , and we tore your clothing .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	640
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁bizilekua , Jakoben ▁Jainko ▁indartsu ari ▁egoitza ▁aurkitu ▁bitartean ».
PRED:	For the Lord , the God of Israel is filled with the Tabernacle . ”
GOLD:	until I find a place to build a house for the Lord , a sanctuary for the Mighty One of Israel . ”

ID:	641
INPUT:	▁harik ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁zerutik ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁arte .
PRED:	When the Lord saw this , he saw that the Lord had seen and seen the face of heaven .
GOLD:	until the Lord looks downfrom heaven and sees .

ID:	642
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁arrats ▁hartan ▁ihesi ▁joanak ▁ziren , ▁beren ▁oihal - etxola , ▁zaldi , ▁asto ▁eta ▁kanpalekua ▁bera ▁ere ▁zegoen ▁zegoenean ▁utziz . ▁Ihes ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁bizia ▁salba tzearren .
PRED:	So they fled to their camp , and their horses went into the camp . They went into the camp and went into a field , and they would not return to life .
GOLD:	So they panicked and ran into the night , abandoning their tents , horses , donkeys , and everything else , as they fled for their lives .

ID:	643
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁antz aldatu ▁egin ▁zen ▁haien ▁aurrean : ▁aurpegia ▁eguzkia ▁bezain ▁distiratsu ▁bihurtu ▁zitzaion ▁eta ▁jantziak ▁argia ▁bezain ▁zuri .
PRED:	The people of Israel did as they watched , and his face became as white as the sun was as white as the sun .
GOLD:	As the men watched , Jesus ' appearance was transformed so that his face shone like the sun , and his clothes became as white as light .

ID:	644
INPUT:	▁Urre ▁harekin ▁irudi ▁bat ▁egin ▁eta ▁Of ran , ▁bere ▁herrian , ▁ipini ▁zuen ▁Gedeonek ; ▁israeldar ▁guztiek ▁irudi ▁hura ▁adoratu ▁zuten , ▁Jainkoarekin ▁desleial ▁jokatuz . ▁I rudi ▁hura ▁galbide ▁gertatu ▁zitzaien ▁Gedeoni ▁eta ▁beronen ▁senitarteko ei .
PRED:	He made a gold statue of gold and placed it in the land of the people of Israel in the land of the Lord our God , and he worshiped him .
GOLD:	Gideon made a sacred ephod from the gold and put it in Ophrah , his hometown . But soon all the Israelites prostituted themselves by worshiping it , and it became a trap for Gideon and his family .

ID:	645
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁batean , ▁Joanen ▁ikasleek ▁eta ▁fariseuek ▁barau - eguna ▁zuten . ▁Jesusengana ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Nola ▁egiten ▁dugu ▁barau ▁Joanen ▁ikasle ok ▁eta ▁fariseu ok , ▁eta ▁zure ▁ikasleek ▁ez ?
PRED:	One day the Pharisees and John went to the Pharisees and asked Jesus , “ Why are we doing this ? Why do we fast ? ”
GOLD:	Once when John 's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting , some people came to Jesus and asked , “ Why do n't your disciples fast like John 's disciples and the Pharisees do ? ”

ID:	646
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁aker ▁bat ▁barkamen - oparitarako , ▁Barkamen ▁Egun ▁handiko ▁barkamen - opari az ▁eta ▁eguneroko ▁erre - opariez ▁gain , ▁berauei ▁dagozkien ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opariekin .
PRED:	In addition , a male goat , a male goat , a male goat , a male goat , a male goat , and liquid offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat for a sin offering . This is in addition to the sin offering of atonement and the regular daily burnt offering with its grain offering , and their accompanying liquid offerings .

ID:	647
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁apostoluak ▁deitu ▁eta ▁zigor katu ▁ondoren , ▁Jesusi ▁buruz ▁hitzik ▁esatea ▁zorrotz ▁debekatu ▁zieten . ▁Ondoren , ▁askatu ▁egin ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Then the apostles called out to the apostles and said , “ This is what the apostles said to Jesus . Then they said to him ,
GOLD:	The others accepted his advice . They called in the apostles and had them flogged . Then they ordered them never again to speak in the name of Jesus , and they let them go .

ID:	648
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁txalupa ▁prest ▁eduki tzeko ▁agindu ▁zien ▁ikasleei , ▁hainbeste ▁jen deren ▁artean ▁zapal ▁ez ▁zezaten .
PRED:	He commanded his disciples to go to the disciples to the crowd .
GOLD:	Jesus instructed his disciples to have a boat ready so the crowd would not crush him .

ID:	649
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jerusalemen ▁eta ▁beste ▁hiri ▁guztietan ▁hauxe ▁iragarri ▁behar ▁zutela : ▁« Atera ▁mendira ▁eta ▁ekarri ▁handik ▁olibondo , ▁p inu , ▁mir to , ▁palmondo ▁eta ▁or ri dun ▁zuhaitzen ▁adarrak , ▁etxol ak ▁egiteko ».
PRED:	When the people of Jerusalem heard this , he said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : He brought a fig tree of olive trees , and there will be a tree in front of the trees . ”
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	650
INPUT:	▁Aten asen : ▁hitzaldia ▁Are o p ag on
PRED:	Paul before the Council
GOLD:	Paul Preaches in Athens

ID:	651
INPUT:	▁eta ▁etxoletan ▁marmarrean ▁hasi ▁zineten , ▁esanez : ▁Gorro toa ▁digu lako ▁atera ▁gaitu ▁Jaunak ▁Egiptotik , ▁amortarren ▁esku ▁utzi ▁eta ▁suntsitzeko .
PRED:	But you did n't realize that the Lord had rescued us from the land of Egypt . He has taken us from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	You complained in your tents and said , ‘ The Lord must hate us . That 's why he has brought us here from Egypt — to hand us over to the Amorites to be slaughtered .

ID:	652
INPUT:	▁Ezin ▁zen ▁jakin ▁zenbat ▁pisatzen ▁zuen ▁Salomonek ▁Jaunaren ▁etxerako ▁eginak ▁ziren ▁bi ▁zutabeen , ▁uraskaren ▁eta ▁or g en ▁bron tzeak .
PRED:	Solomon did n't know how the weight of the Temple of the Lord had built to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of Solomon .

ID:	653
INPUT:	▁Egur - puska ▁bati ▁esaten ▁diote :“ Zeu ▁zara ▁nire ▁aita ”; harri ari : ▁“ Zeuk ▁nauzu ▁sortu ”. B izkarra ▁ematen ▁didate , ez ▁aurpegia ; zoritx ar - egunean , ▁ordea ,“ Zatoz kigu ▁salbatzera ” ▁diote .
PRED:	You say to him , ‘ You are my father , my father , ' says the Lord. ‘ You have no mercy on me , ‘ Come , but I will save you . '
GOLD:	To an image carved from a piece of wood they say , ‘ You are my father . 'To an idol chiseled from a block of stone they say , ‘ You are my mother . 'They turn their backs on me , but in times of trouble they cry out to me , ‘ Come and save us ! '

ID:	654
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dute ▁burua ▁zeharo ▁soilduko , ▁ezta ▁ilea ▁gehiegi ▁luzatzen ▁utziko ▁ere ; ▁tx uk un ▁moztuko ▁dute .
PRED:	They must not shave their hair on their hair . They must not shave their hair on their hair .
GOLD:	“ They must neither shave their heads nor let their hair grow too long . Instead , they must trim it regularly .

ID:	655
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁agintariek ▁erabakitako ▁hiru ▁eguneko ▁e pean ▁etortzen ▁ez ▁zen ari , ▁zigor ▁gisa , ▁ondasun ▁guztiak ▁kenduko ▁zitzaizkion ▁Jaunari ▁sagaratzeko , ▁eta ▁erbestetik ▁itzulitako en ▁elkartetik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁zuten .
PRED:	When the elders had finished saying this , they did n't be cut off from the Book of the Lord 's Armies , they will cut off from the sins of the Lord 's Armies .
GOLD:	Those who failed to come within three days would , if the leaders and elders so decided , forfeit all their property and be expelled from the assembly of the exiles .

ID:	656
INPUT:	▁hiriaren ▁sarrerako ▁plazan , p as agun e etan , ▁aldarrikatzen ▁du :
PRED:	She is at the entrance to the courtyard of the town .
GOLD:	By the gates at the entrance to the town , on the road leading in , she cries aloud ,

ID:	657
INPUT:	▁Erregearen ▁haserreak ▁heriotza ▁iragartzen ▁du , baina ▁zuhurrak ▁bare tzea ▁lortzen ▁du .
PRED:	The king rejoices in trouble , but he finds a fool .
GOLD:	The anger of the king is a deadly threat ; the wise will try to appease it .

ID:	658
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zuten : ▁« O dola ▁da ▁hori ! ▁Errege ▁horiek ▁borroka ▁egin ▁dute ▁eta ▁elkar ▁hil . ▁Ea , ▁moabdar rok , ▁harrapakin etara !»
PRED:	Then they said to them , “ These are all the wild animals , ” they said . “ Come and kill each other . Get up to war against you ! ”
GOLD:	“ It 's blood ! ” the Moabites exclaimed . “ The three armies must have attacked and killed each other ! Let 's go , men of Moab , and collect the plunder ! ”

ID:	659
INPUT:	▁Bekatu ▁egin ▁dute ▁israeldarrek , ▁nik ▁ezarri ▁diedan ▁konpromisoa ▁hautsiz . ▁Suntsitu ▁behar ▁zuten etik ▁hartu ▁dute , ▁lapurtu ▁eta ▁beren ▁gauzen ▁artean ▁gorde .
PRED:	For the people of Israel have set apart as a sin offering to the Lord , and it is what I have done to you .
GOLD:	Israel has sinned and broken my covenant ! They have stolen some of the things that I commanded must be set apart for me . And they have not only stolen them but have lied about it and hidden the things among their own belongings .

ID:	660
INPUT:	▁Gutun ▁txiki ▁bat ▁idatzia ▁diot ▁eliz ▁elkarteari , ▁baina ▁D io t ref es ek , ▁dena ▁bere ▁esku ▁izan ▁nahi ▁duen ▁horrek , ▁ez ▁du ▁gure ▁aginpidea ▁onartzen .
PRED:	This is what I say to the church , but the church is written in the church . Instead , the church can not be baptized with him .
GOLD:	I wrote to the church about this , but Diotrephes , who loves to be the leader , refuses to have anything to do with us .

ID:	661
INPUT:	▁Bada ▁aberats arena ▁egin ▁eta ▁ezer ▁ez ▁duenik , baita ▁behartsu - itxurak ▁egin ▁eta ▁asko ▁duenik .
PRED:	Even if a rich person is rich , let them become poor and needy .
GOLD:	Some who are poor pretend to be rich ; others who are rich pretend to be poor .

ID:	662
INPUT:	▁Ezkon ▁zaitezte ▁eta ▁sortu ▁seme - alabak ; ▁ezkondu ▁seme - alabak ▁ere , ▁umeak ▁sor ▁ditzaten . ▁U gal ▁zaitezte ▁bizi ▁zareten ▁tokian , ▁ez ▁gutx itu .
PRED:	Dear children and children , children , and children will be married to your children and daughters . Do n't be able to live there , and you will live among you .
GOLD:	Marry and have children . Then find spouses for them so that you may have many grandchildren . Multiply ! Do not dwindle away !

ID:	663
INPUT:	▁« Hara , ▁aukeran ▁jartzen ▁dizkizuet ▁gaur ▁bizia ▁eta ▁zoriona , ▁heriotza ▁eta ▁zoritxarra .
PRED:	“ Look , I am giving you today , and I am giving you this life .
GOLD:	“ Now listen ! Today I am giving you a choice between life and death , between prosperity and disaster .

ID:	664
INPUT:	▁Arraz oirik ▁gabe gau zak ▁bahituran ▁hartzen ▁zenizkien ▁anaiei , jantziak ▁kentzen ▁biluzik ▁uz teraino .
PRED:	They did not wear clothing , and he refused to get clothing .
GOLD:	“ For example , you must have lent money to your friendand demanded clothing as security.Yes , you stripped him to the bone .

ID:	665
INPUT:	▁Labanek ▁bi ▁alaba ▁zituen : ▁nagusien ari ▁Lea ▁zeritzon ▁eta ▁gazteen ari ▁Rakel .
PRED:	Laban had two daughters , and she was born to Rachel .
GOLD:	Now Laban had two daughters . The older daughter was named Leah , and the younger one was Rachel .

ID:	666
INPUT:	▁Ekialdetik ▁mendebaldera , ▁herri ▁guztiek ▁aitortzen ▁dute ▁nire ▁izen ▁handia , ▁eta ▁nonahi ▁erretzen ▁didate ▁intsentsua ▁eta ▁behar ▁bezalako ▁oparia ▁eskaintzen . ▁Herri ▁guztiek ▁aitortzen ▁dute ▁nire ▁izen ▁handia ▁— dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak —.
PRED:	“ These are the towns of the surrounding nations , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . They will burn incense and burn incense on my name and burn incense to my name . ”
GOLD:	But my name is honored by people of other nations from morning till night . All around the world they offer sweet incense and pure offerings in honor of my name . For my name is great among the nations , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	667
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁dezagun ▁ituna ▁bion ▁artean , ▁zuen ▁aitak ▁eta ▁gure ak ▁beren ▁artean ▁egin ▁zuten ▁bezala . ▁Hona , ▁zilarra ▁eta ▁urrea ▁igor tzen ▁dizkizut ▁esku - erakutsi . ▁Hau ts ▁ezazu ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Bax arekin ▁egina ▁duzun ▁ituna ; ▁horrela , ▁utzi ▁egin ▁beharko ▁dio ▁nire ▁aurkako ▁borrokari ».
PRED:	“ We have made this covenant with you , ” they said . “ We have made a covenant with silver and gold and gold and gold , and I will give you victory over Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Let there be a treaty between you and me like the one between your father and my father . See , I am sending you a gift of silver and gold . Break your treaty with King Baasha of Israel so that he will leave me alone . ”

ID:	668
INPUT:	▁Norbaitek ▁hondatu ▁nahi ▁baditu , ▁sua ▁aterako ▁da ▁haien ▁ahotik ▁eta ▁etsaiak ▁kiskal iko ▁ditu ; ▁horrelaxe ▁hilko ▁da ▁berori ek ▁hondatu ▁nahi ▁dituen ▁oro .
PRED:	If you refuse to turn away , they will die , and your power will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If anyone tries to harm them , fire flashes from their mouths and consumes their enemies . This is how anyone who tries to harm them must die .

ID:	669
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁Itur riko ▁ate ▁aldera ▁eta ▁Erregearen ▁urtegi rantz ▁jo ▁nuen , ▁baina ▁gainean ▁nin dera man ▁abereak ▁ez ▁zuen ▁handik ▁igarotzeko ▁leku rik .
PRED:	Then I went to the gate to the king , and I took you out of the town of Gibeon . But there was no water for you .
GOLD:	Then I went to the Fountain Gate and to the King 's Pool , but my donkey could n't get through the rubble .

ID:	670
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁herria ▁jo ▁duen hondamen az ▁nago ▁jota , go ibel ▁eta ▁izuak ▁hartuta .
PRED:	My people surround me ; I am deeply troubled and night .
GOLD:	I hurt with the hurt of my people.I mourn and am overcome with grief .

ID:	671
INPUT:	▁U gari ▁baino ▁ugariago ▁nuen ▁esnea , harkaitz ek ▁ere ▁olio - errek ak ▁isurtzen ▁zituzten nire tzat .
PRED:	They were more valuable than olive oil , and the olive trees of the nations were scattered .
GOLD:	My steps were awash in cream , and the rocks gushed olive oil for me .

ID:	672
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁batzuen ▁buruan , ▁hondatu ▁eginen ▁dut ▁zure ▁eta ▁zure ▁aitaren ▁senitarte aren ▁agintea . ▁Zure ▁etxean ▁ez ▁da ▁inor ▁zahar tzar ora ▁helduko .
PRED:	In that day I will send you out of your family , and your family will become a member of your family .
GOLD:	The time is coming when I will put an end to your family , so it will no longer serve as my priests . All the members of your family will die before their time . None will reach old age .

ID:	673
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁seinale ▁bat ▁agertu ▁zen ▁zeruan : ▁herensuge ▁gorri ▁handi ▁bat , ▁zazpi ▁buru ▁eta ▁hamar ▁adar ▁zituena , ▁eta ▁buru etan ▁koroa ▁bana .
PRED:	One of heaven appeared to the dragon of the earth . He saw seven heads of the dragon and seven heads of the dragon .
GOLD:	Then I witnessed in heaven another significant event . I saw a large red dragon with seven heads and ten horns , with seven crowns on his heads .

ID:	674
INPUT:	▁« Em azue ▁zuetako ▁batek ▁morroi ▁bat ▁duela ▁soro - lan ▁edo ▁artzain tzarako . ▁Morro ia ▁etxera tzean , ▁“ H ator ▁berehala ▁mahai ra ” ▁esaten ▁ote ▁dio ?
PRED:	“ If a servant marries a servant , he is a shepherd 's servant , he will go home to the house of your servant , ‘ Who is your servant ? '
GOLD:	“ When a servant comes in from plowing or taking care of sheep , does his master say , ‘ Come in and eat with me ' ?

ID:	675
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord also said to Moses ,

ID:	676
INPUT:	▁eta ▁pozten ▁naiz ▁han ▁ez ▁izan az , ▁zeuen ▁onerako ▁izango ▁baita , ▁horrela ▁sinets ▁dezazuen . ▁Goazen , ▁bada , ▁haren ▁etxera .
PRED:	When I am ready to go , I will do n't believe it , for it will be able to believe him .
GOLD:	And for your sakes , I 'm glad I was n't there , for now you will really believe . Come , let 's go see him . ”

ID:	677
INPUT:	▁A izko ra ▁galdu ▁eta ▁aurkitu
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	The Floating Ax Head

ID:	678
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁hor , ▁bada , ▁Eleazar ▁apaizak , ▁Nunen ▁seme ▁Josuek ▁eta ▁israeldar ▁leinuetako ▁senitarte buruek ▁Xilon , ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ▁zotz ▁eginez , ▁izendatu ▁zituzten ▁ondar eak . ▁Horrela ▁burutu ▁zuten ▁lurraldearen ▁banaketa .
PRED:	That is why Joshua son of Nun , Eleazar the priest , son of Nun , the sons of Israel , and the sons of Israel were given to the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	These are the territories that Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the tribal leaders allocated as grants of land to the tribes of Israel by casting sacred lots in the presence of the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle at Shiloh . So the division of the land was completed .

ID:	679
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁beste ▁gorabeh erarik ▁baldin ▁baduzue , ▁legezko ▁batzar ▁batean ▁erabakiko ▁da .
PRED:	If you are willing , you will be a permanent law for a permanent law .
GOLD:	And if there are complaints about other matters , they can be settled in a legal assembly .

ID:	680
INPUT:	▁Bata , ▁Hexbonen ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Sihon ▁errege ▁amortar ra ▁izan ▁zen ; ▁honen ▁menpeko ▁erreinua ▁Arnon ▁erreka ▁ondoan ▁dagoen ▁Aroer ▁hiritik ▁amondarren ▁lur - muga ▁den ▁Jabok ▁errekaraino ▁hedatzen ▁zen , ▁Ar n onen ▁ibarra ▁eta ▁Galaad ▁lurralde ▁erdia ▁hartzen ▁zituelarik ;
PRED:	So he lived in the land of Heshbon , as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as the Arnon River . It was in the region of the Arnon River .
GOLD:	King Sihon of the Amorites , who lived in Heshbon , was defeated . His kingdom included Aroer , on the edge of the Arnon Gorge , and extended from the middle of the Arnon Gorge to the Jabbok River , which serves as a border for the Ammonites . This territory included the southern half of the territory of Gilead .

ID:	681
INPUT:	▁Su ge a ▁zen ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁egindako ▁pizti arik ▁maltzur rena . Su ge ak ▁esan ▁zion ▁emakumeari :— Jainkoak ▁debekatu ▁egin ▁dizue , ▁beraz , ▁baratzeko ▁arbola ▁guztietako ▁fruitu etarik ▁jatea ?
PRED:	Then the Sovereign Lord came down fire from the wild animals , and she said to her , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says to you ? ”
GOLD:	The serpent was the shrewdest of all the wild animals the Lord God had made . One day he asked the woman , “ Did God really say you must not eat the fruit from any of the trees in the garden ? ”

ID:	682
INPUT:	▁Noemik ▁erantzuten ▁zien :— Ez ▁deitu ▁niri ▁gehiago ▁Noemi ▁— zorion eko —, ▁Mara ▁— zoritx arreko — ▁baizik , ▁Jainko ▁Ahaltsuak ▁zoritx arrez ▁bete ▁bainau .
PRED:	But Naomi said , “ Do n't be afraid , ” Naomi said . “ May the Almighty bless you . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't call me Naomi , ” she responded . “ Instead , call me Mara , for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me .

ID:	683
INPUT:	▁Hona , ▁bada , ▁Jaunak ▁esan : ▁“ Ez ▁zara ▁jaikiko ▁etzana ▁zauden ▁ohetik ; ▁hil ▁eginen ▁zara ”». ▁Eta ▁joan ▁egin ▁zen ▁Elias .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : ‘ You will not die , ” the Lord said . “ You will not kill him , and you will die . ”
GOLD:	Now , therefore , this is what the Lord says : You will never leave the bed you are lying on ; you will surely die . ' ” So Elijah went to deliver the message .

ID:	684
INPUT:	▁Biltzar ▁Nagus iaren ▁aurrera ▁eraman ▁zituzten ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁nagusiak ▁esan ▁zien :
PRED:	Then the high priest brought the high priest to the high priest and said ,
GOLD:	Then they brought the apostles before the high council , where the high priest confronted them .

ID:	685
INPUT:	▁Ar n asa ▁galtzen ▁ari ▁naiz , ▁bihotza ▁barruan ▁lehor .
PRED:	My heart is filled with violence , and I am filled with water .
GOLD:	I am losing all hope ; I am paralyzed with fear .

ID:	686
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁maite ▁zaldi aren ▁indarra , ez ▁du ▁estim atzen ▁gizakiaren ▁bizkor tasuna .
PRED:	For they love their horses , and their strength are filled with violence .
GOLD:	He takes no pleasure in the strength of a horseor in human might .

ID:	687
INPUT:	▁Opari tik ▁irin - esku tada ▁hartuko ▁du ▁oroigarri ▁gisa ▁eta ▁aldare ▁gainean ▁erreko . ▁Ondoren , ▁ura ▁edan araziko ▁dio ▁emakumeari .
PRED:	It must be a sin offering for a sin offering for a sin offering to the altar . Then he will burn it on the altar . Then he will take it on the altar .
GOLD:	He will take a handful of the flour as a token portion and burn it on the altar , and he will require the woman to drink the water .

ID:	688
INPUT:	▁orain , ▁ordea , ▁barkatu ▁eta ▁adorea ▁eman ▁behar ▁diozue , ▁gehieg izko ▁nahigabeak ▁lur ▁joa ▁utz ▁ez ▁dezan .
PRED:	But now now , you will forgive their sins , and trouble will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Now , however , it is time to forgive and comfort him . Otherwise he may be overcome by discouragement .

ID:	689
INPUT:	▁Eman ▁dezagun ,“ Ar doa ▁eta ▁pat tarra ugari ▁emango ▁dizut ” esaka ▁ari ▁dela ▁norbait ; horrelako ▁mezu ▁hutsal eta ▁gezurrez koa ▁l ekar keen aizango ▁litza tek eh erri ▁honek ▁merezi ▁duen ▁profeta !
PRED:	Let us tell you , ‘ This is what I am saying , ‘ This is a false prophet — a false prophet — a false prophet who is like a prophet ! '
GOLD:	Suppose a prophet full of lies would say to you , “ I 'll preach to you the joys of wine and alcohol ! ” That 's just the kind of prophet you would like !

ID:	690
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁inork ▁ez ▁dezake ▁esan ▁nire ▁izenean ▁bataia tua ▁izan ▁denik .
PRED:	And no one can be able to obey my name .
GOLD:	for now no one can say they were baptized in my name .

ID:	691
INPUT:	▁eta ▁barkatu ▁gure ▁erru en ▁zorra , gu k ▁ere ▁geure ▁zor dun ei bar katu ▁di egunez ▁gero ;
PRED:	For we have committed adultery with our sins , and you have kept our vows to the Lord .
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we have forgiven those who sin against us .

ID:	692
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁zion , ▁bada , ▁dei ▁Samuelek ▁Jaunari ▁eta ▁honek ▁trumoiak ▁eta ▁euria ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁egun ▁hartan . ▁Herri ▁osoak ▁Jaunari ▁eta ▁Samueli ▁beldur ▁ikaragarria ▁hartu ▁zien .
PRED:	So Samuel called out to the Lord , and Samuel sent the rain to the Lord , and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So Samuel called to the Lord , and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day . And all the people were terrified of the Lord and of Samuel .

ID:	693
INPUT:	▁Berehala , ▁atzera ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁Jesus ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁zutik , ▁baina ▁ez ▁zen ▁konturatu ▁Jesus ▁zela .
PRED:	Then Jesus got up and saw him , but he did n't realize that Jesus had n't seen him .
GOLD:	She turned to leave and saw someone standing there . It was Jesus , but she did n't recognize him .

ID:	694
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁eskaintzaileak ▁erre - oparigaia ▁larrutu ▁eta ▁zatitu ▁egingo ▁du ;
PRED:	After this , the priest will burn the fat of the town and burn it on it .
GOLD:	Then skin the animal and cut it into pieces .

ID:	695
INPUT:	▁Ai , ▁nire ▁hitzak ▁idatziak ▁geldituko ▁balira , ▁liburuan ▁ezarriak !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits my words , but I will be put on trial .
GOLD:	“ Oh , that my words could be recorded.Oh , that they could be inscribed on a monument ,

ID:	696
INPUT:	▁Z orretan ▁nago , ▁izan ▁ere , ▁greziar ▁herriarekin ▁nahiz ▁greziar ▁ez ▁direnekin , ▁ikasi ekin ▁nahiz ▁ezik asi ekin .
PRED:	I am not sending myself to a severe famine , or a Jew or a Jew .
GOLD:	For I have a great sense of obligation to people in both the civilized world and the rest of the world , to the educated and uneducated alike .

ID:	697
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁gain ▁hartzen ▁dut ▁zure ▁semearen ▁erantzukizuna ; ▁neuri ▁eskatu ▁kontuak . ▁Itzul tzen ▁ez ▁badizut ▁eta ▁aurrera ▁ekartzen ▁ez , ▁errudun ▁izango ▁nauzu ▁betiko !
PRED:	I asked you , ‘ I am willing to ask for you , for I have no mercy to you . If you do n't want to kill me , I will bring you back to you . '
GOLD:	I personally guarantee his safety . You may hold me responsible if I do n't bring him back to you . Then let me bear the blame forever .

ID:	698
INPUT:	▁Hamabi ▁urte ▁zituen ▁Manasesek ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hastean ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamabost ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Jerusalemen . ▁Haren ▁amak ▁Hef tzi - Ba ▁zuen ▁izena .
PRED:	Manasseh was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was the mother of his mother .
GOLD:	Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-five years . His mother was Hephzibah .

ID:	699
INPUT:	▁baina ▁besteei ▁barkatzen ▁ez ▁badizki ezue , ▁zuei ▁ere ▁ez ▁dizkizue ▁barkatuko ▁zeuen ▁hutsegiteak ▁zeruko ▁Aitak .
PRED:	But if you refuse to forgive your sins , you will never forgive you .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to forgive others , your Father will not forgive your sins .

ID:	700
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁askatasuna ▁ematen ▁duen ▁lege ▁bikaina ▁hausn artu ▁eta ▁horri ▁tinko ▁eusten ▁diona ▁— ez ▁erraz ▁ahazten ▁duen ▁entzu le ▁bezala , ▁benetako ▁bete tzaile ▁bezala ▁baizik —, ▁hori ▁zoriontsu ▁izango ▁da ▁legea ▁betez .
PRED:	But if a result , we will not be patient with this command . Instead , you will hear what is right with the law of the law .
GOLD:	But if you look carefully into the perfect law that sets you free , and if you do what it says and do n't forget what you heard , then God will bless you for doing it .

ID:	701
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁herriaren ▁bekatua
PRED:	Israel 's Prayer for Israel
GOLD:	Judah 's Sin and Punishment

ID:	702
INPUT:	▁Azkenik , ▁senideok , ▁poz ▁zaitezte , ▁saiatu ▁bete - bete ak ▁izaten ▁eta ▁izan ▁adore . ▁Bizi ▁zaitezte ▁elkar ▁ongi ▁hartuz ▁eta ▁bakean . ▁Eta ▁maitasunaren ▁eta ▁bakearen ▁Jainkoa ▁zuekin ▁izango ▁da .
PRED:	Finally , dear brothers and sisters , do n't forget the same way . Be strong and courageous ! Be strong and courageous ! May God be with you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I close my letter with these last words : Be joyful . Grow to maturity . Encourage each other . Live in harmony and peace . Then the God of love and peace will be with you .

ID:	703
INPUT:	▁egiptoar , ▁judatar , ▁edomdar , ▁amondar , ▁moabdar ▁eta ▁be du ino ▁guztiak . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁herri ▁horiek , ▁eta ▁Israelek ▁berak , ▁ez ▁dute ▁ezarri ▁bihotzean ▁itunaren ▁seinale ▁den ▁erdainkuntza ».
PRED:	In the past the Canaanites , Edom , Edom , Edom , Ammon , and all the people of Israel , and all the people of Israel . They must not obey their hearts . ”
GOLD:	“ A time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will punish all those who are circumcised in body but not in spirit —

ID:	704
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio :« Entzun ▁niri , ▁Jaun ▁honi , zuzen bidearen ▁atzetik ▁lehiatzen eta ▁nire ▁bila ▁zabil tzaten ok . Begira ▁zein ▁harkaitz etan ▁ebaki ak , n ongo ▁harro bi tik ater at akoak ▁zareten :
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Listen to me , O Lord , you are my people who are living in the streets . You are trying to hide in the rocks of Lebanon .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , all who hope for deliverance — all who seek the Lord ! Consider the rock from which you were cut , the quarry from which you were mined .

ID:	705
INPUT:	▁I kara ▁zaitezte ▁eta ▁ez ▁egin ▁bekaturik , aztertu ▁zeuen ▁barruak , ▁egin ▁negar ▁ohe ▁gainean .
PRED:	Do n't weep for your heart , and do n't weep for your heart .
GOLD:	Offer sacrifices in the right spirit , and trust the Lord .

ID:	706
INPUT:	▁Saul , ▁errege ▁izendatua ▁herriaren ▁aurrean
PRED:	Saul before the king of Israel
GOLD:	Samuel Anoints Saul as King

ID:	707
INPUT:	▁Soldaduek , ▁Jesus ▁gurutziltzatu ▁ondoren , ▁haren ▁jantziak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁lau ▁zati ▁egin ▁zituzten , ▁bakoitz arentzat ▁bana ; ▁gero ▁tunika ▁hartu ▁zuten , ▁baina ▁jos tur arik ▁gabea ▁zenez , ▁goitik ▁behera ▁ehundua ,
PRED:	The soldiers took him to him , and they took him to a piece of blue cloth . They took a piece of blue robe , and they took it to him .
GOLD:	When the soldiers had crucified Jesus , they divided his clothes among the four of them . They also took his robe , but it was seamless , woven in one piece from top to bottom .

ID:	708
INPUT:	▁Erregearen ▁laguntzaile ▁nagusiak , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizonari :— Jaunak ▁zeruko ▁ate xkak ▁irekiko ▁balitu ▁ere , ▁gertatuko ▁ote ▁litzateke ▁horrelakorik ? Eliseok ▁ihardetsi ▁zion :— Zeuk ▁ikusiko ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁begiz , ▁baina ▁ez ▁duzu ▁hartatik ▁jango .
PRED:	But the king said to the man , “ What is the man of God ? ” But the king said to him , “ What do you see ? ”
GOLD:	The officer assisting the king said to the man of God , “ That could n't happen even if the Lord opened the windows of heaven ! ” But Elisha replied , “ You will see it happen with your own eyes , but you wo n't be able to eat any of it ! ”

ID:	709
INPUT:	▁Ai atera ▁iritsi ▁da ▁eraso tzailea , M ig ronen ▁barrena ▁dator , Mik m asen ▁egin ▁du armen ▁ikus ka pena ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who live in the land of Egypt , when they learned that the Lord had done ,
GOLD:	Look , the Assyrians are now at Aiath.They are passing through Migronand are storing their equipment at Micmash .

ID:	710
INPUT:	▁Ez , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁Joel ▁profetak ▁esan ▁zuena ▁ari ▁da ▁hemen ▁gertatzen :
PRED:	Do n't say , ‘ This is what the prophets happened . '
GOLD:	No , what you see was predicted long ago by the prophet Joel :

ID:	711
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁hamabi ▁apostoluak ▁izendatu
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Apostles

ID:	712
INPUT:	▁Deabru aren ▁menpe ▁zegoen ▁gizon ▁bat ▁eraman ▁zioten ▁Jesusi , ▁itsua ▁eta ▁mutua . ▁Hark ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁eta ▁gizona ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁eta ▁ikusten ▁hasi ▁zen .
PRED:	So the man came out to the man who had been blind , and the man began to speak . The man was healed , and the man began to speak .
GOLD:	Then a demon-possessed man , who was blind and could n't speak , was brought to Jesus . He healed the man so that he could both speak and see .

ID:	713
INPUT:	▁Kristau ▁ez ▁dena , ▁ordea , ▁banandu ▁nahi ▁balu , ▁banandu ▁bedi ; ▁horrelako etan ▁krista ua ▁— gizon ▁nahiz ▁emakume — ▁aske ▁gelditzen ▁da , ▁Jainkoak ▁bakean ▁bizitzera ▁deitu ▁baitzaituzte .
PRED:	But if you do not need , do not want to be a person to live in peace . If a woman comes from home , he is a slave to live in peace .
GOLD:	( But if the husband or wife who is n't a believer insists on leaving , let them go . In such cases the believing husband or wife is no longer bound to the other , for God has called you to live in peace . )

ID:	714
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuei ▁zer ▁axola ? Nire ▁herria ▁zapaltzen ▁duzueeta ▁hankapean ▁hartzen behar tsuen ▁duintasuna ». Jainko ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak esan ▁du .
PRED:	But you know what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits you ? ”
GOLD:	How dare you crush my people , grinding the faces of the poor into the dust ? ” demands the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	715
INPUT:	▁Buka tzeko , ▁sendo ▁zaitzatela ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁indar ▁ahaltsu az .
PRED:	O Lord , give you victory over his mighty power .
GOLD:	A final word : Be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power .

ID:	716
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁apaizburu , ▁lege - maisu ▁eta ▁zaharrek ▁ere ▁irri ▁egiten ▁zioten , ▁esanez :
PRED:	The leading priests and teachers of religious law , the teachers of religious law , saying ,
GOLD:	The leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders also mocked Jesus .

ID:	717
INPUT:	▁Sak rifizio ▁horiek ▁eskaintzen ▁dituenak ▁litro ▁eta ▁erdi ren ▁bat ▁oliotan ▁oraturiko ▁lau ▁kilo ▁ogi - irin ▁garbi ▁erantsiko ▁dizkie
PRED:	“ If you present a grain offering to purify yourselves with two quarts of choice flour and two quarts of choice flour mixed with olive oil .
GOLD:	When you present these offerings , you must also give the Lord a grain offering of two quarts of choice flour mixed with one quart of olive oil .

ID:	718
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio , ▁izan ▁ere , ▁Liburu ▁Santuak : ▁Hona ▁nik ▁Sionen ▁harri ▁bat ▁ipini , ▁giltzarri ▁aukeratu ▁eta ▁bikaina . ▁Horretan ▁sinesten ▁duenak ▁ez ▁du ▁huts ▁egingo .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ This is what the Scriptures say . ' ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ I am placing a cornerstone in Jerusalem , chosen for great honor , and anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	719
INPUT:	▁Akaz ▁Damaskora ▁joan ▁zen ▁Asiriako ▁errege ▁Tig l at - Pil es er ▁ikustatzera . ▁Orduan , ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁Damaskoko ▁aldarea , ▁eta ▁beronen ▁neurri - egi tu rak ▁bidali ▁zizkion ▁Urias ▁apaizari , ▁nolakoa ▁egin ▁jakiteko .
PRED:	King Ahaz of Assyria went to King Ahaz of Assyria , where he was going to ask him . Then he sent him to tell him what he had happened .
GOLD:	King Ahaz then went to Damascus to meet with King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria . While he was there , he took special note of the altar . Then he sent a model of the altar to Uriah the priest , along with its design in full detail .

ID:	720
INPUT:	▁Danielek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁ez ▁dut ▁erregal u ▁edo ▁sari ▁beharrik , ▁gorde ▁zeuretzat ▁edo ▁eman ▁besteren ▁bati . ▁Baina ▁hor ▁idatzia ▁irakur riko ▁dizut ▁eta ▁esanahia ▁azalduko .
PRED:	Daniel replied , “ My lord the king , I do n't need it . But I have given you whatever I told you . But I told you , ‘ I will tell you what I told you . ' ”
GOLD:	Daniel answered the king , “ Keep your gifts or give them to someone else , but I will tell you what the writing means .

ID:	721
INPUT:	▁eta ▁gure ▁Jainkoarentzat errege - herri ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁egin ▁dituzu , eta ▁lur ▁osoan ▁errege ▁izango ▁dira ».
PRED:	O God , you will be king , and you will rule over all the nations . ”
GOLD:	And you have caused them to becomea Kingdom of priests for our God.And they will reign on the earth . ”

ID:	722
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zuen : Ez ku tatu ▁egingo ▁diet ▁aurpegia , eta ▁ikusiko ▁dut ▁zer ▁amaiera ▁duten , jende ▁gaizto tua ▁baita , leial tasunik ▁gabeko ▁seme - alabak .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I will see your face ; I will see your face , and your children will see your children .
GOLD:	He said , ‘ I will abandon them ; then see what becomes of them.For they are a twisted generation , children without integrity .

ID:	723
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁eskuaz ▁kanpora ▁bota ▁zenituen ▁beste ▁nazioak , gure ▁gurasoak ▁bertan ▁lan datzeko ; beste ▁herriak ▁gogor ▁jo ▁zenituen , gure ▁gurasoak ▁bertan ▁haz arazteko .
PRED:	You brought them out of our ancestors in the land of our ancestors , and you destroyed all the nations .
GOLD:	They did not conquer the land with their swords ; it was not their own strong arm that gave them victory.It was your right hand and strong armand the blinding light from your face that helped them , for you loved them .

ID:	724
INPUT:	▁« N olaz ▁ausartzen ▁zara ▁esaten :“ Ez ▁naiz ▁kutsatu , ez ▁naiz ▁Baalen ▁idoloen ondoren ▁ibili ”? Ikus ▁zeure ▁urratsak ▁haranean eta ▁aitortu ▁zeure ▁jokabidea ; har at - honat ▁dabilen gam el uk ume ▁kaskar inaren antzeko ▁zara ,
PRED:	“ I say to you , ‘ I am saying , ‘ I have seen your idols , ' we have seen your idols . You have turned away from the valley of Baal , but you have turned away from the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	“ You say , ‘ That 's not true ! I have n't worshiped the images of Baal ! 'But how can you say that ? Go and look in any valley in the land ! Face the awful sins you have done.You are like a restless female cameldesperately searching for a mate .

ID:	725
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuzen ▁joka tzeagatik ▁sufritu ▁beharrean ▁gertatzen ▁bazarete , ▁zorion ekoak ▁zuek ! ▁Ez ▁izan ▁inoren ▁beldur , ▁ez ▁ikaratu !
PRED:	But if you are doing wrong , you must be patient with those who do n't be cursed .
GOLD:	But even if you suffer for doing what is right , God will reward you for it . So do n't worry or be afraid of their threats .

ID:	726
INPUT:	▁Zeruko ▁izarrak ▁bezain batu gari tu ▁zenizkien ▁seme - alabak , haien ▁gurasoei ▁agindu ▁lurraldera ekarri ▁zenituen .
PRED:	O Lord , you sons of heaven and children , and you have given them to their ancestors .
GOLD:	You made their descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and brought them into the land you had promised to their ancestors .

ID:	727
INPUT:	▁Pro betx u ▁gabeko ▁hitzarmena
PRED:	A Call to Obey
GOLD:	Judah 's Worthless Treaty with Egypt

ID:	728
INPUT:	▁Gu ▁gara ▁honen ▁guztiaren ▁lekuko , ▁gu ▁eta ▁esaneko ▁zaizkion ei ▁Jainkoak ▁ematen ▁dien ▁Espiritu ▁Santua .
PRED:	We know that we have seen the Holy Spirit , and we can praise him .
GOLD:	We are witnesses of these things and so is the Holy Spirit , who is given by God to those who obey him . ”

ID:	729
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁beste ▁hirietako ek , ▁baita ▁haietan ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁israeldarrek ▁ere , ▁beren ▁behi , ▁ardi ▁eta ▁beren ▁Jainko ▁Jaunari ▁sagaraturiko ▁beste ▁eskaintzen ▁hamarrenak ▁eman ▁zituzten . ▁Horrela , ▁ondasun - multzo ▁handiak ▁egin ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the people of Judah lived in the towns of Judah , including their cattle , cattle , cattle , sheep , goats , goats , and cattle , and cattle , and cattle , and cattle , and cattle .
GOLD:	The people who had moved to Judah from Israel , and the people of Judah themselves , brought in the tithes of their cattle , sheep , and goats and a tithe of the things that had been dedicated to the Lord their God , and they piled them up in great heaps .

ID:	730
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen ▁Gedeon ▁eta ▁antxume ▁bat ▁prestatu ▁zuen ▁eta , ▁hogei ▁kilo - edo ▁irin ez , ▁legamia ▁gabeko ▁ogiak ▁egin . ▁Gero , ▁okela ▁otar rean ▁eta ▁sal da ▁el tzean ▁harturik , ▁arte ondo ▁azpi ra ▁eraman ▁eta ▁Jaunari ▁eskaini ▁zion ▁dena .
PRED:	But Gideon took a young bull and prepared a grain offering to the Lord . Then he took a loaf of bread and two quarts with olive oil . Then he brought it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Gideon hurried home . He cooked a young goat , and with a basket of flour he baked some bread without yeast . Then , carrying the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot , he brought them out and presented them to the angel , who was under the great tree .

ID:	731
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Ongi . ▁Hala ▁bedi ! Eta ▁agur ▁egin ▁zien . ▁Alde ▁egin ▁zutenean , ▁emakumeak ▁lokarri ▁gorria ▁lotu ▁zuen ▁leiho an .
PRED:	She replied , “ May the woman be right , ” she said . “ May the woman be put on the top of the boat . ”
GOLD:	“ I accept your terms , ” she replied . And she sent them on their way , leaving the scarlet rope hanging from the window .

ID:	732
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁ordu tik ▁aurrera , ▁Jesus ▁nola ▁hilko ▁pentsatzen ▁hasi ▁ziren ;
PRED:	So when Jesus died , they began to die .
GOLD:	So from that time on , the Jewish leaders began to plot Jesus ' death .

ID:	733
INPUT:	▁Jakin ▁zuten ▁apostoluek ▁eta ▁Judeako ▁senideek , ▁jentilek ▁ere ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁onartu ▁zutela .
PRED:	The apostles heard that the apostles were in the region of God .
GOLD:	Soon the news reached the apostles and other believers in Judea that the Gentiles had received the word of God .

ID:	734
INPUT:	▁L itx ar r eriaz ▁jan ▁ohi ▁zutenak ▁ahitu rik ▁erortzen ▁dira ▁kaleetan . L ux u ▁artean ▁hazi ek ▁zabor tegian ▁dute ▁bizileku .
PRED:	In this way , there will be no object of horror , and its branches will be cut down in the streets .
GOLD:	The people who once ate the richest foodsnow beg in the streets for anything they can get.Those who once wore the finest clothesnow search the garbage dumps for food .

ID:	735
INPUT:	▁Abraham ▁zaharra ▁izan ▁arren , ▁Sara ▁haurdun ▁gertatu ▁zen , ▁eta ▁semea ▁eman ▁zion , ▁Jainkoak ▁iragarri tako ▁garaian .
PRED:	Abraham became pregnant and gave birth to a son , Sarah , a son of Abraham . And God gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	She became pregnant , and she gave birth to a son for Abraham in his old age . This happened at just the time God had said it would .

ID:	736
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diote : ▁« Ea , ▁goazen ▁ardo tara . M ozkor ▁gaitezen ▁pat tar rez ! Eta ▁bihar ▁beste ▁horrenbeste , nah ikoa ▁baitago !»
PRED:	“ Come , let 's be healed , ” he said . “ Come , let 's be healed , and let 's be healed . ”
GOLD:	“ Come , ” they say , “ let 's get some wine and have a party.Let 's all get drunk.Then tomorrow we 'll do it againand have an even bigger party ! ”

ID:	737
INPUT:	▁kontuan ▁hartu ▁behar ▁da ▁legea ▁ez ▁dela ▁ezarri ▁zintzo entzat , ▁beste ▁hau entzat ▁baizik : ▁gaizto , ▁errebelde , ▁erlijio gabe ▁eta ▁bekatari entzat , ▁sak ri le go ▁eta ▁profana tzaile entzat , ▁aita - amen ▁hiltzaile ▁eta ▁giza ▁hiltzaile entzat ,
PRED:	This is what the law of the law must not be punished for those who sin . This is a person who sinned against the people of Israel .
GOLD:	For the law was not intended for people who do what is right . It is for people who are lawless and rebellious , who are ungodly and sinful , who consider nothing sacred and defile what is holy , who kill their father or mother or commit other murders .

ID:	738
INPUT:	▁Amon darrak ▁irten ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁ate ▁aurrean ▁prestatu ▁ziren ▁borrokarako ▁lerrotan . ▁Bai ▁Tz oba ▁eta ▁Rehob eko ▁arame arrak , ▁bai ▁Tob ▁eta ▁Maak ako ▁gizonak , ▁berriz , ▁beste ▁toki ▁batean ▁ziren , ▁landan .
PRED:	He went out to the town of Ammon and prepared a Philistine army to attack the town of Zobah .
GOLD:	The Ammonite troops came out and drew up their battle lines at the entrance of the city gate , while the Arameans from Zobah and Rehob and the men from Tob and Maacah positioned themselves to fight in the open fields .

ID:	739
INPUT:	▁Isaiasek ▁Jesusi ▁buruz ▁esan ▁zuen ▁hau , ▁ikusia ▁baitzuen ▁beraren ▁Jainko - aintza .
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to him , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	Isaiah was referring to Jesus when he said this , because he saw the future and spoke of the Messiah 's glory .

ID:	740
INPUT:	▁Seme , ▁entzun ▁aitaren ▁oharrak eta ▁ez ▁baztertu ▁amaren ▁irakaspenak ;
PRED:	My child , listen to your father ; do n't listen to your mother .
GOLD:	My child , listen when your father corrects you.Do n't neglect your mother 's instruction .

ID:	741
INPUT:	▁Esan , ▁bada , ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁diodan ▁hau : ▁Ez ▁da ▁nire ▁hitzik ▁atzera tuko , ▁bete ▁egingo ▁da ▁esaten ▁dudana . ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Then this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I am the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , have spoken to me . I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Therefore , tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : No more delay ! I will now do everything I have threatened . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	742
INPUT:	▁Erromes - kanta . Begi ak ▁mendietara ▁ditut ▁jasotzen : non dik ▁etorriko ▁ote ▁zait ▁laguntza ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me from the mountains ? Why do I go to the mountains ?
GOLD:	I look up to the mountains — does my help come from there ?

ID:	743
INPUT:	▁Horrelako ak ▁ez ▁beza ▁uste ▁Jaunarengandik ▁ezer ▁iritsiko ▁duenik ,
PRED:	Do n't turn away from the Lord , or let us go to the Lord .
GOLD:	Such people should not expect to receive anything from the Lord .

ID:	744
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁nik ▁erantzungo ▁diet : ▁“ Ez ▁zaituztet ▁inoiz ▁ezagutu ; ▁alde ▁niregandik , ▁gaizkile ok !”
PRED:	But I will reply , ‘ Do not listen to me , for I will never listen to you . '
GOLD:	But I will reply , ‘ I never knew you . Get away from me , you who break God 's laws . '

ID:	745
INPUT:	▁Benjaminen ▁leinua ▁ber piztu
PRED:	The Tribe of Benjamin
GOLD:	Israel Provides Wives for Benjamin

ID:	746
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁etiopi arrak ▁agertu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— Berri ▁onak ▁dakar z kizu t , ▁ene ▁errege ▁jauna . ▁Alde ▁atera ▁zaizu ▁gaur ▁Jauna ▁eta ▁libratu ▁zaitu ▁aurka ▁jaiki tako ▁guztien ▁eskuetatik .
PRED:	“ Come , ” the man said , “ I have given you victory over you ! ” And the Lord said to you , “ I have rescued you from all your enemies . ”
GOLD:	Then the man from Ethiopia arrived and said , “ I have good news for my lord the king . Today the Lord has rescued you from all those who rebelled against you . ”

ID:	747
INPUT:	▁ ( Zuek , ▁orain ▁bizi ▁zaretenok , entzun ▁arduraz ▁Jaunaren ▁hitza ) . Israel , ▁eremu ▁soil bihurtu ▁ote ▁naiz ▁zuretzat ? Ala ▁beti ▁ilunpe ▁bel tzean da goen ▁lurralde ? Zergatik ▁diote ▁nire ▁herritarrek :“ Nahi ▁duguna ▁egingo ▁dugu , ez ▁g atzaiz kizu ▁inoiz ▁ere ▁itzuliko ?”
PRED:	“ But now , you who live in the presence of the Lord , the God of Israel , says the Lord , “ Why have you done to you ? Why have you done to me ? Why have you done to me ? ”
GOLD:	“ O my people , listen to the words of the Lord ! Have I been like a desert to Israel ? Have I been to them a land of darkness ? Why then do my people say , ‘ At last we are free from God ! We do n't need him anymore ! '

ID:	748
INPUT:	▁Bien ▁bitartean , ▁Amatziasek ▁berekin ▁gudura ▁eraman ▁ordez ▁etxera ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁gudari - taldea ▁Judako ▁hirietan ▁barrena ▁ibili ▁zen , ▁Samariatik ▁Bet - Horon eraino , ▁hiru ▁mila ▁pertsona ▁hilez ▁eta ▁harrapakin ▁ugari ▁os tuz .
PRED:	When Amaziah led his army into battle , he sent the army of Judah to attack the towns of Samaria .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the hired troops that Amaziah had sent home raided several of the towns of Judah between Samaria and Beth-horon . They killed 3,000 people and carried off great quantities of plunder .

ID:	749
INPUT:	▁Jaunarengandik ▁dator kit ▁laguntza , zeru - lurrak ▁egin ▁zituen agandik .
PRED:	For he created them from the Lord , and he created them from heaven .
GOLD:	My help comes from the Lord , who made heaven and earth !

ID:	750
INPUT:	▁« Zorionekoa ▁Jainkoak ▁zentzarazten ▁duen ▁gizakia ! Ez ▁mespretxatu ▁Ahaltsuaren ▁heziketa .
PRED:	“ How joyful are those who obey the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ But consider the joy of those corrected by God ! Do not despise the discipline of the Almighty when you sin .

ID:	751
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁arduratzen ▁da ▁pres tuen ▁bizitzaz eta ▁beren ▁ondarearen ▁jabe ▁izango ▁dira ▁betiko .
PRED:	The Lord gives me victory to the grave ; they will be given to the rest of the godly .
GOLD:	Day by day the Lord takes care of the innocent , and they will receive an inheritance that lasts forever .

ID:	752
INPUT:	▁Or dua ▁etorri ▁zenean , ▁Jesus ▁mahaian ▁jarri ▁zen ▁apostolu ekin .
PRED:	When Jesus arrived at the table , he went to the table with the apostles .
GOLD:	When the time came , Jesus and the apostles sat down together at the table .

ID:	753
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁horretarako ▁bidaltzen ▁dizuet ▁Timoteo , ▁neure ▁seme ▁maite ▁eta ▁kristau ▁zintzoa . ▁Berak ▁gogoratuko ▁dizkizue ▁kristau - bizitz arako ▁nire ▁burubideak , ▁eliz ▁elkarte ▁guztiei ▁han ▁eta ▁hemen ▁irakasten ▁dizkiedan ▁bezala .
PRED:	I am sending Timothy to Timothy , and I love you to obey the Good News . He loves all my people and sisters , so that I am writing to all the churches .
GOLD:	That 's why I have sent Timothy , my beloved and faithful child in the Lord . He will remind you of how I follow Christ Jesus , just as I teach in all the churches wherever I go .

ID:	754
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁maitasuna ▁izan ▁bedi ▁itxurak eri arik ▁gabea ; ▁gorrotatu ▁gaizkia ▁eta ▁itsats i ▁ongi ari .
PRED:	Your love is pure with your unfailing love ; your unfailing love is pure .
GOLD:	Do n't just pretend to love others . Really love them . Hate what is wrong . Hold tightly to what is good .

ID:	755
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Ikusten ▁duzue ▁hori ▁guztia , ▁ezta ? ▁Ba , ▁benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Ez ▁da ▁hemen ▁harririk ▁harri ▁gainean ▁geldituko : ▁dena ▁suntsituko ▁dute ».
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Do n't all these things ? Do n't let them be broken , and you will be completely completely completely completely completely destroyed . ”
GOLD:	But he responded , “ Do you see all these buildings ? I tell you the truth , they will be completely demolished . Not one stone will be left on top of another ! ”

ID:	756
INPUT:	▁Garai ▁hartan , ▁profezi ▁dohaina ▁zuten ▁senide ▁batzuk ▁jaitsi ▁ziren ▁Jerusalemdik ▁Antiokiara .
PRED:	At that time the Spirit came to Antioch , some of the believers came to Antioch of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	During this time some prophets traveled from Jerusalem to Antioch .

ID:	757
INPUT:	▁Orain ▁den ▁guztia izen datua ▁zuen ▁jadanik ▁Jainkoak eta ▁bazekien ▁zer ▁den ▁gizona . Ezin ▁dio ▁gizonak ▁auzian ▁aurre ▁egin bera ▁baino ▁indartsuagoa ▁denari .
PRED:	So now , God called his friends , and he is going to speak to his brother , and he is going to speak .
GOLD:	Everything has already been decided . It was known long ago what each person would be . So there 's no use arguing with God about your destiny .

ID:	758
INPUT:	▁Israelen ▁itsus keriak ▁egin ▁dituztelako ▁gertatuko ▁zaie ▁hori : ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ▁emaztearekin ▁adulterio ▁egin ▁eta ▁nik ▁agindu ▁gabeko ▁gezurrezko ▁mezua ▁nire ▁izenean ▁iragarri ▁dutelako . ▁Neuk ▁dakit ▁hori ▁eta ▁neu ▁naiz ▁horren ▁testigu . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ This is what the man says : I have said , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I am saying , ‘ I have spoken ! ' ”
GOLD:	For these men have done terrible things among my people . They have committed adultery with their neighbors ' wives and have lied in my name , saying things I did not command . I am a witness to this . I , the Lord , have spoken . ”

ID:	759
INPUT:	▁Absalomek ▁agindu ▁bezala , ▁morroiek ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuten ▁Amnon . ▁Errege - seme ▁guztiek ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁nork ▁bere ▁mando z ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	So Absalom did as Absalom had commanded . So all his men , all his young men had fled to her .
GOLD:	So at Absalom 's signal they murdered Amnon . Then the other sons of the king jumped on their mules and fled .

ID:	760
INPUT:	▁Zuzen bidez ▁eta ▁justiziaz ▁jokatu ▁dut : ez ▁utzi ▁ni ▁zapal tzaileen ▁esku .
PRED:	For I have done good , O Lord , for I have turned away from the wicked .
GOLD:	Do n't leave me to the mercy of my enemies , for I have done what is just and right .

ID:	761
INPUT:	▁« D an - ek ▁bere ▁herria du ▁gobernatuko , Israelgo ▁beste ▁leinuek ▁bezala .
PRED:	“ In this way , the people of Israel will rule over the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Dan will govern his people , like any other tribe in Israel .

ID:	762
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁Jainko , ▁iker ▁nazazu ▁eta ▁ezagutu ▁nire ▁bihotza , pro ba ▁nazazu ▁eta ▁ezagutu ▁nire ▁ardur ak .
PRED:	O God , listen to me , O God , and I know that I am coming .
GOLD:	Search me , O God , and know my heart ; test me and know my anxious thoughts .

ID:	763
INPUT:	▁Han , ▁basamortuan , ▁elkarte ▁osoa ▁marmarrean ▁hasi ▁zen ▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaronen ▁aurka ,
PRED:	When Moses saw the whole community , Moses began to burn up the wilderness of Aaron and Aaron .
GOLD:	There , too , the whole community of Israel complained about Moses and Aaron .

ID:	764
INPUT:	▁igel ts ero ▁eta ▁har gin ei . ▁Orobat ▁erosi ▁ahal ▁izan ▁zituzten ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁hondaketak ▁konpontzeko ▁behar ▁ziren ▁ohol ▁eta ▁harlan duak , ▁baita ▁ordaindu ▁ere ▁tenpluaren ▁konpon k etako ▁gas tu ▁guztiak .
PRED:	They asked , “ They need to build the Temple of the Lord , and they decided to build the Temple of the Lord . They must pay the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	The money brought to the Temple was not used for making silver bowls , lamp snuffers , basins , trumpets , or other articles of gold or silver for the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	765
INPUT:	▁Ehun tariak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Jauna , ▁ni ▁ez ▁naiz ▁inor ▁zu ▁nire ▁etxean ▁sartzeko ; ▁aski ▁duzu ▁hitz ▁bat ▁esatea , ▁nire ▁morroia ▁sendatzeko .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I am the Lord , Lord , ” the man replied . “ There is no one who comes to the house of my servant , and those who say to me . ”
GOLD:	But the officer said , “ Lord , I am not worthy to have you come into my home . Just say the word from where you are , and my servant will be healed .

ID:	766
INPUT:	▁Abram ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldean ▁jarri ▁zen ▁bizitzen , ▁eta ▁Lot ▁ib arreko ▁hirietan . ▁Honen ▁oihal - etxolak ▁Sodoma ▁ber taraino ▁hedatzen ▁ziren .
PRED:	Abram settled there in the land of Canaan , where Abram had settled in the towns of Canaan . He went down to the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	767
INPUT:	▁Argi tzen ▁eta ▁azaltzen ▁badizki dazue , ▁ordea , ▁emaitzez , ▁erregal uz ▁eta ▁ohorez ▁beteko ▁zaituztet . ▁Az aldu , ▁beraz , ▁ametsa ▁eta ▁beronen ▁esanahia .
PRED:	If you give me a dream , I will give me this message to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But if you tell me what I dreamed and what the dream means , I will give you many wonderful gifts and honors . Just tell me the dream and what it means ! ”

ID:	768
INPUT:	▁Uz taroa ▁zen , ▁eta ▁urte - saso i ▁horretan ▁Jordan ▁ibaia ▁gainezka ▁etorri ▁ohi ▁da . ▁Kutxa ▁zeramaten ▁apaizak ▁Jordanera ▁heldu ▁eta ▁haien ▁oinek ▁ur - ertza ▁ukitu ▁bezain ▁laster ,
PRED:	The end of the Jordan River , when the priests arrived in the Jordan River , the Ark of the Jordan River came to the Jordan River , and the Ark of the Jordan River came to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	It was the harvest season , and the Jordan was overflowing its banks . But as soon as the feet of the priests who were carrying the Ark touched the water at the river 's edge ,

ID:	769
INPUT:	▁orain , ▁ordea , ▁Jainkoa ▁ezagutu ▁duzu elarik ▁edota , ▁hobeki ▁esan , ▁Jainkoak ▁ezagutu ▁zaituzte larik , ▁n olatan ▁itzultzen ▁zarete ▁berriro ▁fun tsik ▁eta ▁indarrik ▁gabeko ▁mundu tar ▁erre al ita te etara ? ▁Berriro ▁ere ▁berauen ▁menpeko ▁izan ▁nahi ▁ote ▁duzue ?
PRED:	But you know what God says : ‘ Do n't be afraid , ' God said , ‘ This is what the Lord says : If you have turned away from the world , how can we go to the world ? '
GOLD:	So now that you know God ( or should I say , now that God knows you ) , why do you want to go back again and become slaves once more to the weak and useless spiritual principles of this world ?

ID:	770
INPUT:	▁Bazuen ▁Saulek ▁R itz pa ▁izeneko ▁ohaide ▁bat , ▁A ia - ren ▁alaba . ▁Ix - Boxetek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Abnerri :— Zergatik ▁oheratu ▁zara ▁gure ▁aitaren ▁ohaide arekin ?
PRED:	When Saul arrived , he was a man named Ishbosheth , she named Abner . “ Why have you a daughter ? ” Saul asked . “ Why are you ? ”
GOLD:	One day Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , accused Abner of sleeping with one of his father 's concubines , a woman named Rizpah , daughter of Aiah .

ID:	771
INPUT:	▁Itur riaren ▁aurrera ▁heltzean , ▁Daviden ▁Hiriko ▁har mail etan ▁gora ▁igo ▁ziren , ▁harres iko ▁aldapan ▁gora , ▁Daviden ▁etxearen ▁gain aldetik , ▁ekialderantz , ▁Ur - ateraino ▁heldu ▁arte .
PRED:	When they arrived at the town of the city , they went out to the town of the town of David , they went out to the valley of David .
GOLD:	At the Fountain Gate they went straight up the steps on the ascent of the city wall toward the City of David . They passed the house of David and then proceeded to the Water Gate on the east .

ID:	772
INPUT:	▁Henok ▁izan ▁zuenetik , ▁beste ▁zortziehun ▁urtez ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zen , ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁izan ▁zituen .
PRED:	Enoch lived another years old , and he lived another 403 years .
GOLD:	After the birth of Enoch , Jared lived another 800 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	773
INPUT:	▁O pa ▁biezaiote ▁bakea ▁Jerusalemi :« Lasai ▁bizi ▁bitez ▁maite ▁zaituztenak !
PRED:	“ Take peace for your relatives , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Pray for peace in Jerusalem.May all who love this city prosper .

ID:	774
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁eratu ▁didazu ▁gorputza , zuk ▁zaindu ▁nauzu ▁amaren ▁sabeletik .
PRED:	You have made me your mother , and your mother was born in the womb .
GOLD:	You made all the delicate , inner parts of my bodyand knit me together in my mother 's womb .

ID:	775
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁ikasleei ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Iri tsiko ▁zaizue ▁Gizonaren ▁Semearen ▁etor rerako ▁egun ▁bat ▁bederen ▁ikusi ▁nahi ▁izango ▁duzuen ▁garaia , ▁baina ▁ez ▁duzue ▁ikusiko .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Let us go out to the Son of Man , ” he said . “ If you see the time of the Son of Man is coming , you will see that day . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The time is coming when you will long to see the day when the Son of Man returns , but you wo n't see it .

ID:	776
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁gaiztakeria ▁hauen ▁guztien ▁ondoren ▁— Ai ▁ene , ▁zoritx arrekoa ▁zu ! , ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak —
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O Lord , O God , and I will destroy all the nations , says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , says the Sovereign Lord . In addition to all your other wickedness ,

ID:	777
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak :« Kon ts ola ▁ezazue , konts olatu ▁nire ▁herria !
PRED:	This is what God says : “ Listen to my people , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Comfort , comfort my people , ” says your God .

ID:	778
INPUT:	▁Sin ets ▁iezadazue : ▁ni ▁Aitarekin ▁bat ▁eginda ▁nago ▁eta ▁Aita ▁nirekin . ▁Bes terik ▁ez ▁bada , ▁sinetsi ▁egiten ▁ditudan ▁egintzengatik .
PRED:	He said to me , “ I am the Father who believes in me . I believe that my Father is in me . ”
GOLD:	Just believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me . Or at least believe because of the work you have seen me do .

ID:	779
INPUT:	▁Itzuli ▁zen ▁bigarren ▁aldiz ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua , ▁ukitu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Jaiki ▁eta ▁jan , ▁oso ▁bide ▁luzea ▁baituzu ».
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord came to the Lord and said to him , “ Get up , and eat it very long . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord came again and touched him and said , “ Get up and eat some more , or the journey ahead will be too much for you . ”

ID:	780
INPUT:	▁« Horregatik , ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁zin ▁dagit ▁neure ▁biziarengatik , ▁zeure ▁idolatria ▁eta ▁jokaera ▁higuingarri az ▁nire ▁santutegia ▁kutsatu ▁duzulako , ▁nik ▁ere ▁baztertu ▁egingo ▁zaitudala ; ▁ez ▁dizut ▁batere ▁errukirik ▁izango , ▁ezta ▁barkatuko ▁ere .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : If you live , you must worship other gods and worship other gods , you must not worship other gods . You have not abandoned me .
GOLD:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will cut you off completely . I will show you no pity at all because you have defiled my Temple with your vile images and detestable sins .

ID:	781
INPUT:	▁Mu ino ▁eder , ▁lur ▁osoaren ▁pozgarri ! Sion ▁mendi , ▁Jainkoaren ▁egoitza , ▁errege ▁handiaren ▁hiri !
PRED:	O God , all the nations of Zion ; there is a great place of honor .
GOLD:	God himself is in Jerusalem 's towers , revealing himself as its defender .

ID:	782
INPUT:	▁Balaamek ▁erantzun :— Jaunak ▁adierazi takoa ▁behar ▁dut ▁esan .
PRED:	Balaam replied , “ I 've told you what the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	But Balaam replied , “ I will speak only the message that the Lord puts in my mouth . ”

ID:	783
INPUT:	▁Ga taz kak ▁filistearren ▁aurka
PRED:	A Warning against Philistia
GOLD:	Battles against Philistine Giants

ID:	784
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁harentzat ▁munduan ▁ezer ▁gorderik ; ▁dena ▁dago ▁agerian ▁eta ▁zabalik , ▁kontuak ▁eman ▁beharko ▁dizkio gun ▁harentzat .
PRED:	He does n't let them rejoice in the world , for he has given them victory over them .
GOLD:	Nothing in all creation is hidden from God . Everything is naked and exposed before his eyes , and he is the one to whom we are accountable .

ID:	785
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Pilatoren ▁aurrean
PRED:	Jesus before Pilate
GOLD:	The Soldiers Mock Jesus

ID:	786
INPUT:	▁maite ▁duenari ▁egiten ▁baitio ▁Jaunak ▁agiraka , ai tak ▁seme ▁kutun ari ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	For the Lord loves those who love the Lord , who love him .
GOLD:	For the Lord corrects those he loves , just as a father corrects a child in whom he delights .

ID:	787
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁seme , ▁gorde ▁zentzu tasuna ▁eta ▁ohar mena , ez ▁itzazu ▁ken ▁zeure ▁aurretik ;
PRED:	My son , listen to what you do , and do n't let them go ahead to you .
GOLD:	My child , do n't lose sight of common sense and discernment.Hang on to them ,

ID:	788
INPUT:	▁eta ▁morroiari ▁galdegin :— Nor ▁da ▁landan ▁zehar ▁bidera ▁datorki gun ▁gizon ▁hori ? M orro iak ▁erantzun :— Ene ▁nagusia . Orduan , ▁Rebekak ▁bere ▁aurpegia ▁estali ▁zuen ▁zapi ▁batez .
PRED:	“ Who is the man ? ” he asked . “ Who is this man ? ” So she replied , “ I have seen with you ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master. ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	789
INPUT:	▁Agindu ▁guri , ▁jauna , ▁zeure ▁esanetara ▁gaituzu ▁zeure ▁zerbitzariok ; ▁bil atuko ▁dugu ▁zitara ▁jotzen ▁dakien ▁norbait . ▁Horrela , ▁Jaunak ▁bidalitako ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoak ▁eraso ▁diez azun ean , ▁hark ▁zitara ▁jo ▁eta ▁on ▁egingo ▁dizu .
PRED:	Therefore , O Lord , you have your servants , your servants , and your servants will come to the Lord your God , and you will stand firm in your presence .
GOLD:	Let us find a good musician to play the harp whenever the tormenting spirit troubles you . He will play soothing music , and you will soon be well again . ”

ID:	790
INPUT:	▁astoak ▁ 30 . 500 ,
PRED:	Procedures for silver .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys ,

ID:	791
INPUT:	▁eta ▁gaizki - esaka ▁hasi ▁ziren ▁Jainkoaren ▁eta ▁Moisesen ▁aurka : ▁« Zertarako ▁atera ▁gintu zuen ▁Egiptotik ? ▁Basamortuan ▁hilarazteko ? ▁Ez ▁dugu ▁urik , ▁ez ▁j akirik , ▁eta ▁mana ▁delako ▁janari ▁kaskar ▁honetaz ▁asper - as per ▁eginak ▁gaude !»
PRED:	When they arrived at the wilderness , they said to Moses , “ Why are you angry with us ? We have we brought us into the wilderness of Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	and they began to speak against God and Moses . “ Why have you brought us out of Egypt to die here in the wilderness ? ” they complained . “ There is nothing to eat here and nothing to drink . And we hate this horrible manna ! ”

ID:	792
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Josek , ▁ama ▁berarengan diko ▁senide ▁zuen ▁Benjaminen gan ▁begiak ▁jarririk , ▁esan ▁zuen :— Hori ▁al ▁da ▁zuek ▁aipatu ▁zenidaten ▁anaia ▁gazteena ? ▁Be j on dai ala , ▁seme !
PRED:	When Joseph saw that Joseph was in the land of Benjamin , he said to him , “ Where is your brother ? ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph looked at his brother Benjamin , the son of his own mother . “ Is this your youngest brother , the one you told me about ? ” Joseph asked . “ May God be gracious to you , my son . ”

ID:	793
INPUT:	▁Ez tia ▁eskuan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁bidean ▁jan ez ▁joan ▁zen ▁aita - amen gana ; ▁eman ▁zien ▁eztia ▁eta ▁jan ▁zuten ▁haiek ▁ere . ▁Baina ▁ez ▁zien ▁esan ▁ezti ▁hura ▁lehoiaren ▁hezur ▁artetik ▁hartua ▁zuenik .
PRED:	He did not eat or drink from the road to eat . But they ate it . But they did not eat the honey from their father and honey . But they did not commit adultery .
GOLD:	He scooped some of the honey into his hands and ate it along the way . He also gave some to his father and mother , and they ate it . But he did n't tell them he had taken the honey from the carcass of the lion .

ID:	794
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁ezarri ▁zueneko ▁lur saila ▁Sikemgo ▁buruzagi ▁zen ▁Ham orren ▁semeei ▁erosi ▁zien , ▁zilarrezko ▁ehun ▁txanpon ▁ordainduz .
PRED:	He set the courtyard of the family of Shechem in the courtyard of King Abimelech 's sons . He overlaid it with silver for silver .
GOLD:	Jacob bought the plot of land where he camped from the family of Hamor , the father of Shechem , for 100 pieces of silver .

ID:	795
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Danielen ▁salatzaileak ▁ekartzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen ▁erregeak , ▁eta ▁lehoi - zulora ▁jaurti ▁zituzten ▁beren ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabekin ▁batera . ▁Eta ▁zulo ▁barren era ▁heldu ▁baino ▁lehen , ▁lehoi ek ▁beren ▁atzap arretan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁txiki - txiki ▁egin ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Then the king ordered the men to bring their swords and threw them into their hands . They threw them into their hands on their heads , and their heads and their heads .
GOLD:	Then King Darius sent this message to the people of every race and nation and language throughout the world : “ Peace and prosperity to you !

ID:	796
INPUT:	▁halako ari ▁eus tea ▁haizeari ▁eus tea eta ▁eskuaz ▁olioa ▁hartzea ▁bezala ▁da .
PRED:	When the wind blows the Ammonites , he burned them in the morning .
GOLD:	Stopping her complaints is like trying to stop the windor trying to hold something with greased hands .

ID:	797
INPUT:	▁Herria ▁erbestetik ▁itzuli
PRED:	Israel 's Return to Israel
GOLD:	A Taunt for Babylon 's King

ID:	798
INPUT:	▁ F ede aren ▁ahalmena : ▁ep ilep tiko aren ▁sendak eta
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy

ID:	799
INPUT:	▁jantzi ▁dotore , ▁mantu , le p oko ▁zapi ▁eta ▁pol tsak , g ona ▁fin , ▁dur ban te ▁eta ▁man tilak .
PRED:	She is clothed with fine linen clothing , and she is covered with fine linen .
GOLD:	party clothes , gowns , capes , and purses ;

ID:	800
INPUT:	▁egun ▁horretan ▁egingo ▁baita ▁zuen ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea , ▁garbi ▁zaitezten ; ▁bekatu ▁guztietatik ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁zarete ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	In this day , you will be pure with the sin of the Lord , and you will be ceremonially clean before the Lord .
GOLD:	On that day offerings of purification will be made for you , and you will be purified in the Lord 's presence from all your sins .

ID:	801
INPUT:	▁Jende - multzo ▁handi ek ▁jarraitu ▁zioten ▁eta ▁Jesusek ▁gaixoak ▁sendatu ▁zizkien .
PRED:	The crowd followed the crowd , and the crowds followed the sick .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him there , and he healed their sick .

ID:	802
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁neure ▁osasuna ▁zela - eta ▁nekagarri ▁izan ▁banintz aiz uen ▁ere , ▁zuek ▁ez ▁ninduzuen ▁mespretxatu , ▁ez ▁gaitzetsi ; ▁bestela ▁baizik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezulari tzat ▁hartu ▁ninduzuen , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁bera ▁banintz ▁bezala .
PRED:	But when I was in my heart , I would not give you a little while I was with you . But you would not forget the sake of God Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	But even though my condition tempted you to reject me , you did not despise me or turn me away . No , you took me in and cared for me as though I were an angel from God or even Christ Jesus himself .

ID:	803
INPUT:	▁Axdod ▁eta ▁Gaza ▁eta ▁beraien ▁herri ▁eta ▁herrixkak , ▁Egiptoko ▁errekaraino . ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoa ▁zen ▁muga .
PRED:	and all the surrounding nations were in the land of Egypt and its surrounding villages . It was the southern border of Egypt .
GOLD:	It also included Ashdod with its surrounding settlements and villages and Gaza with its settlements and villages , as far as the Brook of Egypt and along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea .

ID:	804
INPUT:	▁eta ▁arkume ▁bakoitzeko ▁lau ▁kilo .
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .
GOLD:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	805
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁da Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁mahastia ; Judako ▁herria , haren ▁landare - sail ▁kutuna . Zuzen bidea ▁espero ▁zuen haren gandik , eta ▁horra : ▁zuzen gabekeria ! J ustizia ▁espero ▁zuen , eta ▁horra : ▁aien eak !
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ His unfailing love is gone , for I was filled with joy .
GOLD:	The nation of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people of Judah are his pleasant garden.He expected a crop of justice , but instead he found oppression.He expected to find righteousness , but instead he heard cries of violence .

ID:	806
INPUT:	▁zeure ▁goi - gel etan ▁pilatzen ▁ura ; hodei ▁gainean ▁ko katzen ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁kar ro za , haize - hegal etan ▁zabiltza .
PRED:	For you see the earth , O God of Heaven 's Armies , a mighty wind is covered with rain .
GOLD:	you lay out the rafters of your home in the rain clouds.You make the clouds your chariot ; you ride upon the wings of the wind .

ID:	807
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁agertuko ▁diot ▁zenbat ▁sufritu ▁beharko ▁duen ▁niregatik .
PRED:	Yes , I will suffer for you , and I will suffer for you .
GOLD:	And I will show him how much he must suffer for my name 's sake . ”

ID:	808
INPUT:	▁profeta ▁bat ▁bidali ▁zien ▁Jaunak , ▁esatera : ▁« Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Nik ▁ekarri ▁zaituztet ▁Egiptotik ▁eta ▁nik ▁atera ▁esklabotzatik .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent this message to Moses : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the God of Israel , says : I will bring you out of Egypt . '
GOLD:	the Lord sent a prophet to the Israelites . He said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I brought you up out of slavery in Egypt .

ID:	809
INPUT:	▁Jerusalem , garbi tu ▁zeure ▁barruko ▁gaiztakeria , bizirik ▁atera ▁nahi ▁baduzu . Noiz ▁arte izango ▁ote ▁dituzu ▁zeure ▁baitan buru bide ▁gaizto ▁horiek ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits your sins ? How long will you be destroyed ? How long will you be destroyed ? How long will you be destroyed ?
GOLD:	O Jerusalem , cleanse your heartthat you may be saved.How long will you harboryour evil thoughts ?

ID:	810
INPUT:	▁Biz irako ▁bidea ▁erakutsiko ▁didazu : alai tasun ▁betea ▁zure ▁aurrean , ▁betiko ▁zoriona ▁zure ▁ondoan .
PRED:	I will give you the way to the way of your salvation , and you will walk in the presence of your presence .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	811
INPUT:	▁U rez ▁ase ▁dira ▁Jaunaren ▁zuhaitzak , hark ▁landaturiko ▁Libanoko ▁zedroak ;
PRED:	The trees of the Lord is filled with cedars ; the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	The trees of the Lord are well cared for — the cedars of Lebanon that he planted .

ID:	812
INPUT:	▁« Ea , ▁jan ▁nire ▁ogia ▁eta ▁edan ▁nik ▁nahastu riko ▁ardoa .
PRED:	“ Get up and drink , and drink the food I drink .
GOLD:	“ Come , eat my food , and drink the wine I have mixed .

ID:	813
INPUT:	▁Le inu ▁bakar rarekin ▁geldituko ▁da ▁hura , ▁eta ▁hori ▁ere ▁David ▁ene ▁zerbitzari agatik ▁eta ▁Israelgo ▁hiri ▁guztien ▁artetik ▁hautatu ▁dudan ▁Jerusalem ▁hiri arengatik .
PRED:	In this way , David will be chosen , and I will bring my servant David and my servant David .
GOLD:	But I will leave him one tribe for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem , which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel .

ID:	814
INPUT:	▁« Etxe ▁batean ▁sartzean , ▁esan : ▁« Bakea ▁zuekin »;
PRED:	“ When you cross the cave , you will say , ‘ May you be with you . '
GOLD:	When you enter the home , give it your blessing .

ID:	815
INPUT:	▁Merari tarren ▁ardurapean ▁zeuden ▁egoitzako ▁oholak , ▁zehar - egurrak , ▁zutabeak , ▁oinak ▁eta ▁beste ▁os agai ▁guztiak ;
PRED:	These were the frames of the Tabernacle , frames , frames , and the crossbars .
GOLD:	These two clans were responsible for the care of the frames supporting the Tabernacle , the crossbars , the pillars , the bases , and all the equipment related to their use .

ID:	816
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁zuen ▁inoren ▁aitorpen - beh arrik , ▁ongi ▁ezagutzen ▁baitzuen ▁berak ▁gizakiaren ▁baitan ▁dagoena .
PRED:	He did n't know anyone else , for he does n't know what he was right .
GOLD:	No one needed to tell him about human nature , for he knew what was in each person 's heart .

ID:	817
INPUT:	▁« Norbaitek ▁bere ▁alaba ▁esklabotzat ▁saltzen ▁badu , ▁ez ▁da ▁libre ▁geldituko ▁beste ▁esklab oen ▁erara .
PRED:	“ If a virgin daughter refuses to marry her , he must not be his slave .
GOLD:	“ When a man sells his daughter as a slave , she will not be freed at the end of six years as the men are .

ID:	818
INPUT:	▁Nikode m ok ▁galdetu :— Nola ▁jaio ▁daiteke ▁norbait , ▁jadanik ▁zaharra ▁izanik ? ▁Sar ▁ote ▁daiteke ▁amaren ▁sabelean ▁eta ▁berriro ▁jaio ?
PRED:	“ How can you be born ? ” Nicodemus asked . “ How long will a baby baby baby baby baby baby ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean ? ” exclaimed Nicodemus . “ How can an old man go back into his mother 's womb and be born again ? ”

ID:	819
INPUT:	▁Lan ean ▁arazoak
PRED:	Instructions for the Priests
GOLD:	The Ironies of Life

ID:	820
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁lapurrak ▁mespretx urik ▁merezi , gosea ▁kentzeko ▁os ten ▁badu .
PRED:	But if the wicked are left , the rich person is left , they will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Excuses might be found for a thiefwho steals because he is starving .

ID:	821
INPUT:	▁Izen datu ▁zioten , ▁beraz , ▁egun ▁bat , ▁eta ▁asko ▁joan ▁zitzaizkion ▁bera ▁zegoen ▁etxera . ▁Paulo ▁Jainkoaren ▁erregetzaren ▁azalpena ▁eta ▁testigantza ▁egiten ▁jardun ▁zitzaien ▁goizetik ▁arrats aldera ▁eta , ▁Moisesen ▁legea ▁eta ▁profetak ▁oinarri ▁hartuz , ▁Jesusen ▁mezua ▁sines tarazten ▁ahalegindu ▁zen .
PRED:	So they preached the word of God , and many days they went to the Jewish leaders . They preached the word of God and preached the law of Moses .
GOLD:	So a time was set , and on that day a large number of people came to Paul 's lodging . He explained and testified about the Kingdom of God and tried to persuade them about Jesus from the Scriptures . Using the law of Moses and the books of the prophets , he spoke to them from morning until evening .

ID:	822
INPUT:	▁« K artz ela ▁arreta ▁guztiaz ▁itxia ▁aurkitu ▁dugu ▁eta ▁zaintzaileak ▁ateetan ▁erne , ▁baina ▁ireki tzean ▁barruan ▁ez ▁dugu ▁inor ▁aurkitu ».
PRED:	“ Be quiet ! We found everything in the night , but we found no one on the gates , but we found no one on the gates . ”
GOLD:	“ The jail was securely locked , with the guards standing outside , but when we opened the gates , no one was there ! ”

ID:	823
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁morroien ▁begiak ▁nagusien ▁eskuetara , nola ▁neskam earen ▁begiak ▁etxekoandre aren ▁eskuetara , halaxe ▁daude ▁gure ▁begiak Jaunarengana , ▁gure ▁Jainkoarengana , haren ▁errukia ▁iritsi ▁zain .
PRED:	Who is the one who has been blind to the woman , for she has been able to save him . He is faithful to God , who has mercy on our behalf .
GOLD:	We keep looking to the Lord our God for his mercy , just as servants keep their eyes on their master , as a slave girl watches her mistress for the slightest signal .

ID:	824
INPUT:	▁Neska ▁heldu ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁aitari ▁lursail ▁bat ▁eskatzera ▁bultzatu ▁zuen ▁Otni elek . ▁Neska ▁asto ▁gainetik ▁jaitsi ▁zenean , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁aitak :— Zer ▁nahi ▁dun ?
PRED:	When she returned to her father , she asked her father to ask her to ask her , “ What do you do ? ” she asked . “ What do you want to do ? ”
GOLD:	When Acsah married Othniel , she urged him to ask her father for a field . As she got down off her donkey , Caleb asked her , “ What 's the matter ? ”

ID:	825
INPUT:	▁Zen batez inak ▁dira ▁haren ▁gudarosteak , guztien ▁gain ▁altxatzen ▁haren ▁argia .
PRED:	From the end of the people of the godly cause him to the light .
GOLD:	Who is able to count his heavenly army ? Does n't his light shine on all the earth ?

ID:	826
INPUT:	▁Aspaldi tik ▁ira garriak ▁nituen gertatu ▁direnak , neuk ▁hitzeman ▁nituen ▁eta ▁adierazi ; bat - batean ▁ekin ▁nion eta ▁denak ▁gertatu .
PRED:	When I heard the Lord , I said , “ I have spoken to you , I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Long ago I told you what was going to happen.Then suddenly I took action , and all my predictions came true .

ID:	827
INPUT:	▁Hitz aldia ▁bukatu rik , ▁belauniko ▁jarri ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen ▁beste ▁guztiekin ▁batera .
PRED:	Then he finished finished speaking and prayed to the other prayer .
GOLD:	When he had finished speaking , he knelt and prayed with them .

ID:	828
INPUT:	▁aurrez ▁aurre ▁eten gab ei rain tzen ▁nauen ▁herriaren gana : b aratze ▁sakratu etan sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzen ▁dituzteeta ▁adre il uzko ▁aldare etan intsentsua ▁erretzen ,
PRED:	When he comes to me , I will bring my people back to the people of Israel , they offer sacrifices to idols in front of the altar .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	829
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁moztu ▁ile - adats aren ▁er tzak ▁inguru ▁guztian , ▁ezta ▁biz arraren ▁er tzak ▁ere .
PRED:	The hair of the hair must not be cut down on the sides of the crime .
GOLD:	“ Do not trim off the hair on your temples or trim your beards .

ID:	830
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	831
INPUT:	▁Gutun ak ▁igorri ▁zituen ▁erreinuko ▁eskualde ▁guztietara , ▁eskualde ▁bakoitzeko ▁idaz keran ▁eta ▁herri ▁bakoitzeko ▁hiz keran ▁emanak , ▁gizaseme ▁guztiak ▁nor ▁bere ▁etxeko ▁nagusi ▁izan ▁zitezen ▁aginduz .
PRED:	He sent a decree to write on the throne of the kingdom of King Darius . He will write on the throne of all the kingdoms of the empire .
GOLD:	He sent letters to all parts of the empire , to each province in its own script and language , proclaiming that every man should be the ruler of his own home and should say whatever he pleases .

ID:	832
INPUT:	▁Luzatu ▁zuen ▁Moisesek ▁eskua ▁itsaso ▁gainera ▁eta , ▁Jaunak ▁eraginda , ▁ekialdeko ▁haize ▁indartsuak ▁jo ▁zuen ▁gau ▁osoan . ▁Haizeak ▁itsasoa ▁lehortu ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁urak ▁bi ▁multz otan ▁ban atuz .
PRED:	Then Moses raised his hand into the sea , and the Lord raised his hand into the sea . He threw the sea into the sea , and the sea into the sea .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand over the sea , and the Lord opened up a path through the water with a strong east wind . The wind blew all that night , turning the seabed into dry land .

ID:	833
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁alai ▁nago ▁ni ▁Jaunarekin , poz aren ▁pozez salba tzaile ▁dudan ▁Jainkoarekin .
PRED:	But I am glad , for I trust in the Lord , for I trust in the Lord .
GOLD:	yet I will rejoice in the Lord ! I will be joyful in the God of my salvation !

ID:	834
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ▁hartu ▁duen erabakia ▁nork ▁galarazi ? Jaunak ▁luz atua ▁duen ▁esku ar inork ▁atzera ▁eragin ?»
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , is the one who has been able to save us ? ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken — who can change his plans ? When his hand is raised , who can stop him ? ”

ID:	835
INPUT:	▁Zeren , ▁bihotzez ▁sinesten ▁duena ▁onartu ▁egiten ▁baitu ▁Jainkoak , ▁eta ▁ahoz ▁aitortzen ▁duena ▁salbatu ▁egiten ▁da .
PRED:	For those who believe God does what is right with those who believe him .
GOLD:	For it is by believing in your heart that you are made right with God , and it is by openly declaring your faith that you are saved .

ID:	836
INPUT:	▁Gizaki aren ▁ek intzak ▁gizakia gan ▁eragin a
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies
GOLD:	Elihu Reminds Job of God 's Justice

ID:	837
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jainkoaren ▁izena ▁kantuz ▁goretsiko ▁dut , es ker ▁onez ▁handi ets iko .
PRED:	Then I will praise the name of God ; I will praise you .
GOLD:	For this will please the Lord more than sacrificing cattle , more than presenting a bull with its horns and hooves .

ID:	838
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁duzu ▁sexu - harremanik ▁izango ▁zeure ▁errain arekin , ▁zure ▁semearen ▁emaztea ▁baita .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your wife , for your wife is your son .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law ; she is your son 's wife , so you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	839
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁herriaren ▁barkamen - oparirako ▁akerra ▁hilko ▁du ; ▁honen ▁odola ▁errezelaz ▁barru aldera ▁eramango ▁du ▁eta ▁zekorraren ▁odolaz ▁eginiko a ▁bera ▁egingo : ▁estalkia ▁zipriztinduko ▁du ▁eta ▁estalki ▁aurrean ▁zirtatuko .
PRED:	Then he will slaughter the male goat for the sin offering . He will slaughter the blood of the altar and the blood of the Covenant , and he will sprinkle it on the altar .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron must slaughter the first goat as a sin offering for the people and carry its blood behind the inner curtain . There he will sprinkle the goat 's blood over the atonement cover and in front of it , just as he did with the bull 's blood .

ID:	840
INPUT:	▁Hamaika ▁larrialdi ▁eta ▁zoritxar ▁pasarazi ▁didazu . Baina ▁berriro ▁biziaraziko ▁nauzu , Herio ▁Leize ▁sakon etik ▁altxatuko .
PRED:	I will thank you , and I will give you victory to those who trust me .
GOLD:	You have allowed me to suffer much hardship , but you will restore me to life againand lift me up from the depths of the earth .

ID:	841
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁tunika ▁jantzi ▁zion ▁Aaroni , ▁gerriko az ▁lotu ▁eta ▁mantua ▁jarri ; ▁gainetik ▁efoda ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁eta <unk> laz ▁lotu .
PRED:	Then he put a robe on Aaron 's head and placed it on a robe . He placed it in front of the ephod and placed it on a cart .
GOLD:	He put the official tunic on Aaron and tied the sash around his waist . He dressed him in the robe , placed the ephod on him , and attached the ephod securely with its decorative sash .

ID:	842
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁Jainkoa ▁dugu ▁geure ▁buruzagi , ▁eta ▁geurekin ▁ditugu ▁haren ▁apaizak , ▁baita ▁turuta ▁ozen ak ▁ere ▁zuen ▁kontra ▁jotzeko . ▁Israeldarrok , ▁ez ▁borrokatu ▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁arbasoen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁kontra , ▁ez ▁baituzue ▁garaipen ik ▁izango ».
PRED:	Let us worship the Lord our God , and we are with us , for we are going to fight against the Lord our God , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So you see , God is with us . He is our leader . His priests blow their trumpets and lead us into battle against you . O people of Israel , do not fight against the Lord , the God of your ancestors , for you will not succeed ! ”

ID:	843
INPUT:	▁Haurra ▁haziz ▁eta ▁sendo tuz ▁zihoan ; ▁jakinduriaz ▁betea ▁zegoen ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁onginahia ▁berekin ▁zuen .
PRED:	The child was filled with fear , and his love was filled with joy .
GOLD:	There the child grew up healthy and strong . He was filled with wisdom , and God 's favor was on him .

ID:	844
INPUT:	▁denek ▁egin ▁baitzuten ▁bekatu ▁eta ▁denak ▁aurkitzen ▁dira ▁geroztik ▁Jainkoaren ▁aintz arik ▁gabe .
PRED:	But all the people have sinned , and it is a time for the day of God .
GOLD:	For everyone has sinned ; we all fall short of God 's glorious standard .

ID:	845
INPUT:	▁Hau exek ▁dira ▁Artaxerxesen ▁erregealdian ▁Babiloniatik ▁nirekin ▁etorri ▁ziren ▁familiaburuak , ▁beren ▁jatorri ekin :
PRED:	In this time , during the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came to me with me .
GOLD:	Here is a list of the family leaders and the genealogies of those who came with me from Babylon during the reign of King Artaxerxes :

ID:	846
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁makur rarazi ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁israeldarren ▁aurrean ▁Kanaango ▁errege ▁Jabin .
PRED:	So God was very angry with the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So on that day Israel saw God defeat Jabin , the Canaanite king .

ID:	847
INPUT:	▁Nesk ame ▁batek , ▁Pedro ▁su t ondoan ▁eseria ▁ikustean , ▁begira ▁jarri ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— Hau ▁ere ▁Jesusekin ▁zebilen .
PRED:	When Peter saw Peter sitting on the mountain , he looked up and looked at him . “ This is the man who is with Jesus , ” he said .
GOLD:	A servant girl noticed him in the firelight and began staring at him . Finally she said , “ This man was one of Jesus ' followers ! ”

ID:	848
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ez ▁izan ▁beldur . ▁Zer ▁ikusten ▁duzu ? Emakumeak ▁Sauli :— Espiritu ▁bat ▁dak us at ▁lur petik ▁igotzen .
PRED:	“ What is you afraid ? ” the king replied . “ What is you going ? ” “ The king replied . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid ! ” the king told her . “ What do you see ? ” “ I see a god coming up out of the earth , ” she said .

ID:	849
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Buru tik ▁zaude ! ▁Nor ▁dabil ▁zu ▁hil ▁nahian ?
PRED:	But the people replied , “ How are you trying to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	The crowd replied , “ You 're demon possessed ! Who 's trying to kill you ? ”

ID:	850
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁Jainko ▁Jauna , ▁gure ▁aita ▁Daviden ▁ordez ▁ni , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁hau , ▁egin ▁nauzu ▁errege . ▁Ni , ▁berriz , ▁mutil ▁gaztea ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁gobernatzen ▁ikasi ▁gabea .
PRED:	For the Lord is my father , my father , my servant David , have made me a king , but I was a king .
GOLD:	“ Now , O Lord my God , you have made me king instead of my father , David , but I am like a little child who does n't know his way around .

ID:	851
INPUT:	▁Gar esti ▁ordainduz ▁eskuratu ▁zaituzte ▁Jainkoak : ▁ez ▁bihurtu , ▁beraz , ▁gizakien ▁esklabo .
PRED:	For God has given you a ransom for you .
GOLD:	God paid a high price for you , so do n't be enslaved by the world .

ID:	852
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁aurrekoek ▁hondatu ▁zituzten ▁nazio ▁horietako ▁jainko etarik ▁batek ▁ere ▁libratu ▁ahal ▁izan ▁ote ▁du ▁bere ▁herria ▁nire ▁eskuetatik ? ▁Eta ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁libratuko ▁zaituztela ▁nire ▁eskuetan ▁erortzetik ?
PRED:	“ Have you rescued me from your ancestors , who rescued me from your gods ? ” they demanded . “ Is God who rescued me from your power ? ”
GOLD:	Which of their gods was able to rescue its people from the destructive power of my predecessors ? What makes you think your God can rescue you from me ?

ID:	853
INPUT:	▁Zigor - eguna
PRED:	A Call to God
GOLD:	The Desolation of Israel

ID:	854
INPUT:	▁Adierazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Zure ▁aurka ▁nator , ▁Sidon , ▁zure ▁kontura ▁jantziko ▁naiz ▁ospez . ▁Zure ▁aurka ▁epaia ▁bete ▁eta ▁neure ▁santutasuna ▁agertzean , ▁denek ▁jakingo ▁dute ▁ni ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : I am the Sovereign Lord , the God of the nations , and your enemies will be filled with joy . They will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Give the people of Sidon this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Sidon , and I will reveal my glory by what I do to you.When I bring judgment against youand reveal my holiness among you , everyone watching will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	855
INPUT:	▁Jakizue , ▁batez ▁ere , ▁azken ▁garaietan ▁gizon ▁isek ariak , ▁beren ▁grina ▁tx arrei ▁jarraituz ▁biziko ▁direnak , ▁etorriko ▁direla . ▁Eta ▁ir riz
PRED:	In the same way , the same way , the people of Israel will live in the same way . They will live in your presence .
GOLD:	Most importantly , I want to remind you that in the last days scoffers will come , mocking the truth and following their own desires .

ID:	856
INPUT:	▁Ohol ▁hauek ▁behe aldean ▁bereiz ▁jarriko ▁dituzu ▁eta ▁gainaldean , ▁lehenengo ▁eraztun aren ▁parean , ▁ongi ▁lotuak . ▁Egin ▁honela ▁bi ▁kantoi etarako ▁bi ▁oholak ▁ere .
PRED:	Make these curtains along the sides of the two curtains on the sides of the two pillars , along with each side .
GOLD:	These corner frames will be matched at the bottom and firmly attached at the top with a single ring , forming a single corner unit . Make both of these corner units the same way .

ID:	857
INPUT:	▁Akaben ▁errege - etxea ▁suntsitu ▁Jehuk
PRED:	Jehu Kills Ahab 's Family
GOLD:	The Death of Jehu

ID:	858
INPUT:	▁horregatik , ▁su ▁emango ▁diet T iro ko ▁harresi ei , eta ▁bertako ▁jauregiakiren tsi ▁egingo ▁ditu ».
PRED:	So I will send down fire on fire , and all its fortresses will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on the walls of Tyre , and all its fortresses will be destroyed . ”

ID:	859
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁bera ▁joango ▁zaizu ▁aurretik ▁eta ▁zeurekin ▁izango ▁duzu ; ▁ez ▁zaitu ▁inola ▁ere ▁utziko . ▁Ez ▁izan ▁beldur ! ▁Ez ▁kikildu !»
PRED:	May the Lord be with you , and you will be with you . Do n't be afraid , and you will not be afraid . ”
GOLD:	Do not be afraid or discouraged , for the Lord will personally go ahead of you . He will be with you ; he will neither fail you nor abandon you . ”

ID:	860
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁Noeren ▁semeen ▁leinuak , ▁nor ▁bere ▁ondorengo ▁eta ▁herrien ▁arabera . ▁Hori engandik ▁sortu ▁ziren ▁herriak ▁uholde aren ▁ondoren ▁eta ▁hedatu ▁munduan ▁zehar .
PRED:	These were the names of the family of Noah , the descendants of Levi , and the people of Israel followed the earth .
GOLD:	These are the clans that descended from Noah 's sons , arranged by nation according to their lines of descent . All the nations of the earth descended from these clans after the great flood .

ID:	861
INPUT:	▁Lege az ▁harrotzen ▁zaren ▁horrek , ▁nola ▁desohoratzen ▁duzu ▁Jainkoa , ▁legea ▁hautsiz ?
PRED:	The law of Moses is detestable to the law of the law of God ?
GOLD:	You are so proud of knowing the law , but you dishonor God by breaking it .

ID:	862
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁alde ▁izan ▁zuen ▁Jauna ▁Josafatek , ▁bere ▁arbaso ▁Daviden ▁lehenengo ▁jokaera ▁bera ▁izan ▁zuelako , ▁Baalen ▁idoloetara ▁jo ▁gabe .
PRED:	When Jehoshaphat had finished the Lord for his ancestor David , he became very angry with all the sins of Baal .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Jehoshaphat because he followed the example of his father 's early years and did not worship the images of Baal .

ID:	863
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁gaixo tzen ▁da , ▁ni ▁gaixotu ▁gabe ? ▁Nor ▁erortzen , ▁ni ▁erre min du ▁gabe ?
PRED:	How can I be sick ? Who can I be sick ? Why is you so angry with me ?
GOLD:	Who is weak without my feeling that weakness ? Who is led astray , and I do not burn with anger ?

ID:	864
INPUT:	▁Deitu ▁zuen ▁Esterrek ▁H atak , ▁bere ▁zerbitzura ▁erregeak ▁jarri ▁zizkion ▁iren etariko ▁bat , ▁eta ▁Mardokeo gana ▁igorri ▁zuen , ▁zer ▁gertatzen ▁eta ▁zergatik ▁zen ▁jakitera .
PRED:	So Esther went to the king and told him what he had happened to say to Mordecai . He told Mordecai what he had happened .
GOLD:	Then Esther sent for Hathach , one of the king 's eunuchs who had been appointed as her attendant . She ordered him to go to Mordecai and find out what was troubling him and why he was in mourning .

ID:	865
INPUT:	▁Behin , ▁barau - egunez , ▁Jaunaren ▁kultu - os pak izun ▁batean ▁zeudela , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuak ▁honela ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Bere izi ▁niretzat ▁Bernabe ▁eta ▁Saulo , ▁nik ▁dei ▁egin ▁diedan ▁egiteko rako ».
PRED:	One day when he finished speaking in the Temple of the Lord , he said to them , “ I am in the Lord , ” he said , “ I am going to come with you . ”
GOLD:	One day as these men were worshiping the Lord and fasting , the Holy Spirit said , “ Appoint Barnabas and Saul for the special work to which I have called them . ”

ID:	866
INPUT:	▁Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Ez ▁dut ▁gehiago ▁ardorik ▁edango , ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuan ▁ardo ▁berria ▁edan ▁arte ».
PRED:	I tell you the truth , I do n't drink wine until wine of wine . ”
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , I will not drink wine again until the day I drink it new in the Kingdom of God . ”

ID:	867
INPUT:	▁Jonatanek ▁erantzun :— Hon d amena ▁ekarri ▁dio ▁herri ▁osoari ▁gure ▁aitak ! ▁Ikusi ▁nola ▁argitu ▁zaizkidan ▁begiak ▁ezti ▁pit tin ▁bat ▁jan ▁dudalako .
PRED:	Then Jonathan said to him , “ This is what the people said to him , ‘ This is what the good for us ! '
GOLD:	“ My father has made trouble for us all ! ” Jonathan exclaimed . “ A command like that only hurts us . See how refreshed I am now that I have eaten this little bit of honey .

ID:	868
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁ahotsak ▁ur ▁gainean ▁dur un da : Jainko ▁aintzat suak ▁trumoia ▁jo ▁du . Jauna ▁ur ▁handien ▁gainean ▁garai .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord is poured out your unfailing love , O Lord , the God of your unfailing love .
GOLD:	The voice of the Lord echoes above the sea.The God of glory thunders.The Lord thunders over the mighty sea .

ID:	869
INPUT:	▁eta ▁litro ▁eta ▁erdi ren ▁bat ▁ardo ▁isur - oparitzat ▁arkume ▁bakoitzeko .
PRED:	and two quarts of olive oil for each year .
GOLD:	For each lamb offered as a burnt offering or a special sacrifice , you must also present one quart of wine as a liquid offering .

ID:	870
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁berriz , ▁lotsaz ▁betetzen ▁duzue ▁pob rea . ▁Ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁aberatsak ▁zuek ▁zapaltzen ▁eta ▁auzitegira ▁eramaten ▁zaituztetenak ?
PRED:	But you are not afraid of your enemies , and your rich are filled with violence .
GOLD:	But you dishonor the poor ! Is n't it the rich who oppress you and drag you into court ?

ID:	871
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁bere ▁mahats - p arra pean es eriko ▁da , bere ▁pikondo pean , inoren ▁beldurrik ▁gabe . Honela ▁agindu ▁du Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	Who is a fig tree of wine , and he is not afraid of them .
GOLD:	Everyone will live in peace and prosperity , enjoying their own grapevines and fig trees , for there will be nothing to fear.The Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas made this promise !

ID:	872
INPUT:	▁Esnatu ▁zen ▁kartzel az aina ▁eta , ▁esp etxeko ▁ateak ▁zabalik ▁ikustean , ▁ezpata ▁atera ▁zuen ▁bere ▁burua ▁hiltzeko , ▁preso ek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zutelako an .
PRED:	When the wild animals saw the doors , the leader of the city looked up and killed them , and they fled to death .
GOLD:	The jailer woke up to see the prison doors wide open . He assumed the prisoners had escaped , so he drew his sword to kill himself .

ID:	873
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Balakek , ▁eta ▁bien ▁artean ▁zekor ▁eta ▁ahari ▁bana ▁eskaini ▁zituzten ▁aldare ▁bakoitzean .
PRED:	So Balak did as Balaam ordered , and he offered a young bull as a young bull and a ram on each altar .
GOLD:	Balak followed his instructions , and the two of them sacrificed a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	874
INPUT:	▁« Espiritu ▁gaiztoa , ▁norbaiten gandik ▁irten ▁ondoren , ▁leku ▁id orretan ▁barrena ▁ibili ▁ohi ▁da ▁atseden ▁bila ; ▁baina , ▁aurkitzen ▁ez ▁duelarik , ▁bere ▁buruari ▁esaten ▁dio : ▁“ N oan ▁berriro , ▁atera ▁nintzen eko ▁neure ▁etxera ”.
PRED:	“ When a person leaves a person in the land , it grows up in the desert , but it is found in its shade . But I said , ‘ I am in the wilderness . '
GOLD:	“ When an evil spirit leaves a person , it goes into the desert , searching for rest . But when it finds none , it says , ‘ I will return to the person I came from . '

ID:	875
INPUT:	▁Barau ari ▁buruz . ▁Zah arra ▁eta ▁berria
PRED:	A Discussion about Fasting
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	876
INPUT:	▁« Beraz ▁— esan ▁zien —, ▁zuen ▁artean ▁agin terik ▁dutenak ▁bet oz ▁nirekin ▁Zesareara ▁eta , ▁gizon ▁honek ▁errurik ▁badu , ▁sala ▁bezate ».
PRED:	“ But he said to them , “ Let 's be put to death . Let 's be put to death . Let them be put to death . ”
GOLD:	So he said , “ Those of you in authority can return with me . If Paul has done anything wrong , you can make your accusations . ”

ID:	877
INPUT:	▁Z an oah , ▁En - G an im , ▁T apuah , ▁En am ,
PRED:	Jezreel , Ezem ,
GOLD:	Zanoah , En-gannim , Tappuah , Enam ,

ID:	878
INPUT:	▁« Hau tsia ▁utzi ▁dute ▁Moab , haur ren ▁garrasiak ▁entzuten ▁dira .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The words of Moab have heard your word .
GOLD:	All Moab is destroyed.Her little ones will cry out .

ID:	879
INPUT:	▁Zertarako ▁du ▁gizakiak lur ▁honetan ▁leher ▁egitea ?
PRED:	He gives rain to the earthand gives rain to the earth ?
GOLD:	What do people get for all their hard work under the sun ?

ID:	880
INPUT:	▁Mendiak ▁landatu ak ▁izan ▁aurretik , muinoak ▁baino ▁lehen ▁izan ▁nintzen ▁sortua ;
PRED:	When the mountains were dried up before the mountains , I took care of the Amalekites .
GOLD:	Before the mountains were formed , before the hills , I was born —

ID:	881
INPUT:	▁Jakobek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ongi ▁dakizu ▁zenbat ▁lan ▁egin ▁dudan ▁zuretzat ▁eta ▁zenbat eraino ▁hazi ▁zaizun ▁abere - taldea ▁niri ▁esker .
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ You know how much I have done to you . I have done it to you , and you have all the livestock of your livestock . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ You know how hard I 've worked for you , and how your flocks and herds have grown under my care .

ID:	882
INPUT:	▁baita ▁geroago ▁ere , ▁Josiasen ▁seme ▁Joiakim ▁Judako ▁errege ▁izan ▁zen ▁garai tik ▁Josiasen ▁beste ▁seme ▁baten , ▁Sedekiasen , ▁erregealdiko ▁hamaikagarren ▁urte aren ▁azkena ▁arte . ▁Urte ▁horretako ▁bosgarren ▁hilean ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunak ▁erbesteratu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	In the first year of King Jehoiakim son of Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah , king of Josiah son of Josiah , was in the eleventh year of the reign of Josiah 's reign in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	883
INPUT:	▁Hiramek ▁emanak ▁zizkion ▁Salomoni ▁lau ▁tona ▁inguru ▁urre .
PRED:	Solomon built twenty gold for silver and gold .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Hiram paid Solomon 9,000 pounds of gold .

ID:	884
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Moisesen ▁bitartez ▁agindu ▁bezala , ▁israeldarrek ▁zotz ▁eginez ▁izendatu ▁zizkieten ▁lebitarrei ▁hiriak , ▁herri - lur ▁eta ▁guzti .
PRED:	This is what the Lord commanded Moses through the tribe of Levi , just as the special possession of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So the Israelites obeyed the Lord 's command to Moses and assigned these towns and pasturelands to the Levites by casting sacred lots .

ID:	885
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁um etan dik ▁ezagunak ▁dituzula . ▁Liburu ▁Santuek ▁emango ▁dizute ▁Kristo ▁Jesusen ganako ▁sinesmenaren ▁bidez ▁salbamenera ▁daraman ▁jakinduria .
PRED:	The Scriptures say , “ I am very old , ” the Scriptures say . “ Yes , I will give you grace to God . ”
GOLD:	You have been taught the holy Scriptures from childhood , and they have given you the wisdom to receive the salvation that comes by trusting in Christ Jesus .

ID:	886
INPUT:	▁« Sar ▁zaitezte ▁ate ▁estu tik »
PRED:	The Coming of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	887
INPUT:	▁Bigarren ▁ikuskari aren ▁azalpena
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	Gabriel Explains the Vision

ID:	888
INPUT:	▁Israeli ▁buruz , ▁berriz , ▁hau ▁dio : ▁Egun ▁osoan ▁luz atuak ▁nituen ▁eskuak , ▁herri ▁sinesgogor ▁eta ▁errebelde agana .
PRED:	But this is what I am saying : I am saying , ‘ I am planning to judge Israel . '
GOLD:	But regarding Israel , God said , “ All day long I opened my arms to them , but they were disobedient and rebellious . ”

ID:	889
INPUT:	▁Jainko zko ▁ikuskari tan ▁Israel ▁lurraldera ▁eraman ▁eta ▁mendi ▁garai ▁baten ▁gainean ▁utzi ▁ninduen , ▁eta ▁haren ▁gailur rean , ▁hegoaldera , ▁eraik in - multzo ▁bat ▁zegoen , ▁hiri ▁baten ▁antzekoa .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says to me , the people of Israel , and he brought me into a heap of wood .
GOLD:	In a vision from God he took me to the land of Israel and set me down on a very high mountain . From there I could see toward the south what appeared to be a city .

ID:	890
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁mintzo ▁bat ▁entzun ▁nuen , ▁niri ▁esaten : ▁“ Ea , ▁Pedro , ▁hil ▁eta ▁jan ”.
PRED:	Then I heard this message : ‘ Come , let me eat and die . '
GOLD:	And I heard a voice say , ‘ Get up , Peter ; kill and eat them . '

ID:	891
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁apaiz ▁edo ▁profeta ▁nahiz ▁herriko ren ▁batek ▁“ Jaunaren ▁mezua ▁ ( z ama ) ” ▁esaten ▁badu , ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁ditut ▁bera ▁eta ▁bere ▁etxekoak .
PRED:	And if a prophet or prophets are prophets or prophets , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will tell you the Lord , and I will say to his servants . '
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	892
INPUT:	▁« Hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Zuk ▁jokatu ▁duzun ▁bezalaxe ▁jokatuko ▁dut ▁nik ▁ere ▁zurekin , ▁zina ▁mespretxatu ▁eta ▁ituna ▁hautsi ▁baituzu .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have done to you , just as the Sovereign Lord says : I have abandoned you and made my covenant with you .
GOLD:	“ Now this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will give you what you deserve , for you have taken your solemn vows lightly by breaking your covenant .

ID:	893
INPUT:	▁Lan ▁egiten ▁duenari , ▁saria ▁ez ▁zaio ▁dohain ▁huts ▁bezala ▁ematen , ▁zor ▁zaion ▁zerbait ▁bezala ▁baizik .
PRED:	For everyone who gives the gift to others , but it is not good to others .
GOLD:	When people work , their wages are not a gift , but something they have earned .

ID:	894
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁altxor ▁baliotsu ▁hau ▁buztinezko ▁ontzi tan ▁daram agu , ▁garbi ▁ager ▁dadin ▁honen besteko ▁indarra ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁datorrela ▁eta ▁ez ▁guregandik .
PRED:	But now we have a clay jar of clay jar , and you will know that you have been made from your power . ”
GOLD:	We now have this light shining in our hearts , but we ourselves are like fragile clay jars containing this great treasure . This makes it clear that our great power is from God , not from ourselves .

ID:	895
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁gonbidatu ▁zuen ari ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Baz kari ▁edo ▁afari ren ▁bat ▁ematean , ▁ez ▁gonbidatu ▁zeure ▁adiskideak , ▁ezta ▁senide , ▁ahaide ▁edo ▁auzoko ▁aberatsak ▁ere ; ▁zeren ▁beraiek ▁ere ▁gonbidatu ▁egingo ▁zintuzkete , ▁eta , ▁horrela , ▁ordaina ▁hartuko ▁zenuke .
PRED:	Then she said to the guests , “ Take a feast for the guests . If you have a feast for the guests , you must not take some of the feast for you .
GOLD:	Then he turned to his host . “ When you put on a luncheon or a banquet , ” he said , “ do n't invite your friends , brothers , relatives , and rich neighbors . For they will invite you back , and that will be your only reward .

ID:	896
INPUT:	▁zuen ▁lehen - semeak ▁oro ▁eta ▁lehen ▁abere - kume ▁ar rak ▁Jaunari ▁eskainiko ▁dizkiozue , ▁beraren ak ▁baitira :
PRED:	The firstborn of the firstborn male goats and the firstborn of the firstborn of the Lord .
GOLD:	you must present all firstborn sons and firstborn male animals to the Lord , for they belong to him .

ID:	897
INPUT:	▁Zentzu dunak ▁menderatu ▁egiten ▁du ▁haserrea , oho ragarri ▁zaio ▁iraina ▁kontuan ▁ez ▁hartzea .
PRED:	Pride leads to disgrace , and she has turned his shame to disgrace .
GOLD:	Sensible people control their temper ; they earn respect by overlooking wrongs .

ID:	898
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« D akizuen ▁bezala , ▁judu ▁batek ▁debekatua ▁dauka ▁atzerritarrekin ▁inolako ▁harremanik ▁izatea ▁nahiz ▁haien ▁etxean ▁sartzea . ▁Baina ▁niri ▁Jainkoak ▁erakutsi ▁dit ▁ez ▁dudala ▁inor ▁lo hi ▁edo ▁kutsatutzat ▁hartu ▁behar .
PRED:	He said to them , “ This is what the Jewish leaders of the Jewish leaders and the people of Israel . If I do n't want to look for me , I would n't find any of you . ”
GOLD:	Peter told them , “ You know it is against our laws for a Jewish man to enter a Gentile home like this or to associate with you . But God has shown me that I should no longer think of anyone as impure or unclean .

ID:	899
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁ituna ▁iragarri ▁zizuen , ▁bete ▁behar ▁zenituzten ▁hamar ▁aginduak , ▁eta ▁bi ▁harlauz atan ▁idatzi ▁zituen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You must obey the terms of the terms of the terms of the covenant I gave you two words .
GOLD:	He proclaimed his covenant — the Ten Commandments — which he commanded you to keep , and which he wrote on two stone tablets .

ID:	900
INPUT:	▁Samuelen ▁jaiotza ▁eta ▁haur tzar oa
PRED:	The Birth of Samuel
GOLD:	Hannah 's Prayer for a Son

ID:	901
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁prob atuko ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁israeldarrak ▁eta ▁jakingo ▁beraien ▁gurasoei ▁Moisesen ▁bitartez ▁emaniko ▁aginduak ▁betetzen ▁zituzten ▁ala ▁ez .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave these instructions to Moses and his ancestors . He did not obey the commands of Moses or obey the commands of Moses .
GOLD:	These people were left to test the Israelites — to see whether they would obey the commands the Lord had given to their ancestors through Moses .

ID:	902
INPUT:	▁Dan ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semea : ▁Hux im .
PRED:	David and his son in Dan .
GOLD:	The son of Dan was Hushim .

ID:	903
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁Davidek ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen :— Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁Saul ▁Keilara ▁datorrela ▁eta ▁niregatik ▁hiria ▁hondatzeko ▁asmotan ▁dela ▁entzun ▁dut ▁nik , ▁zure ▁morroi ▁honek .
PRED:	Then David prayed , “ Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the city of Israel , have spoken to you . ”
GOLD:	Then David prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , I have heard that Saul is planning to come and destroy Keilah because I am here .

ID:	904
INPUT:	▁Haur ▁bat ▁jaio ▁zaigu , Jainkoak ▁seme ▁bat ▁eman ▁digu . Ber oni ▁ezarri ▁zaio ▁aginpidea , eta ▁honela ▁deitzen ▁diote :« Kon ts eil ari ▁miragarri , Jainko ▁indartsu , Aita ▁betiereko , ▁Errege ▁bake - emaile ».
PRED:	Our children have been born to him , for God has given him a son to him . He has given him victory to him , saying , “ God has given us a great king who is faithful to those who belong to him . ”
GOLD:	The boots of the warriorand the uniforms bloodstained by warwill all be burned.They will be fuel for the fire .

ID:	905
INPUT:	▁Epaile ek ▁zehatz - mehatz ▁iker tuko ▁dute ▁auzia ; ▁ikusten ▁bada ▁leku koa ▁faltsua ▁dela ▁eta ▁herritarra ▁gezurrez ▁salatu ▁duela ,
PRED:	“ This is what the king says : If a person sees a case , it is a false witness that is a false witness .
GOLD:	The judges must investigate the case thoroughly . If the accuser has brought false charges against his fellow Israelite ,

ID:	906
INPUT:	▁Madarikatua ▁Jauna ▁maite ▁ez ▁duena ! ▁Mar ana ▁t ha ! ▁ ( Zatoz , ▁Jauna ! ) .
PRED:	But those who love the Lord , who love the Lord , who love him .
GOLD:	If anyone does not love the Lord , that person is cursed . Our Lord , come !

ID:	907
INPUT:	▁Asetzeraino ▁jan ▁zuten ▁denek , ▁eta ▁gelditutako ▁hondar rez ▁hamabi ▁saski ▁bete ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So they ate as much as they had eaten , and they took twelve large baskets of bread .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted , and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftovers .

ID:	908
INPUT:	▁Big bai renak ▁ 2 . <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Anathoth128
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,056

ID:	909
INPUT:	▁Amondarren ▁erregeari ▁eraso ▁eta ▁nagusitu ▁egin ▁zitzaion ; ▁urte ▁hartan ▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁bietan ▁amondarrek ▁zerga ▁handia ▁ordaindu ▁behar ▁izan ▁zioten : ▁hiru ▁tona ▁zilar , ▁hiru ▁mila ▁tona ▁gari ▁eta ▁beste ▁horrenbeste ▁garagar .
PRED:	The king of Ammon attacked the king of Ammon , and there was five years old enough to pay for ten years .
GOLD:	Jotham went to war against the Ammonites and conquered them . Over the next three years he received from them an annual tribute of 7,500 pounds of silver , 50,000 bushels of wheat , and 50,000 bushels of barley .

ID:	910
INPUT:	▁H af araim , ▁X ion , ▁An ahar at ,
PRED:	Eltolad , Hormah ,
GOLD:	Hapharaim , Shion , Anaharath ,

ID:	911
INPUT:	▁Esaiozu , ▁bada , ▁bake - itu na ▁egiten ▁dudala ▁berarekin :
PRED:	Therefore , I am writing to myself ,
GOLD:	Now tell him that I am making my special covenant of peace with him .

ID:	912
INPUT:	▁baita ▁atari ▁inguruko ▁zutabeak ▁beren ▁oinekin , ▁hesolak ▁eta ▁sokak ▁ere .
PRED:	For the courtyard of the Temple , including their ropes and their ropes .
GOLD:	They were also responsible for the posts of the courtyard and all their bases , pegs , and ropes .

ID:	913
INPUT:	▁Profeta ▁bat ▁profeta ▁delako ▁onartzen ▁duenak ▁profetari ▁zor ▁zaion ▁saria ▁jasoko ▁du ; ▁eta ▁gizon ▁zuzen ▁bat ▁zuzena ▁delako ▁onartzen ▁duenak ▁gizon ▁zuzen ari ▁zor ▁zaion ▁saria ▁jasoko ▁du ;
PRED:	Anyone who refuses to listen to the prophet prophets will be a witness to the prophets . If a person person person person is right , it will be a person to be punished .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	914
INPUT:	▁Herriko ▁jende ▁xehea ▁baizik ▁ez ▁zuen ▁utzi , ▁alorrak ▁eta ▁mahastiak ▁landu ▁zitzaten .
PRED:	But the people refused to serve the poor , however , and they allowed them to eat and vineyards .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	915
INPUT:	▁Odol jarioa ▁zuen ▁emakumea ▁eta ▁buruzagiaren ▁alaba
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Heals in Response to Faith

ID:	916
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁piztu ▁ondoren , ▁aurretik ▁joango ▁natzaizue ▁Galileara ».
PRED:	But I will send you back to Galilee , for I am going to Galilee . ”
GOLD:	But after I am raised from the dead , I will go ahead of you to Galilee and meet you there . ”

ID:	917
INPUT:	▁Era baki tako ▁egunean , ▁Herodesek , ▁errege - jantzi tan ▁eta ▁bere ▁aulkian ▁eser irik , ▁hitzaldia ▁egin ▁zien .
PRED:	When Herod heard that Herod had been king , he sat on his throne and sat on his throne .
GOLD:	and an appointment with Herod was granted . When the day arrived , Herod put on his royal robes , sat on his throne , and made a speech to them .

ID:	918
INPUT:	▁Egia ▁esan , ▁ez ▁dut ▁ausar di arik ▁beren ▁buruak ▁goraipatzen ▁dituzten ▁horien ▁pareko ▁edo ▁kideko tzat ▁neure ▁burua ▁emateko . ▁Horrelako ▁horiek ▁zentzu ▁ona ▁galdu ▁dute : ▁lehenengo ▁beren ▁burua ▁hartzen ▁dute ▁neurri tzat ▁eta , ▁gero , ▁neurri ▁horrekin ▁balio z tatzen ▁dituzte ▁beren ▁buruak .
PRED:	For I say to them , ‘ This is what they are doing . They are weak to become wise , and their own own own children . They are weak and become weak . '
GOLD:	Oh , do n't worry ; we would n't dare say that we are as wonderful as these other men who tell you how important they are ! But they are only comparing themselves with each other , using themselves as the standard of measurement . How ignorant !

ID:	919
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁besterik ▁fro gatu ▁nahi ▁baduzue , ▁e ka tzu e ▁hona ▁zeuen ▁anaia ▁gazteena . ▁Bien ▁bitartean , ▁ala ▁faraoia ! , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁hemendik ▁aterako .
PRED:	If you want to get your neighbor , take your brother , your brother , go out to your brother , you will go home .
GOLD:	This is how I will test your story . I swear by the life of Pharaoh that you will never leave Egypt unless your youngest brother comes here !

ID:	920
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁haien ▁hezurrak ▁Jabexeko ▁tam arin do aren ▁p ean ▁ehortzi ▁zituzten , ▁eta ▁zazpi ▁egunez ▁barau ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	When the bones of the wicked saw their bones , they were buried in the evening .
GOLD:	Then they took their bones and buried them beneath the tamarisk tree at Jabesh , and they fasted for seven days .

ID:	921
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁errespeta tzeak ▁konfiantza ▁osoa ▁sortzen ▁du , eta ▁ondorengoak ▁ere ▁horretan ▁babestuko ▁dira .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord ; the descendants of the wicked will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Those who fear the Lord are secure ; he will be a refuge for their children .

ID:	922
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁semeak ▁aita ▁iraintzen ▁du , alaba ▁amaren ▁aurka ▁ateratzen ▁daeta ▁erraina ▁amaginarreb aren ▁aurka . Nork ▁bere ▁etxekoak ▁ditu ▁etsai .
PRED:	For the children of her father is dead ; his mother is full against her .
GOLD:	For the son despises his father.The daughter defies her mother.The daughter-in-law defies her mother-in-law.Your enemies are right in your own household !

ID:	923
INPUT:	▁itsas ▁hondarra ▁bezain ▁ugari izango ▁lirateke ▁zure ▁ondorengoak , hon dar - aleak ▁bezain ba tzure ▁seme - alabak ; haien ▁izena ▁ez ▁litzateke ▁suntsituko , inoiz ▁ere ▁ez nire ▁aurretik ▁ezabatuko ».
PRED:	Your children will be as numerous as the sand on the seashore , your children , and your children will not be like the sand on the seashore . I will destroy them . ”
GOLD:	Your descendants would have been like the sands along the seashore — too many to count ! There would have been no need for your destruction , or for cutting off your family name . ”

ID:	924
INPUT:	▁Sar des ko ▁eliz ▁elkarteari
PRED:	The Message to the Church in Ephesus
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Sardis

ID:	925
INPUT:	▁« Zure ▁senide ▁batek ▁bekatu ▁egiten ▁badu , ▁zoaz ▁berarengana ▁eta ▁zentzarazi ▁bakarrean . ▁Jar am on ▁egiten ▁badizu , ▁irabazia ▁duzu ▁senidea .
PRED:	“ If you have sinned , go with a fellow believers , go with him . Instead , go to the believers , let him be patient with money .
GOLD:	“ If another believer sins against you , go privately and point out the offense . If the other person listens and confesses it , you have won that person back .

ID:	926
INPUT:	▁Joramek ▁Tz ai r rera ▁jo ▁zuen ▁bere ▁guda - gurdi ▁guztiekin . ▁Gauez ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁setiatzen ▁ari ▁zitzaizkion ▁edomdarrak ▁eta ▁hauen ▁guda - gurdi etan ▁zeuden ▁buruzagiak ▁garaitu ▁zituen ▁arren , ▁Judako ▁gudariek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten ▁nork ▁bere ▁etxolara .
PRED:	So Jehoshaphat and his chariot army went out and attacked his chariot and attacked them , and all the armies of Judah and their chariots and chariots and fled to battle .
GOLD:	So Jehoram went with all his chariots to attack the town of Zair . The Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders , but he went out at night and attacked them under cover of darkness . But Jehoram 's army deserted him and fled to their homes .

ID:	927
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Oraindik ▁pixka ▁batean ▁argia ▁zeuen ▁artean ▁duzue ; ▁ibili ▁argia ▁duzuen ▁bitartean , ▁ilunp eak ▁harrapa ▁ez ▁zaitzaten , ▁ilunpetan ▁dabilenak ▁ez ▁bait aki ▁nora ▁doan .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If you go out to a little while you go to the darkness , you wo n't find the light of darkness . If you walk in darkness , you wo n't find the darkness . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	928
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁duzu ▁G era - ren ▁seme ▁Ximei ▁ere , ▁Bah uri mgo ▁benjamin darra ; ▁izugarrizko ▁madarikazioak ▁bota ▁zizkidan ▁Mahanaimera ▁nin do alarik . ▁Alabaina , ▁bera ▁ere ▁etorri ▁zitzaidan ▁gero ▁bila ▁Jordanera , ▁eta ▁nik ▁Jaunarengatik ▁zin ▁egin ▁nion ▁ez ▁nuela ▁ezpataz ▁hilko .
PRED:	You did n't go out to the town of Jericho , as the Lord had rescued me from the wilderness . But when I saw him , he did n't kill me . But when I did n't kill him , I would kill him .
GOLD:	“ And remember Shimei son of Gera , the man from Bahurim in Benjamin . He cursed me with a terrible curse as I was fleeing to Mahanaim . When he came down to meet me at the Jordan River , I swore by the Lord that I would not kill him .

ID:	929
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁gizon ▁batek ▁adierazi ▁zion ▁Joabi :— Absalom ▁arte ondo ▁batetik ▁zintzilik ▁ikusi ▁dut .
PRED:	When he saw this man , he said to Joab , “ I have seen the ram 's horn until I saw the king 's horn . ”
GOLD:	One of David 's men saw what had happened and told Joab , “ I saw Absalom dangling from a great tree . ”

ID:	930
INPUT:	▁Hamar ▁egun ▁in gur uren ▁buruan , ▁heriotzaz ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Jaunak ▁Nabal ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	Then the Lord opened his cloak , and he died .
GOLD:	About ten days later , the Lord struck him , and he died .

ID:	931
INPUT:	▁« Er respetatu ▁nik ▁aginduriko ▁atseden - eguna ▁eta ▁izan ▁begirune ▁nire ▁santutegi ari . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey my Sabbath days and obey my Sabbath days . I am the Lord . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Keep my Sabbath days of rest , and show reverence toward my sanctuary . I am the Lord .

ID:	932
INPUT:	▁Jeroboamen ▁semearen ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Ahijah 's Prophecy against Jeroboam

ID:	933
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁beraien ▁menpe ▁jartzen ▁ez ▁bazara , ▁hiria ▁babiloniarren ▁esku ▁eroriko ▁da ▁eta ▁erre ▁egingo ▁dute , ▁eta ▁zeu ▁ere ▁ez ▁zara ▁libratuko ▁haien ▁eskuetatik .
PRED:	But if you do not attack the Babylonians , the Babylonians will attack the Babylonians , the Babylonians will attack them , and you will attack them .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to surrender , you will not escape ! This city will be handed over to the Babylonians , and they will burn it to the ground . ' ”

ID:	934
INPUT:	▁Borroka ▁hastean , ▁Galaadeko ▁arduradunak ▁Tob era ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Jef teren ▁bila ,
PRED:	When they arrived , they returned to Ramoth-gilead ,
GOLD:	When the Ammonites attacked , the elders of Gilead sent for Jephthah in the land of Tob .

ID:	935
INPUT:	▁Zeruko ▁gudaroste ek , ▁liho ▁zuri ▁garbiz ▁jantzirik , ▁zaldi ▁gainean ▁jarraitzen ▁zioten .
PRED:	The armies of heaven were clothed with fine linen clothing , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The armies of heaven , dressed in the finest of pure white linen , followed him on white horses .

ID:	936
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Natan i :— Bekatu ▁egin ▁dut ▁Jaunaren ▁aurka . N atan ek ▁Davidi :— Jaunak , ▁hala ▁ere , ▁barkatzen ▁dizu ▁bekatua . ▁Ez ▁zara ▁hilko .
PRED:	David replied , “ I have sinned against the Lord , ” David replied . “ I have sinned against David , the Lord , have sinned against you . ”
GOLD:	Then David confessed to Nathan , “ I have sinned against the Lord. ” Nathan replied , “ Yes , but the Lord has forgiven you , and you wo n't die for this sin .

ID:	937
INPUT:	▁Israeldar rekin ▁bake - hitzarmena ▁egin ▁zuen ▁hiri ▁bakarra ▁hibiarrak ▁bizi ▁zireneko ▁Gabaon ▁izan ▁zen . ▁Beste ▁guztiak ▁ar men ▁indarrez ▁hartu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So the Israelites made a covenant with the Israelites , and they lived in their towns . They were their own towns with their swords .
GOLD:	No one in this region made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites of Gibeon . All the others were defeated .

ID:	938
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Moisesek ▁oihu ▁egin ▁zion ▁Jaunari . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁zuh aix ka ▁bat ▁erakutsi ▁zion . ▁Moisesek ▁zuh aix ka ▁uretara ▁jaurti ▁eta ▁ura ▁gez atu ▁egin ▁zen . Toki ▁hartan ▁probatu ▁zituen ▁Jaunak , ▁eta ▁arau ▁eta ▁usadioak ▁ezarri ▁zizkien .
PRED:	Then Moses shouted to the Lord , “ As a result , Moses saw that the Lord had seen the water that Moses had been filled with the water , and the water was filled with water .
GOLD:	So Moses cried out to the Lord for help , and the Lord showed him a piece of wood . Moses threw it into the water , and this made the water good to drink.It was there at Marah that the Lord set before them the following decree as a standard to test their faithfulness to him .

ID:	939
INPUT:	▁eta ▁zu ▁hil ▁nahian ▁dabiltzan ▁eta ▁beldurrik ▁handiena ▁diezun ▁etsaien ▁esku ▁utziko , ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonosor ▁eta ▁beraren ▁gudarostearen ▁esku , ▁alegia .
PRED:	Your enemies will be afraid to kill you and your enemies , the king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	I will hand you over to those who seek to kill you , those you so desperately fear — to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the mighty Babylonian army .

ID:	940
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Zilizi ako ▁eta ▁Pan fil iako ▁itsaso etan ▁barrena , ▁L izi ako ▁M ira ▁hirira ▁iritsi ▁ginen .
PRED:	So we traveled through the sea and traveled through the sea .
GOLD:	Keeping to the open sea , we passed along the coast of Cilicia and Pamphylia , landing at Myra , in the province of Lycia .

ID:	941
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Moisesek , ▁bere ▁Jainko ▁Jaunaren ▁sumina ▁baretu ▁nahiz , ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Jauna , ▁nola ▁jarriko ▁zara , ▁bada , ▁haserre - sutan , ▁hain ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁Egiptotik ▁atera ▁duzun ▁zeure ▁herri ▁honen ▁aurka ?
PRED:	Then Moses spoke to the Lord , and he said , “ O Lord , Lord , why are you angry with a mighty army ? Why are you angry with a strong hand ? ”
GOLD:	But Moses tried to pacify the Lord his God . “ O Lord ! ” he said . “ Why are you so angry with your own people whom you brought from the land of Egypt with such great power and such a strong hand ?

ID:	942
INPUT:	▁Maite ▁duzue ▁Jesu ▁Kristo , ▁gaurdaino ▁ikusi ▁ez ▁duzuen ▁arren . ▁Eta , ▁ikusi ▁gabe ▁berarengan ▁sinets iz , ▁esanez in ▁ahalako ▁pozez , ▁poz ▁distiratsuz , ▁beteak ▁zaudete ▁jadanik ,
PRED:	For you have seen the day of Christ Jesus , but you have seen that you have seen the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ . And you have seen the power of the dead .
GOLD:	You love him even though you have never seen him . Though you do not see him now , you trust him ; and you rejoice with a glorious , inexpressible joy .

ID:	943
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁harrokeriaz ▁erasotzen ▁dio ▁errukarri ari , as m atzen ▁dituen ▁azpik eri ez ▁dauka ▁harrapatua .
PRED:	The wicked plot against the wicked ; the wicked plot against them .
GOLD:	The wicked arrogantly hunt down the poor.Let them be caught in the evil they plan for others .

ID:	944
INPUT:	▁Bide tik ▁okertzen ▁dena ▁gogor ▁zentz araziko ▁dute ; zentzaraz pena ▁gorrotatzen ▁duena ▁hil ▁egingo ▁da .
PRED:	Those who hate evil will prosper ; those who hate evil will be killed .
GOLD:	Whoever abandons the right path will be severely disciplined ; whoever hates correction will die .

ID:	945
INPUT:	▁Ez p atak ▁jo ▁eta ▁ez ▁dio ▁ezer ▁egiten , ezta ▁lantz ak , ▁azkon ak ▁eta ▁geziak ▁ere .
PRED:	“ Do n't go or discouraged , ” says the Lord . “ There is no one of your chariots and chariots . ”
GOLD:	“ When it sneezes , it flashes light ! Its eyes are like the red of dawn .

ID:	946
INPUT:	▁Bizi , ▁bada , ▁Jainkoa ▁etorriko ▁den ▁egunaren ▁zain ▁eta ▁lan ▁egin ▁lehenbailehen ▁irits ▁dadin . ▁Egun ▁hartan , ▁sutan ▁desegingo ▁dira ▁zeruak , ▁eta ▁munduaren ▁osag aiak ▁kiskal ita ▁ezereztuko ▁dira .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ In that day , the day of the people will come down to the sky , and the heavens will come down to the ground .
GOLD:	looking forward to the day of God and hurrying it along . On that day , he will set the heavens on fire , and the elements will melt away in the flames .

ID:	947
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁begi - bistan ▁bo tarazi ▁zituen ▁Baalen ▁aldareak , ▁berauen ▁gainean ▁zeuden ▁intsentsu - ontziak ▁hautsiz ; ▁zutoin ▁sakratu ▁eta ▁zurezko ▁nahiz ▁metal ezko ▁idoloak ▁xehatu ▁eta ▁puskak ▁halako ei ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzen ▁zizkieten en ▁hilobi ▁gainean ▁barre iatu ▁zituen .
PRED:	Then he spoke to them all the pagan shrines , and all the idols of Baal did not worship idols idols . He built an Asherah pole and burned them on the altar and burned it on the altar .
GOLD:	He ordered that the altars of Baal be demolished and that the incense altars which stood above them be broken down . He also made sure that the Asherah poles , the carved idols , and the cast images were smashed and scattered over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them .

ID:	948
INPUT:	▁Norbaitek ▁zergatik ▁askatzen ▁duzuen ▁galdetuko ▁balizue , ▁erantzun : ▁“ Jaunak ▁behar ▁du ”».
PRED:	“ If you ask , ‘ The Lord will ask , ' the Lord replied , ‘ The Lord is going . ' ”
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	949
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Paulok , ▁Pan fil ian ▁alde ▁egin ▁eta ▁lanean ▁lagundu ▁ez ▁zien ▁gizona ▁berriro ▁berekin ▁hartzea ▁ez ▁zuen ▁ongi ▁ikusten .
PRED:	But Paul left the town and went back to the man . He did n't see the man , and he did n't see him .
GOLD:	But Paul disagreed strongly , since John Mark had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in their work .

ID:	950
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁eta ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁famili akoek ▁Egipton ▁bizitzen ▁jarraitu ▁zuten . ▁Ehun ▁eta ▁hamar ▁urte ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zen ▁Jose ,
PRED:	Joseph lived in Egypt with his father , and Joseph lived in Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph and his brothers and their families continued to live in Egypt . Joseph lived to the age of 110 .

ID:	951
INPUT:	▁Kanta ▁Jaunari , gauza ▁harrigarriak ▁egin ▁baititu ; mundu ▁osoan ▁jakin ▁bezate haren ▁berri .
PRED:	He has done great things to the Lord , for he has done all the things he has done .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done wonderful things.Make known his praise around the world .

ID:	952
INPUT:	▁Bekatu ▁egiten ▁duena , ▁hori ▁hilko ▁da ; ▁semeak ▁ez ▁ditu ▁aitaren ▁erruaren ▁ondorenak ▁jasan ▁beharko , ▁ezta ▁aitak ▁ere ▁seme arenak . ▁Gizon ▁zintzo ari ▁bere ▁zintzo tasunaren ▁ordaina ▁emango ▁zaio , ▁gaiztoari ▁bere ▁gaiztakeri arena .
PRED:	Anyone who refuses to die , but he does not be cut off from his father 's family . He must not be punished for his father , for he is guilty of death .
GOLD:	The person who sins is the one who will die . The child will not be punished for the parent 's sins , and the parent will not be punished for the child 's sins . Righteous people will be rewarded for their own righteous behavior , and wicked people will be punished for their own wickedness .

ID:	953
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoak ▁erantzun ▁zien : ▁« Ez agutzen ▁dut ▁Jesus ▁eta ▁badakit ▁Paulo ▁nor ▁den . ▁Baina ▁nor ▁zarete ▁zuek ?»
PRED:	But he replied , “ I am not my spirit , ” he replied . “ I know that you are my God , ” he replied .
GOLD:	But one time when they tried it , the evil spirit replied , “ I know Jesus , and I know Paul , but who are you ? ”

ID:	954
INPUT:	▁Dei ▁degizut : ▁salba ▁nazazu , eta ▁beteko ▁ditut ▁zure ▁xedapenak .
PRED:	I will rescue you ; I will praise your laws .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	955
INPUT:	▁Or duz ▁geroztik , ▁larunbat - bez per an , ▁ilun tzen ▁hasi ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁Jerusalemgo ▁ateak ▁ix teko ▁agindu ▁nuen , ▁eta ▁larunbat - bi har amun a ▁arte ▁ez ▁ireki tzeko . ▁Eta ▁nire ▁gizon etako ▁batzuk ▁jarri ▁nituen ▁atean , ▁larunbatean ▁inolako ▁zamarik ▁sar ▁ez ▁zedin .
PRED:	The first day I was on the Sabbath day , as I had commanded . I stopped the doors of Jerusalem , the doors of the Sabbath day , so I could not leave the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	Then I commanded that the gates of Jerusalem should be shut as darkness fell every Friday evening , not to be opened until the Sabbath ended . I sent some of my own servants to guard the gates so that no merchandise could be brought in on the Sabbath day .

ID:	956
INPUT:	▁Davidek , ▁orduan , ▁Uri asi :— Geldi ▁zaitez ▁gaur ▁hemen . ▁Bihar ▁utziko ▁dizut ▁joaten . Egun ▁hartan , ▁beraz , ▁Jerusalemen ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁Urias ; ▁biharamunean ,
PRED:	Then David said to David , “ Go and leave the next day . ” So David went back to the next day .
GOLD:	“ Well , stay here today , ” David told him , “ and tomorrow you may return to the army. ” So Uriah stayed in Jerusalem that day and the next .

ID:	957
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio : ▁« Garai ▁berria ▁dator . ▁Garai ▁horretan , ▁jendeak ▁ez ▁du ▁honela ▁zin ▁egingo : ▁“ Ala ▁Jauna , ▁israeldarrak ▁Egiptotik ▁atera ▁zituena !” ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ When the people of Israel is coming , the people of Israel will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ when people are taking an oath , they will no longer say , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , who rescued the people of Israel from the land of Egypt . '

ID:	958
INPUT:	▁Berdin ▁fedea ▁ere : ▁bera ▁bakarrik , ▁egintzetan ▁ez ▁bada ▁azaltzen , ▁hila ▁dago .
PRED:	For you know how much you are dead , and your body is dead .
GOLD:	So you see , faith by itself is n't enough . Unless it produces good deeds , it is dead and useless .

ID:	959
INPUT:	▁Moises ▁menditik ▁jaitsi ▁zen , ▁legearen ▁harlauzak ▁eskuetan ▁zituela . ▁Har lau zak ▁bi ▁aldeetatik ▁idatziak ▁zeuden :
PRED:	Moses went down to the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant with the terms of the covenant .
GOLD:	Then Moses turned and went down the mountain . He held in his hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant . They were inscribed on both sides , front and back .

ID:	960
INPUT:	▁Horien ▁aldamenean ▁Gabaongo ▁Mel at iasek ▁eta ▁Mer on o teko ▁J ad onek ▁jardun ▁zuten ▁lanean , ▁Gabaongo ▁eta ▁Mitz pako ▁beste ▁gizon ▁batzuekin ▁batera , ▁Eufrates ▁ibaiaren ▁mendebaldeko ▁gobernariaren ▁kontura .
PRED:	Instead , the leader of the town of Gibeon , came to the town of Gibeon , and the governor of the province of the province of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	Next to them were Melatiah from Gibeon , Jadon from Meronoth , people from Gibeon , and people from Mizpah , the headquarters of the governor of the province west of the Euphrates River .

ID:	961
INPUT:	▁Gutun aren ▁arrazoia : ▁Sas imai suak
PRED:	Blessings for False Prophets
GOLD:	The Danger of False Teachers

ID:	962
INPUT:	▁Babiloniako ▁Nabukodonos orren ▁erregealdiko ▁hemeretzi garren ▁urtean , ▁bosgarren ▁hilaren ▁hamarrean , ▁Nebuzaradan , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁funtzionario ▁eta ▁guardiaburua , ▁etorri ▁zen ▁Jerusalemera .
PRED:	On the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , during the reign of the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , the captain of the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	963
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁zenbait ▁ale ▁sasi ▁artean ▁erori ▁zen , ▁eta ▁sasi ek , ▁harekin ▁batera ▁ern erik , ▁ito ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	The seed fell among thorns among the thorns , and the seed fell on the ground .
GOLD:	Other seed fell among thorns that grew up with it and choked out the tender plants .

ID:	964
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Naam ako ▁Tz of arrek ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zuen :
PRED:	Then Zophar spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Zophar the Naamathite replied to Job :

ID:	965
INPUT:	▁Haietako ▁batzuk ▁ez ▁zirela ▁leial ▁izan ? ▁Eta ▁zer ? ▁Haien ▁leialtasun - ezak ▁huts ▁bihurtuko ▁ote ▁du ▁Jainkoaren ▁leialtasuna ?
PRED:	But some of them did n't think they were merely human hands ? Who can give them authority to God ? ”
GOLD:	True , some of them were unfaithful ; but just because they were unfaithful , does that mean God will be unfaithful ?

ID:	966
INPUT:	▁Norbaitek ▁galde ▁dezake : ▁Eta ▁hilak ▁nola ▁pizten ▁dira ? ▁N olako ▁gorputzez ▁itzuliko ▁dira ▁bizira ?
PRED:	If you ask , how can you be dead ? Where will you return to life ?
GOLD:	But someone may ask , “ How will the dead be raised ? What kind of bodies will they have ? ”

ID:	967
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁etxe ▁honi ▁gau ▁eta ▁egun , ▁zure ▁bizilekua ▁hau ▁izanen ▁dela ▁esan ▁baituzu . ▁Entzun , ▁zure ▁zerbitzariak ▁toki ▁honetarantz ▁begira ▁eginiko ▁otoitza .
PRED:	Let this night be sure to rebuild your Temple , and you will know that your servants will be honored in my presence .
GOLD:	May you watch over this Temple day and night , this place where you have said you would put your name . May you always hear the prayers I make toward this place .

ID:	968
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁erabili ▁gaizki ▁alargun tsak ▁eta ▁umezurtzak ;
PRED:	“ Do n't let the widow of widows ; pay attention to the orphans .
GOLD:	“ You must not mistreat or oppress foreigners in any way . Remember , you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	969
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Bernabe ▁eta ▁Saulo , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuak ▁bidal irik , ▁S el e uzi ara ▁jaitsi ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁handik ▁Zip rera ▁jo ▁zuten ▁itsasoz .
PRED:	So Saul and Barnabas went to Antioch of the Holy Spirit , and Barnabas went to Antioch .
GOLD:	So Barnabas and Saul were sent out by the Holy Spirit . They went down to the seaport of Seleucia and then sailed for the island of Cyprus .

ID:	970
INPUT:	▁Amnon ▁eta ▁Tamar
PRED:	Laban and Tamar
GOLD:	The Rape of Tamar

ID:	971
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁« Hona ▁hemen , ▁Israelgo ▁hamabi ▁leinuen ▁artean ▁banatuko ▁duzuen ▁lurraldearen ▁mugak ▁ ( Jos eren ▁ondorengoek ▁bi ▁zati ▁hartuko ▁dituzte ) .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The descendants of Israel will be divided among the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Divide the land in this way for the twelve tribes of Israel : The descendants of Joseph will be given two shares of land .

ID:	972
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jaunari :— Herri a ▁ez ▁da ▁ausartuko ▁Sinai ▁mendira ▁igo tzera , ▁zuk ▁zeuk ▁ohartarazi ▁baiti guzu ▁eta ▁agindu ▁mendiari ▁mugak ▁ezartzeko ▁eta ▁sakratu tzat ▁hartzeko .
PRED:	Moses said to the Lord , “ This is what the Lord says to us , ‘ You are not going to go on Mount Sinai . If you are on Mount Sinai , we are going to worship the Ark of the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	“ But Lord , ” Moses protested , “ the people can not come up to Mount Sinai . You already warned us . You told me , ‘ Mark off a boundary all around the mountain to set it apart as holy . ' ”

ID:	973
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak makur raraziko ▁ditu harro , ▁handi putz eta ▁buru - ten te ▁guztiak :
PRED:	Then the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will fill the proud .
GOLD:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas a day of reckoning.He will punish the proud and mightyand bring down everything that is exalted .

ID:	974
INPUT:	▁Jakob ▁Labanen ▁etxean . ▁Lea ▁eta ▁Rakel
PRED:	Jacob 's Return to Rachel
GOLD:	Jacob Arrives at Paddan-Aram

ID:	975
INPUT:	▁Hemen ▁adierazten ▁dena , ▁berriz , ▁Jesus ▁gure ▁Jauna ▁alegia , ▁beste ▁leinu ▁batekoa ▁da , ▁inoiz ▁aldare - gizon ik ▁izan ▁ez ▁duen ▁leinukoa ,
PRED:	Now this is what the Lord Jesus says : “ This is the one of the tribe of Levi , the tribe of Levi ,
GOLD:	For the priest we are talking about belongs to a different tribe , whose members have never served at the altar as priests .

ID:	976
INPUT:	▁Elihuk ▁jarraitu ▁zuen :
PRED:	Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Elihu said :

ID:	977
INPUT:	▁Oin orde - eskubidea ▁duten ▁emakume en ▁ezkon tzarako ▁arauak
PRED:	The Faith of the Firstborn
GOLD:	Women Who Inherit Property

ID:	978
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak , ▁berriz , ▁basamortura ▁egin ▁zuen ▁ihes ; ▁han ▁bazter ▁bat ▁prestatua ▁zion ▁Jainkoak , ▁mila ▁berrehun ▁eta ▁hirurogei ▁egunez ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁zedin .
PRED:	But she fled to the wilderness to the wilderness , where God had lived in the wilderness .
GOLD:	And the woman fled into the wilderness , where God had prepared a place to care for her for 1,260 days .

ID:	979
INPUT:	▁ezagut ▁dezan ▁munduak ▁zure ▁nagusitza , jen til - herri ek ▁zure ▁garaipena .
PRED:	For the world will know the world , the nations of the world , and the kingdoms of your enemies .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	980
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁nik ▁ere ▁mespretxagarri ▁eta ▁kaskar ▁egingo ▁zaituztet ▁herri ▁guzti arentzat , ▁nire ▁bideak ▁jarraitu ▁ez ▁dituzuelako ▁eta ▁erabakiak ▁zein ▁nor ▁den ▁begira tuz ▁hartu ▁dituzuelako ».
PRED:	So I will make you an object of your people and your people . You must not look for your people and your people . ”
GOLD:	“ So I have made you despised and humiliated in the eyes of all the people . For you have not obeyed me but have shown favoritism in the way you carry out my instructions . ”

ID:	981
INPUT:	▁Aaron ▁bera ▁ere ▁suntsitu ▁nahi ▁izateraino ▁zegoen ▁Jauna ▁haserre , ▁eta ▁Aaronen ▁alde ▁ere ▁erregutu ▁nuen .
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to Aaron and destroyed them , too , and I begged them to pray for Aaron .
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	982
INPUT:	▁« Zuen ▁artean ▁jarriko ▁dut ▁neure ▁egon lekua ▁eta ▁ez ▁zaituztet ▁zapuz tuko .
PRED:	“ I will put you on you , ” says the Lord. “ I will punish you with you .
GOLD:	I will live among you , and I will not despise you .

ID:	983
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁erregeek ▁ezarriak ▁zituzten ▁sasia paiz ak ▁Judako ▁hiri xka ▁eta ▁Jerusalem ▁inguruetako ▁kultu - lekuetan , ▁toki ▁horietan ▁intsentsua ▁erre ▁zezaten ; ▁Josiasek ▁kendu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁halakoak ; ▁baita ▁Baali , ▁eguzki ▁nahiz ▁ilargi ari ▁nahiz ▁izar - multzo ▁eta ▁izar ▁guztiei ▁intsentsua ▁erretzen ▁zieten ak ▁ere .
PRED:	So Josiah removed the pagan shrines and burned incense in the towns of Judah . He burned incense on the pagan shrines and burned incense to the pagan shrines and burned incense .
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	984
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁eskuineko ei ▁esango ▁die : ▁“ Zatozte , ▁nire ▁Aitaren ▁bedeinkatu ok ; ▁hartz azue ▁munduaren ▁sor tzetik ▁zuentzat ▁prestatua ▁dagoen ▁erreinua .
PRED:	Then the king will say to his right hand , ‘ Come , let the Kingdom of the Father who has blessed you . '
GOLD:	“ Then the King will say to those on his right , ‘ Come , you who are blessed by my Father , inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the creation of the world .

ID:	985
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁ene ! ▁Leiala ▁zen ▁hiria emagaldu ▁bihurtua ! Behin ola ▁justiziaz ▁betea , zuzen bide - leku ▁zena , orain ▁hiltzaileen ▁bizileku .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , O city ! It is like a city , just as long as long as long as long as long as they live .
GOLD:	See how Jerusalem , once so faithful , has become a prostitute.Once the home of justice and righteousness , she is now filled with murderers .

ID:	986
INPUT:	▁Kuts aturiko ▁perts onak ▁bereiz ▁ezarri
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Purity in Israel 's Camp

ID:	987
INPUT:	▁gizakiaren ▁jarduera ▁ger arazten ▁du , berak ▁egindako az ▁guztiak ▁ohar ▁daitezen .
PRED:	The godly will prosper ; the wicked will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then everyone stops workingso they can watch his power .

ID:	988
INPUT:	▁ahun tzak , ▁esne az ▁zeu ▁eta ▁familia ▁elik atu eta ▁zerbitzariak ▁manten tzeko .
PRED:	dip the birds and the birds in the field , and birds in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	And you will have enough goats ' milk for yourself , your family , and your servant girls .

ID:	989
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁bidaliko ▁dizkizuet ▁nik ▁profetak , ▁jakintsuak ▁eta ▁lege - maisuak , ▁eta ▁zuek ▁batzuk ▁hil ▁eta ▁gurutziltzatu , ▁besteak ▁sinagogetan ▁zigortu ▁eta ▁herri rik ▁herri ▁erasoka ▁erabiliko ▁dituzue .
PRED:	I will send them into the town of religious law , and the teachers of religious law , and the teachers of religious law , and the people of Judah will be killed .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I am sending you prophets and wise men and teachers of religious law . But you will kill some by crucifixion , and you will flog others with whips in your synagogues , chasing them from city to city .

ID:	990
INPUT:	▁On ak ▁Jaunaren ▁onespena ▁lortzen ▁du , asmo ▁tx arrekoak ▁gaitzespena .
PRED:	For the Lord is good to the Lord , and he will judge you .
GOLD:	The Lord approves of those who are good , but he condemns those who plan wickedness .

ID:	991
INPUT:	▁horregatik , ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁zin ▁dagit ▁neure ▁biziarengatik , ▁zuk ▁gorroto aren ▁eraginez ▁israeldarren ▁kontra ▁azaldu ▁duzun ▁amorru ▁eta ▁grina ▁ber ber az ▁jokatuko ▁dudala . ▁Zigor tuko ▁zaitudan ean , ▁orduan ▁aitortuko ▁naute ▁israeldarrek .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : If you live , I am sending you into your anger , I will punish you . Then I will punish you . Then I will punish you .
GOLD:	Therefore , as surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will pay back your angry deeds with my own . I will punish you for all your acts of anger , envy , and hatred . And I will make myself known to Israel by what I do to you .

ID:	992
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁jauregia
PRED:	Solomon 's Message to Solomon
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	993
INPUT:	▁bertan ▁behera ▁utzi ▁zuen ▁Xiloko ▁egoitza , giz artean ▁bizitzeko ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁etxola .
PRED:	So he left the town and lived in the place where he had built .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	994
INPUT:	▁Maite ▁izango ▁zaituzte , ▁bedeinkatu ▁eta ▁ugalduko , ▁emankor ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ▁zeuek , ▁zuen ▁abereak ▁eta ▁lurrak : ▁garia , ▁ardoa ▁eta ▁olioa ▁oparo ▁emango ▁dizkizue , ▁eta ▁zekor ▁eta ▁arkumeak ▁ugalduko , ▁zuen ▁arbasoei ▁zin ▁egindako aren ▁arabera ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	For you will bless you and bless your livestock and your livestock , and your livestock will be filled with olive oil . He will give you a grain offering to your ancestors . He will give you a covenant with your ancestors .
GOLD:	He will love you and bless you , and he will give you many children . He will give fertility to your land and your animals . When you arrive in the land he swore to give your ancestors , you will have large harvests of grain , new wine , and olive oil , and great herds of cattle , sheep , and goats .

ID:	995
INPUT:	▁Joseren ▁anaien ▁mendekua
PRED:	Joseph 's Dream
GOLD:	Joseph Sold into Slavery

ID:	996
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁aingeruak ▁ihardetsi ▁zion : ▁“ Bi ▁mila ▁eta ▁hirurehun ▁arratsalde ▁eta ▁goiz ▁igaro ▁beharko ▁dira . ▁Gero , ▁santutegia ▁berriro ▁sagaratua ▁izango ▁da ”.
PRED:	Then the angel said to him , ‘ The same day will be eaten in the evening , and there will be a holy sanctuary and holy sanctuary . '
GOLD:	The other replied , “ It will take 2,300 evenings and mornings ; then the Temple will be made right again . ”

ID:	997
INPUT:	▁Jende tzagatik ▁ez ▁baitzuten ▁nondik ▁sartu ▁aurkitzen , ▁te il atu ra ▁igo ▁eta , ▁te ilak ▁kendurik , ▁ohatila ▁eta ▁guzti ▁jaitsi ▁zuten ▁erdi - erdi ra , ▁Jesusen ▁aurrera .
PRED:	When the people saw him , they would n't go out to the crowd and touched his feet . They went out to the camp and threw him into the camp .
GOLD:	but they could n't reach him because of the crowd . So they went up to the roof and took off some tiles . Then they lowered the sick man on his mat down into the crowd , right in front of Jesus .

ID:	998
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ▁Hamor : ▁« S ik em ▁nire ▁semea ▁zuen ▁arre baz ▁maitemin dua ▁dago ; ▁emaiozue , ▁arren , ▁emaztetzat .
PRED:	He said to his father , “ My son has been unfaithful to her , but she has been unfaithful to her .
GOLD:	Hamor tried to speak with Jacob and his sons . “ My son Shechem is truly in love with your daughter , ” he said . “ Please let him marry her .

ID:	999
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Koreren ▁seme ena . ▁O bo ez ▁. ▁Kanta .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to you , O God , and you will not be safe .
GOLD:	God is our refuge and strength , always ready to help in times of trouble .

ID:	1000
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁da ▁esaten ▁ari ▁garen aren ▁gai lurra : ▁hain ▁handia ▁da ▁gure ▁apaiz ▁nagusia , ▁ezen ▁Jainko ▁handiaren ▁eskuinaldean ▁eseria ▁baitago ▁zeruan ,
PRED:	This is what we say to us : Our high priest is great in heaven , the high priest , the high priest , who is in heaven .
GOLD:	Here is the main point : We have a High Priest who sat down in the place of honor beside the throne of the majestic God in heaven .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	▁Em aten ▁al ▁du ▁egur rik ▁ezer ▁egiteko ? Egi ten ▁al ▁da ▁beraren ▁zu raz ▁kako rik ezer ▁zintz ilika tzeko ?
PRED:	“ Is it it right ? Who is it right ? ” he demanded . “ Is it right to make you right ? ”
GOLD:	Can its wood be used for making things , like pegs to hang up pots and pans ?

ID:	1002
INPUT:	▁Zuhur tzia ▁eskura ezina ▁da ▁burugabe arentzat , ez ▁da ▁gauza ▁jendaurrean ▁ahoa ▁zabaltzeko .
PRED:	The wise give justice , but the mouth of fools will never disappear .
GOLD:	Wisdom is too lofty for fools.Among leaders at the city gate , they have nothing to say .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen ; ▁ez ▁zen ▁aldendu ▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamek ▁Israeli ▁eginarazi ▁zizkion ▁bekatuetatik .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But Pekahiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1004
INPUT:	▁Nahi ▁dudan ▁ongia ▁ez ▁dut ▁egiten , ▁eta ▁nahi ▁ez ▁dudan ▁gaizkia ▁egiten ▁dut .
PRED:	I do n't desire what I do evil , and I do n't turn away from evil .
GOLD:	I want to do what is good , but I do n't . I do n't want to do what is wrong , but I do it anyway .

ID:	1005
INPUT:	▁Mak ila ▁bat ▁hartuko ▁duzue ▁zeuekin ▁eta , ▁sabela ▁hus tera ▁irtetean , ▁berarekin ▁zuloa ▁egin ▁eta ▁gor otza ▁lur rez ▁estaliko ▁duzue .
PRED:	Do n't let me go to the grave , and let them go down to the ground . When you leave him , you will cover your feet .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	1006
INPUT:	▁Era ikuntza ▁hauek ▁guztiak , ▁nola ▁barn etik ▁hala ▁kanpotik , ▁neurri ra ▁landu ▁eta ▁zer ratu riko ▁harri ▁bikain ez ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁oinarri etatik ▁habe etaraino , ▁etxearen ▁kanpoaldetik ▁areto ▁nagusi raino .
PRED:	These were the walls of the courtyard were given to the courtyard and the walls of the courtyard . The walls were made to the Temple , and the walls of the Temple .
GOLD:	From foundation to eaves , all these buildings were built from huge blocks of high-quality stone , cut with saws and trimmed to exact measure on all sides .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	▁Basamortu ra ▁joan ▁behar ▁dugu ▁hiru ▁eguneko ▁bidean , ▁geure ▁Jainko ▁Jaunari ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzeko , ▁berak ▁agindu ▁digun ▁eran .
PRED:	So whenever he went to the Lord our God , we must offer sacrifices to the Lord our God .
GOLD:	I will make a clear distinction between my people and your people . This miraculous sign will happen tomorrow . ' ”

ID:	1008
INPUT:	▁Beti ▁izan ▁naiz ▁Jainkoaren ▁zigorraren ▁beldur , ezin ▁nuen ▁ezer ▁haren ▁handi tasunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	I was afraid to be afraid of God .
GOLD:	That would be better than facing God 's judgment.For if the majesty of God opposes me , what hope is there ?

ID:	1009
INPUT:	▁H alaber , ▁ekartzen ▁dizkidaten ▁uzta ▁guztien ▁lehen ▁emaitzak ▁zureak ▁izango ▁dira . ▁Zure ▁senitarte tik ▁garbi ▁dagoen ▁edon ork ▁jan ▁dezake ▁horietatik .
PRED:	These are the food of your flocks , your relatives , your relatives , your relatives , your relatives , who are ceremonially unclean for you .
GOLD:	All the first crops of their land that the people present to the Lord belong to you . Any member of your family who is ceremonially clean may eat this food .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hirurehun ▁babeski ▁txiki ▁ere ▁egin ▁zituen ▁urre ▁garbiz , ▁babeski ▁bakoitza ▁egiteko ▁hiru ▁kilo ▁eta ▁erdi ▁urre ▁behar ▁izan ▁zelarik . ▁Eta ▁« Libanoko ▁Oih ana » ▁zeritzan ▁jauregian ▁ipini ▁zituen .
PRED:	He also made two shields of gold , hammered gold . He also made two quarts of gold and six quarts of gold .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than 71/2 pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	▁H atu x , ▁Xeb anias , ▁Mal uk ,
PRED:	Shecaniah , Harim ,
GOLD:	Harim , Meremoth , Obadiah ,

ID:	1012
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁jakintsua ▁buruargi ; er gela , ▁ordea , ▁ilunpetan ▁dabil . Badakit , ▁hala ▁ere , bi ek ▁etorkizun ▁bera ▁dutela .
PRED:	For fools are wise , but fools are trapped by the darkness .
GOLD:	For the wise can see where they are going , but fools walk in the dark. ” Yet I saw that the wise and the foolish share the same fate .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	▁Senarrak , ▁horren ▁berri ▁jakitean , ▁deus ▁ere ▁esaten ▁ez ▁badio , ▁on iri tzia ▁ematen ▁dio , ▁eta ▁bo toak ▁zein ▁konpromis oak ▁balio zkoak ▁izango ▁dira .
PRED:	When she heard her , she says the Lord , “ If she has been unfaithful to her , he will pay attention to the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	But if her husband refuses to accept it on the day he hears of it , her vow or pledge will be nullified , and the Lord will forgive her .

ID:	1014
INPUT:	▁Hobe ▁zuek ▁nahasten ▁ari ▁diren ▁horiek ▁erabat ▁iren duko ▁balira !
PRED:	It is better to be better to be fool .
GOLD:	I just wish that those troublemakers who want to mutilate you by circumcision would mutilate themselves .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	▁Aitari ▁isekaz ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁amari ▁esana ▁egiten ▁ez ▁dion ari bel e ek ▁begiak ▁aterako ▁dizkiote ▁eta ▁arrano ek ▁irentsiko .
PRED:	He said to his mother , “ Do n't let the woman speak to the woman , and she will pay attention to its eyes .
GOLD:	The eye that mocks a fatherand despises a mother 's instructionswill be plucked out by ravens of the valleyand eaten by vultures .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁jakinduria ▁ekialdeko ena ▁eta ▁egiptoarren a ▁baino ▁handiagoa ▁izan ▁zen ,
PRED:	Solomon 's wisdom was more than gold , and he became more than the Lord .
GOLD:	So Hiram supplied as much cedar and cypress timber as Solomon desired .

ID:	1017
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁baztertu ▁beretzat ▁aukeratu ▁zuen ▁herria . ▁Gogoan ▁duzue , ▁noski , ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁Eliasi ▁buruz ▁dioena , ▁nola ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁zion ▁Jainkoari ▁Israelen ▁aurka :
PRED:	For God has abandoned us , for he has chosen us to say to Elijah . “ This is what the Scriptures say to the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	No , God has not rejected his own people , whom he chose from the very beginning . Do you realize what the Scriptures say about this ? Elijah the prophet complained to God about the people of Israel and said ,

ID:	1018
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren , ▁lur ▁osoko ▁jabe aren , ▁itun - kutxa ▁daramaten ▁apaizen ▁oinek ▁Jordan ▁ibaiko ▁urak ▁ukitu ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁ur - kor ron tea ▁eten ▁eta ▁urak ▁gelditu ▁egingo ▁dira , ▁harresia ▁bailiran ».
PRED:	For all the nations of the Lord , the priests , the priests who are like the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , and the Ark of the Covenant will come to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The priests will carry the Ark of the Lord , the Lord of all the earth . As soon as their feet touch the water , the flow of water will be cut off upstream , and the river will stand up like a wall . ”

ID:	1019
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁Sionen ▁zauden ▁Jainkoa , zuri ▁zor ▁zaizu ▁gorespena , ▁zuri ▁bete ▁behar ▁promesak ,
PRED:	O God , listen to your unfailing love ; you will fulfill your vows to you .
GOLD:	for you answer our prayers.All of us must come to you .

ID:	1020
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Jerusalemen gatik ▁aieneka
PRED:	Jesus Appears to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jesus Grieves over Jerusalem

ID:	1021
INPUT:	▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonos orrek ▁Josiasen ▁seme ▁Sedekias ▁Judako ▁errege ▁ezarri ▁zuen , ▁Joiakimen ▁seme ▁Jekon iasen ▁ordez .
PRED:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon was king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Josiah son of Josiah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah son of Josiah succeeded Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim as the king of Judah . He was appointed by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .

ID:	1022
INPUT:	▁Jaunari , ▁bere ▁Jainkoari , ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen . ▁Eta ▁Jeremias ▁profetak ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zion ▁arren , ▁Sedekias ▁ez ▁zen ▁apaldu .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he did what was evil in the name of the Lord . He did not listen to Jeremiah .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the sight of the Lord his God , and he refused to humble himself when the prophet Jeremiah spoke to him directly from the Lord .

ID:	1023
INPUT:	▁« Bete , ▁bada , ▁gaur ▁ematen ▁dizkizuedan ▁agindu ▁guztiak , ▁adoretsu ▁izan ▁eta ▁hartzera ▁zoazten ▁lurraldeaz ▁jabetzeko ▁gauza ▁izan ▁zaitezten
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey all the commands I am giving you today and giving you today . When you enter the land I am giving you and giving them to the land .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , be careful to obey every command I am giving you today , so you may have strength to go in and take over the land you are about to enter .

ID:	1024
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁ni , ▁gezurrezko ▁amets en ▁z ale ▁diren ▁profeten ▁kontra ; ▁ametsak ▁konta tuz , ▁desbidera tu ▁egiten ▁dute ▁nire ▁herria ▁beren ▁gezur ▁eta ▁neurri gabekeri ez . ▁Ez ▁ditut ▁nik ▁bidali , ▁ez ▁diet ▁nik ▁ezer ▁agindu . ▁Horregatik , ▁ez ▁diote ▁inolako ▁onik ▁egiten ▁herri ▁honi . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ These false prophets are false prophets are false prophets , false prophets , and false prophets have spoken to me . I am saying , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord has commanded . ' ”
GOLD:	I am against these false prophets . Their imaginary dreams are flagrant lies that lead my people into sin . I did not send or appoint them , and they have no message at all for my people . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	1025
INPUT:	▁Juda ▁eta ▁Simeonen ▁leinuek ▁kanaan darrei ▁eraso
PRED:	The Land Given to Judah
GOLD:	Judah and Simeon Conquer the Land

ID:	1026
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁janari ▁hori ▁gorderik ▁geldituko ▁da ▁Egipto ▁lurraldean ▁izango ▁diren ▁zazpi ▁gose - urte etarako , ▁eta ▁gosete ak ▁ez ▁du ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁hondatuko ».
PRED:	So Egypt will be food in the land of Egypt , famine , famine , and famine will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	1027
INPUT:	▁Hartan , ▁inguru ▁haietan ▁bizi ▁zen ▁emakume ▁kanaandar ▁bat ▁deiadarka ▁hasi ▁zitzaion :— Erruki ▁zakizkit , ▁Jauna , ▁Daviden ▁Semea ! ▁Oin az e ▁gorritan ▁dauka ▁deabruak ▁nire ▁alaba .
PRED:	One day the men of Judah began to live in the battle , shouting , “ O Lord , Lord , Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	A Gentile woman who lived there came to him , pleading , “ Have mercy on me , O Lord , Son of David ! For my daughter is possessed by a demon that torments her severely . ”

ID:	1028
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁Asaren ▁erregealdiko ▁hogeita ▁hamasei garren ▁urtean , ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Baxa ▁Judaren ▁kontra ▁borrokatzera ▁abiatu ▁zen . ▁Rama ▁hiria ▁gotortu ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Asaren ▁joan - etorri ak ▁eragoz teko .
PRED:	During the reign of King Asa 's reign in Judah , Asa 's reign , King Asa 's reign in Judah . He went to attack the town of Judah . He went to attack the town of Judah .
GOLD:	In the thirty-sixth year of Asa 's reign , King Baasha of Israel invaded Judah and fortified Ramah in order to prevent anyone from entering or leaving King Asa 's territory in Judah .

ID:	1029
INPUT:	▁Nagusiak , ▁bere ▁asmo aren ▁kontra , ▁emaztetzat ▁hartzen ▁ez ▁badu , ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁duelako , ▁ez ▁du ▁haren ▁ber rer os pena ▁gal araziko ; ▁dena ▁den , ▁ez ▁du ▁atzerritarrei ▁saltzeko ▁eskubiderik , ▁iruzur ▁egingo ▁lioke ▁eta .
PRED:	“ But if the king refuses to listen to his own family , he must not marry him . He will not be able to kill him , and he will do what he has done to him .
GOLD:	If she does not satisfy her owner , he must allow her to be bought back again . But he is not allowed to sell her to foreigners , since he is the one who broke the contract with her .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	▁ F edeari ▁esker , ▁Isaakek ▁etorkizun erako ▁bedeinkazioa ▁eman ▁zien ▁Jakobi ▁eta ▁Esauri .
PRED:	It was by faith that Isaac gave birth to Esau .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Isaac promised blessings for the future to his sons , Jacob and Esau .

ID:	1031
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁ikusten ▁duzu ▁zertan ▁ari ▁diren ? ▁Ikusten ▁Israel ▁herriak ▁hemen ▁egiten ▁dituen ▁higuingarri tasunak , ▁ni ▁neure ▁santutegitik ▁alde ▁egitera ▁behartuz ? ▁Baina ▁higuingarri tasun ▁handiagoak ▁ere ▁ikusiko ▁dituzu ▁oraindik ».
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , what are you doing ? Why do you look for me ? Why do you look for me ? ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ do you see what they are doing ? Do you see the detestable sins the people of Israel are committing to drive me from my Temple ? But come , and you will see even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	1032
INPUT:	▁Mariak ▁hirur en ▁bat ▁hilabete ▁egin ▁zituen ▁Elis abe tekin ; ▁gero , ▁etxera ▁itzuli ▁zen .
PRED:	Mary left her home , and she returned home to her home .
GOLD:	Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three months and then went back to her own home .

ID:	1033
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁ere , ▁nagus iok , ▁joka ▁ezazue ▁era ▁berean ▁esklabo ekin , ▁mehatx urik ▁egin ▁gabe ; ▁hartu ▁kontuan ▁haien ▁eta ▁zuen ▁nagusia ▁zeruan ▁dagoela , ▁eta ▁hark ▁ez ▁duela ▁bereizkeriarik ▁egiten .
PRED:	You know that you are a slave , slave , slaves , slaves , and do n't realize that you have not been put on heaven . But he does not know that he does not do .
GOLD:	Masters , treat your slaves in the same way . Do n't threaten them ; remember , you both have the same Master in heaven , and he has no favorites .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	▁Liburu ▁Santuetan , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁hauxe ▁esana ▁du ▁norbaitek : ▁Zer ▁da ▁gizona , ▁zu ▁hartaz ▁oro itzeko , ▁zer ▁gizakia , ▁zu ▁hartaz ▁arduratzeko ?
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ Cursed is a man who is a gift to you ? Where is a man who is a gift to you ? '
GOLD:	For in one place the Scriptures say , “ What are mere mortals that you should think about them , or a son of man that you should care for him ?

ID:	1035
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orduan , <unk> i elek ▁egin ▁duena ▁egingo ▁duzue : ▁ez ▁duzue ▁aurpegia ▁estaliko , ▁ezta ▁hileta - ogi rik ▁jango ▁ere .
PRED:	Then you must be sure to be sure that you are not guilty , and you must not be cut off from your face .
GOLD:	Then you will do as Ezekiel has done . You will not mourn in public or console yourselves by eating the food brought by friends .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	▁« Honela ▁diotsuet ▁nik , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun ▁honek : Izan ▁bihotz , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren etxea ▁jasotzeko oin arriak ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁egun ▁haietan prof eten ▁ahotik hitz ▁hauek ▁entzun ▁zenituzten ok .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Be strong and finish the task ! Ever since the laying of the foundation of the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you have heard what the prophets have been saying about completing the building .

ID:	1037
INPUT:	▁heldu ▁eta ▁putzu ▁batera ▁jaurti ▁zuten . ▁H utsik ▁zegoen ▁putzua , ▁urik ▁gabe .
PRED:	They threw the ship into the boat and threw it into water .
GOLD:	Then they grabbed him and threw him into the cistern . Now the cistern was empty ; there was no water in it .

ID:	1038
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁arbasoen ▁ondoan ▁ehortzi ▁zuten ▁Jotam , ▁David ▁bere ▁arbaso aren ▁Hirian . ▁Ondorengo ▁erregea ▁haren ▁seme ▁Akaz ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then he became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . And his son Ahaz became the next king .

ID:	1039
INPUT:	▁azpian ▁zilarrezko ▁berrogei ▁oin ▁dituztela , ▁ohol ▁bakoitzeko ▁bi ▁oin .
PRED:	Make forty silver bases in silver bases — two bases on each frame .
GOLD:	with their forty silver bases , two bases under each frame .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	▁Harri ▁bat ▁ekarriz , ▁lehoi - zulo aren ▁sarreran ▁jarri ▁zuten , ▁eta ▁erregeak ▁bere ▁errege - zi giluz ▁eta ▁funtzionarioen ▁zigiluz ▁zigil atu ▁zuen , ▁Danieli ▁buruz ▁erabaki takoa ▁inork ▁alda ▁ez ▁zezan .
PRED:	“ All right , ” the king said , “ There was a young lion , the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , and there was no reply .
GOLD:	Then the king returned to his palace and spent the night fasting . He refused his usual entertainment and could n't sleep at all that night .

ID:	1041
INPUT:	▁Hitz ▁hutsez ▁ez ▁da ▁morroia ▁zentzarazten ; uler tu ▁egin ▁arren , ▁ez ▁du ▁esanik ▁egingo .
PRED:	He does not listen to his servant , but he does n't obey his servant .
GOLD:	Words alone will not discipline a servant ; the words may be understood , but they are not heeded .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁uretatik ▁atera tzerakoan , ▁zerua ▁ur ratzen ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁eta ▁Espiritua , ▁uso - tan keran , ▁beregana ▁jaisten .
PRED:	When Jesus came out of the sky , he saw the heavens and saw the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit of the earth .
GOLD:	As Jesus came up out of the water , he saw the heavens splitting apart and the Holy Spirit descending on him like a dove .

ID:	1043
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jeftek , ▁Galaadeko ▁gizonak ▁bildurik , ▁efraim darrei ▁eraso ▁eta ▁menderatu ▁egin ▁zituen . ▁Efraim darrek ▁esan ▁ohi ▁zuten , ▁Efraim ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurralde ▁artean ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁galaad tarrak ▁efraim darren ▁artetik ▁alde ▁eginak ▁zirela .
PRED:	Then the men of Gilead attacked the tribe of Gilead and attacked them . He attacked them and attacked them , and he had fled to the land of Ephraim and Ephraim . He also lived in the land of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The people of Ephraim responded , “ You men of Gilead are nothing more than fugitives from Ephraim and Manasseh. ” So Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead and attacked the men of Ephraim and defeated them .

ID:	1044
INPUT:	▁gauza ▁guztietan ▁zeu ▁egintza ▁onen ▁eredu ▁agertuz : ▁irakaspen ▁garb iko ▁eta ▁giz abide tsu ;
PRED:	In all the evil things you have done , you will come to the end of your faithfulness .
GOLD:	And you yourself must be an example to them by doing good works of every kind . Let everything you do reflect the integrity and seriousness of your teaching .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	▁Hauxe ▁jakinarazten ▁diogu , ▁beraz , ▁erregeari : ▁juduek ▁hiria ▁berriro ▁eraiki ▁eta ▁harresiak ▁jasotzen ▁badituzte , ▁laster ▁galduko ▁dituela ▁erregeak ▁Eufrates ▁ibaiaren ▁mendebaldeko ▁lurraldeak ».
PRED:	This is what the Jews say to the king : ‘ We will rebuild the walls of the Euphrates River , and the walls of the Euphrates River will be rebuilt . ' ”
GOLD:	We declare to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are completed , the province west of the Euphrates River will be lost to you . ”

ID:	1046
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁hiriak ▁hondaturik ▁utziko ▁ditut , eta ▁zu ▁zeu ▁basamortu ▁bihurtuko ; orduan ▁jakingo ▁duzun i ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	Your towns will be desolate , and your towns will be destroyed . I will know that you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will demolish your citiesand make you desolate.Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1047
INPUT:	▁eta ▁diru arekin ▁batera ▁nire ▁edalontzia , ▁zilarrez koa , ▁gazteenaren ▁zaku - muturrean ». Hark ▁Joseren ▁esana ▁bete ▁zuen .
PRED:	He took my money to the money of silver , for he has given you his share of silver . ”
GOLD:	Then put my personal silver cup at the top of the youngest brother 's sack , along with the money for his grain. ” So the manager did as Joseph instructed him .

ID:	1048
INPUT:	▁Herodesek ▁hura ▁atera ▁behar ▁zuen ▁aurreko ▁gauean , ▁Pedro ▁lo ▁zegoen ▁bi ▁solda dur en ▁artean , ▁bi ▁katez ▁loturik , ▁eta ▁guardiak ▁atean ▁kartzela ▁zaintzen .
PRED:	Herod went out to the city where he was found , where Peter had been found , and John was found in chains .
GOLD:	The night before Peter was to be placed on trial , he was asleep , fastened with two chains between two soldiers . Others stood guard at the prison gate .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	▁Zeren ▁Jainkoarengan ▁zorakeria ▁dirudi ena ▁gizakiak ▁baino ▁jakin tsuago ▁baita , ▁eta ▁Jainkoarengan ▁ahul ezia ▁dirudi ena ▁gizakiak ▁baino ▁indartsuago .
PRED:	For God is like a lion , and he is more powerful than the Almighty .
GOLD:	This foolish plan of God is wiser than the wisest of human plans , and God 's weakness is stronger than the greatest of human strength .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁gaiztakeri an ▁seguru ▁zeunden , pents atuz : ▁“ Ez ▁nau ▁inork ▁ikusten ”. Zeure ▁jakinduri ak ▁eta ▁zien tziak des bideratu ▁zaituzte , eta ▁pents arazi :“ Neu , ▁eta ▁beste ▁inor ▁ez !”
PRED:	When you heard this , they said , ‘ Do n't understand your wisdom , and no one can save you . '
GOLD:	“ You felt secure in your wickedness. ‘ No one sees me , ' you said.But your ‘ wisdom ' and ‘ knowledge ' have led you astray , and you said , ‘ I am the only one , and there is no other . '

ID:	1051
INPUT:	▁Jakin ▁zuen ▁Herodes ▁agintariak ▁gertatzen ▁zen ▁guztia , ▁eta ▁zer ▁pentsa ▁ez ▁zeki ela ▁zegoen . ▁Batzuek ▁Joan ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁zela ▁zioten ;
PRED:	When Herod heard what was happening to him , he did n't know what he was going to come from the dead .
GOLD:	When Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , heard about everything Jesus was doing , he was puzzled . Some were saying that John the Baptist had been raised from the dead .

ID:	1052
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zien ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	and the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	1053
INPUT:	▁aurrez ▁betidanik ▁berak ▁zuen ▁eta ▁Kristo ▁Jesus ▁gure ▁Jaunarengan ▁bete ▁duen ▁asmo aren ▁jakinduria .
PRED:	Then he spoke again to the Lord Jesus Christ in the past past .
GOLD:	This was his eternal plan , which he carried out through Christ Jesus our Lord .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	▁« Han ▁datza ▁Elam go ▁erregea ▁bere ▁gerlari ▁guztien ▁hilobi ez ▁inguratua ; ▁gerran ▁hilak ▁dira ▁denak . ▁Sines gabe ▁horiek , ▁bizien ▁artean ▁izu - ikara ▁ezartzen ▁zutenak , ▁lur ▁azpiko ▁mundura ▁jaitsi ▁dira , ▁desohorez ▁beterik , ▁hildakoekin ▁elkar tzera .
PRED:	“ The kings of the nations will be surrounded by the sword . They will be surrounded by the sword , and they will lie down among the nations . They will lie down among the nations .
GOLD:	“ Elam lies there surrounded by the graves of all its hordes , those who were slaughtered by the sword . They struck terror in the hearts of people everywhere , but now they have descended as outcasts to the world below . Now they lie in the pit and share the shame of those who have gone before them .

ID:	1055
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁bi ▁txori ▁s os ▁batean ▁saltzen ? ▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁da ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁ere ▁lurrera ▁erortzen ▁zuen ▁Aitaren ▁baimenik ▁gabe .
PRED:	“ Do n't you build a small price for two branches ? No one of it is allowed to fall on the ground . No one can fall on the ground .
GOLD:	What is the price of two sparrows — one copper coin ? But not a single sparrow can fall to the ground without your Father knowing it .

ID:	1056
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁itzuli ▁eta ▁usain ▁gozoko ▁uken duak ▁prestatu ▁zituzten . Larun batean ▁atseden ▁hartu ▁zuten , ▁agindua ▁zegoen ▁bezala .
PRED:	Then they returned and prepared the spices for the Sabbath , just as he had commanded .
GOLD:	Then they went home and prepared spices and ointments to anoint his body . But by the time they were finished the Sabbath had begun , so they rested as required by the law .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁onginahia ▁ez ▁dut ▁alferrikako ▁bihurtu ▁nahi . ▁Baina ▁Jainkoak ▁legea ▁betetzeagatik ▁onartzen ▁gaituela ▁egia ▁balitz , ▁alferrik ▁hila ▁izango ▁zen ▁Kristo .
PRED:	For we do n't want to obey God 's law , for we are dead . But if we are dead , we are dead .
GOLD:	I do not treat the grace of God as meaningless . For if keeping the law could make us right with God , then there was no need for Christ to die .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁egun ▁horien ▁buruan ▁berriro ▁miatuko ▁du , ▁eta ▁zauria , ▁azalean ▁zabaldu ▁gabe , ▁zurbil duz ▁doala ▁ikusten ▁badu , ▁garbitzat ▁aitortuko ▁du ; ▁zor ne ▁hutsa ▁da . ▁G aix oak ▁arropak ▁garbituko ▁ditu ▁eta ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the affected area , and the priest must pronounce the person ceremonially clean . The priest must pronounce the person ceremonially clean , and the person ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest will make another examination . If he finds the affected area has faded and has not spread , the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially clean . It was only a rash . The person 's clothing must be washed , and the person will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	1059
INPUT:	▁Is uri ▁olioa ▁erre - oparien ▁aldarearen ▁eta ▁bertako ▁tresna ▁guztien ▁gainera . ▁Honela ▁sagaratuko ▁duzu , ▁eta ▁guztiz ▁sakratua ▁izango ▁da ▁aldarea .
PRED:	“ You must burn the fat of burnt offerings and burn incense at the altar . You must be made with all the altar of the altar .
GOLD:	Anoint the altar of burnt offering and its utensils to consecrate them . Then the altar will become absolutely holy .

ID:	1060
INPUT:	▁zeru - sab aia ▁lurrean ▁oinarritzen ▁du , eta ▁horren ▁gainean ▁eraikitzen bere ▁jauregia ; itsas ▁urak ▁bildu eta ▁lur ▁gainera ▁isurtzen ▁ditu . Jauna ▁du ▁izena .
PRED:	He lights up the sky on the heavens , the heavens above the earth . He sits on the sea , the sea , and the foundations of the sea .
GOLD:	The Lord 's home reaches up to the heavens , while its foundation is on the earth.He draws up water from the oceansand pours it down as rain on the land.The Lord is his name !

ID:	1061
INPUT:	▁entzun ▁zuk ▁zerutik , ▁bizi ▁zaren ▁toki ▁horretatik , ▁eta ▁barkatu . ▁Egizu ▁har ▁dezala ▁nork ▁bere ▁joka eraren ▁ordaina , ▁ongi ▁baitak izu ▁halakoaren ▁barru aren ▁berri ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁zuk ▁bakarrik ▁dakizu ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztien ▁barru aren ▁berri .
PRED:	When you hear from heaven , you will know what you have done , you will know that you have done , you will know that everyone will know that you are true . ”
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	1062
INPUT:	▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁besoak ▁indar tuko ▁ditut , ▁faraoiaren ak ▁ahuldu ta ▁eroriko ▁diren ▁bitartean . ▁Nire ▁ezpata ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁eskuan ▁jarri ▁eta ▁hark ▁Egiptoren ▁kontra ▁astin duko ▁duenean , ▁orduan ▁jakingo ▁dute ▁ni ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	The king of Babylon will strike the king of Babylon , and I will strike the sword of the king of Babylon . Then they will be killed by the sword of the king of Babylon . Then they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon , while the arms of Pharaoh fall useless to his sides . And when I put my sword in the hand of Babylon 's king and he brings it against the land of Egypt , Egypt will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1063
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁diot ▁nik , Jainko ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : Hona ▁hemen ▁ni ▁zure ▁aurka , lots agabe ▁halakoa ! Heldu ▁da ▁zure ▁eguna , kontuak ▁emateko ▁ordua !
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will bring you back to you . '
GOLD:	“ See , I am your enemy , you arrogant people , ” says the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies. “ Your day of reckoning has arrived — the day when I will punish you .

ID:	1064
INPUT:	▁Gau ▁eta ▁egun ▁gainean ▁nuen ▁zure ▁esku ▁gogorra , indarrak ▁mak altzen ▁ari ▁zitzaizkidan , ▁u dako ▁sargo ritan ▁bezala .
PRED:	That night I handed them over to you , just as the water was watching for me .
GOLD:	Day and night your hand of discipline was heavy on me.My strength evaporated like water in the summer heat.Interlude

ID:	1065
INPUT:	▁Os asun tsu ▁iraunaraziko ▁nauzu , zu tik ▁eutsiko ▁zeure ▁aurrean ▁betiko .
PRED:	For you will live in your presence , O Lord , for your unfailing love will be secure in your presence .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who lives from everlasting to everlasting.Amen and amen !

ID:	1066
INPUT:	▁Horren beste ▁abere ▁izanik , ▁lurralde ▁hark ▁ez ▁zien ▁denak ▁batera ▁bizitzeko ▁egoki erarik ▁eskaintzen ;
PRED:	He gave them a male animal to live in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	But the land could not support both Abram and Lot with all their flocks and herds living so close together .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	▁Iparraldeko ▁erasoa ▁iragarri
PRED:	Summary of Asa 's Reign
GOLD:	Coming Judgment against Judah

ID:	1068
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁baitiot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Gorro tagarri ▁eta ▁nazkagarri ▁egin ▁zaizkizun ▁haien ▁esku ▁utziko ▁zaitut ;
PRED:	For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will turn you from your enemies .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will surely hand you over to your enemies , to those you loathe , those you rejected .

ID:	1069
INPUT:	▁lurrari ▁bere ▁ertzetatik ▁heldurik gaiztoak ▁bertatik ▁astin ▁ditzan ?
PRED:	When the godly arrived at the entrance to its side ?
GOLD:	Have you made daylight spread to the ends of the earth , to bring an end to the night 's wickedness ?

ID:	1070
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁buruko ▁ilea ▁zuria ▁zen , ▁artilea ▁eta ▁elurra ▁bezalakoa , ▁begiak ▁sugarra ▁bezalakoak ,
PRED:	His hair was as white as white as white as white as snow .
GOLD:	His head and his hair were white like wool , as white as snow . And his eyes were like flames of fire .

ID:	1071
INPUT:	▁« Honela ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Ikus iak ▁dituzue ▁Jerusalemen ▁eta ▁Judako ▁hirien ▁aurka ▁bidali ▁ditudan ▁zori gaitzak : ▁hondaturik ▁eta ▁bizilagunik ▁gabe ▁daude .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I have sent you to destroy the towns of Judah .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : You saw the calamity I brought on Jerusalem and all the towns of Judah . They now lie deserted and in ruins .

ID:	1072
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁aldenduko ▁gaitu ▁Kristok ▁digun ▁maitasun etik ? ▁Ats ek abeak , ▁larriak , ▁eraso aldiak , ▁goseak , ▁jantzirik ▁ezak , <unk> , ▁ezpatak ?
PRED:	Who can save us ? Who will you ? Who will know that we are going to attack us ? ”
GOLD:	Can anything ever separate us from Christ 's love ? Does it mean he no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity , or are persecuted , or hungry , or destitute , or in danger , or threatened with death ?

ID:	1073
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zion ▁ondaretzat ▁lurrik ▁eman , ▁ezta ▁oin ▁bat ▁ere ; ▁baina ▁berari ▁eta ▁beraren ▁ondorengoei ▁emango ▁ziela ▁agindu ▁zion , ▁oraindik ▁Abrahamek ▁seme - alabarik ▁ez ▁zuen ▁arren .
PRED:	But Abraham did not give him a special gift or a special possession . But Abraham gave birth to him , and he gave birth to his sons . But Abraham did not give him children to him .
GOLD:	“ But God gave him no inheritance here , not even one square foot of land . God did promise , however , that eventually the whole land would belong to Abraham and his descendants — even though he had no children yet .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	▁Agian ▁adituko ▁dizute ▁eta ▁beren ▁jokabide ▁okerretik ▁bihurtuko ▁dira . ▁Horrela ▁baldin ▁bada , ▁damutu ▁egingo ▁naiz ▁eta ▁ez ▁dut ▁beteko ▁beraien ▁egite ▁gaiztoengatik ▁ematea ▁pents atua ▁dudan ▁zigorra .
PRED:	They will turn away from their wickedness , and they will turn away from their sins . I will punish them , and I will punish them .
GOLD:	Perhaps they will listen and turn from their evil ways . Then I will change my mind about the disaster I am ready to pour out on them because of their sins .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁bedeinkatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁zazpigarren ▁eguna ▁eta ▁sagaratu , ▁egun ▁horretan ▁hartu ▁baitzuen ▁atseden ▁kre azio - lan etik .
PRED:	Then he blessed the people and broke it out of the seventh day , and it was set apart for the rest of the people .
GOLD:	And God blessed the seventh day and declared it holy , because it was the day when he rested from all his work of creation .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	▁« Hala ▁gertatuko ▁da ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea ▁agertuko ▁den ▁egunean ▁ere .
PRED:	“ But when the Son of Man returns , the Son of Man will be on the day .
GOLD:	Yes , it will be ‘ business as usual ' right up to the day when the Son of Man is revealed .

ID:	1077
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁eraginik , ▁Galaad ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurraldeak ▁igaro ▁eta ▁Galaadeko ▁Mitzpara ▁heldu ▁zen ▁Jefte , ▁eta ▁hemendik ▁amondarren ▁lurraldera ▁jo ▁zuen .
PRED:	When the Spirit of the Lord came to the land of Gilead , he went into the land of Gilead and went out to the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	At that time the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah , and he went throughout the land of Gilead and Manasseh , including Mizpah in Gilead , and from there he led an army against the Ammonites .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	▁Tenpluaren ▁mendebaldean , ▁eraik in ▁bat ▁zegoen ▁huts artearen ▁azkenean : ▁berrogeita ▁bost ▁metro ▁zen ▁luze ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁hamabost ▁zabal ; ▁hormak , ▁berriz , ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdi ▁lodi .
PRED:	The Temple was built in the inner courtyard , and it was 15 feet long and 27 feet wide , and 45 feet wide .
GOLD:	A large building stood on the west , facing the Temple courtyard . It was 1221/2 feet wide and 1571/2 feet long , and its walls were 83/4 feet thick .

ID:	1079
INPUT:	▁Gaden ▁eta ▁Rubenen ▁ondorengoek ▁erantzun ▁zioten ▁Moisesi :— Prest ▁gaude ▁zure ▁agindua ▁betetzeko , ▁jauna .
PRED:	The descendants of Reuben said to Moses , “ We will go to the tribes of Reuben and your ancestors . ”
GOLD:	Then the men of Gad and Reuben replied , “ We , your servants , will follow your instructions exactly .

ID:	1080
INPUT:	▁ F ariseuek , ▁hori ▁ikustean , ▁esan ▁zieten ▁ikasleei :— Nolatan ▁jaten ▁du ▁zuen ▁mai suak ▁zergalari ▁eta ▁bekatariekin ?
PRED:	When the Pharisees saw the disciples , he asked his disciples , “ Why are you eating with tax tax collectors and sisters ? ”
GOLD:	But when the Pharisees saw this , they asked his disciples , “ Why does your teacher eat with such scum ? ”

ID:	1081
INPUT:	▁« Etorri ▁ziren , ▁bada , ▁arratsaldeko ▁bos te takoak , ▁eta ▁zilarrezko ▁txanpon ▁bana ▁jaso ▁zuten .
PRED:	“ Well , ” they said , “ Haman , the five pieces of silver , and five pieces of silver .
GOLD:	When those hired at five o'clock were paid , each received a full day 's wage .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ezarri ▁saski ▁batean ; ▁gero , ▁aurkeztu ▁sas kia ▁zekorrarekin ▁eta ▁bi ▁ahari ekin ▁batera .
PRED:	Place a basket of bread with olive oil , and sprinkle it with two quarts with two quarts with olive oil .
GOLD:	Place them all in a single basket , and present them at the entrance of the Tabernacle , along with the young bull and the two rams .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	▁« Zu , ▁Israel , ▁nire ▁zerbitzaria ; zu , ▁Jakob , ▁nik ▁aukeraturiko ▁herria , nire ▁adiskide ▁Abrahamen ondoren goa .
PRED:	“ You are my servant , my servant , my servant , my servant , for I have been born to you .
GOLD:	“ But as for you , Israel my servant , Jacob my chosen one , descended from Abraham my friend ,

ID:	1084
INPUT:	▁“ Aur kitu tako ▁harrapakinak bana tzen ▁ari ▁dira , ▁noski ! B ana , ▁bina ▁neskatx agu dari ▁bakoitzari , ko lo rezko ▁ehun ak ▁Sis er arentzat , ko lo rezko ▁oihalak : kol ore tan ▁bor daturiko ▁oihalak haren ▁lep orako ”.
PRED:	They say , ‘ We have seen the best of the land ! We have been driven to the gods of the forest , and we are mocked by their heads . We have been filled with gold . '
GOLD:	‘ They must be dividing the captured plunder — with a woman or two for every man.There will be colorful robes for Sisera , and colorful , embroidered robes for me.Yes , the plunder will includecolorful robes embroidered on both sides . '

ID:	1085
INPUT:	▁— Zer ▁da ? ▁— galdetu ▁nion . Hark ▁erantzun ▁zidan :— On tzi ▁handi ▁bat ▁da : ▁lurralde ▁guztiaren ▁bekatua ▁adierazten ▁du .
PRED:	“ Where is he ? ” he asked me . “ He is the great man , ” he replied . “ He is a great nation . ”
GOLD:	“ What is it ? ” I asked.He replied , “ It is a basket for measuring grain , and it 's filled with the sins of everyone throughout the land . ”

ID:	1086
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1087
INPUT:	▁T re beak ▁eta ▁laguntzeko ▁gogo tsu ▁ziren ▁emakumeek ▁ahuntz - ilea ▁ehundu ▁zuten .
PRED:	Many women and women were given to Abraham , women , women , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	All the women who were willing used their skills to spin the goat hair into yarn .

ID:	1088
INPUT:	▁« Zure ▁emazteak ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁babiloni arrei ▁emango ▁dizkiete ▁eta ▁zeu ▁ere ▁ez ▁zara ▁libratuko : ▁Babiloniako ▁erregeak ▁preso ▁hartuko ▁zaitu , ▁eta ▁hiria ▁erre ▁egingo ▁du ».
PRED:	“ You will give your sons and daughters and daughters , and you will be killed . You will be killed , and you will be killed . ”
GOLD:	All your wives and children will be led out to the Babylonians , and you will not escape . You will be seized by the king of Babylon , and this city will be burned down . ”

ID:	1089
INPUT:	▁Printz een ▁eskubideak ▁eta ▁bete beharrak
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Rules for the Princes

ID:	1090
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁urtez ▁ereingo ▁duzue ▁zeuen ▁soroetan , ▁sei ▁urtez ▁in aus iko ▁mahastiak ▁eta ▁bilduko ▁uztak ;
PRED:	You must plant six years for six years , and you will plant your crops for six years .
GOLD:	For six years you may plant your fields and prune your vineyards and harvest your crops ,

ID:	1091
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁salbatu ▁zituen ▁arren , bere ▁izenaren ▁ohore agatik ▁eta ▁bere ▁ahalmena ▁azaltzeko .
PRED:	The Lord rescues them from his name , and he gives power to his glory .
GOLD:	Even so , he saved them — to defend the honor of his nameand to demonstrate his mighty power .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zien :— Badakit ▁Jaunak ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁eman ▁dizuela . ▁Hemen , ▁hirian , ▁izuturik ▁gaude ▁eta ▁herrialdeko ▁jende ▁guztia ▁ere ▁ikaraz ▁dago ▁zuen ▁aurrean ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ We know that the Lord has given us this land . We have seen all the people of the land , and we are filled with fear . ”
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	1093
INPUT:	▁Go ibel ▁jarri ▁zen ▁erregea , ▁baina ▁mahaikide en ▁aurrean ▁egindako ▁zin arengatik , ▁ez ▁zion ▁ukatu ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	He built a banquet for the king , but he refused to hide it before him .
GOLD:	Then the king deeply regretted what he had said ; but because of the vows he had made in front of his guests , he could n't refuse her .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁oz pina ▁ah orako ▁eta ▁kea ▁begi etarako , hala ▁alfer ra ▁lanean ▁hartzen ▁duenaren tzako .
PRED:	They look to their feet , and you are too hard to harvest .
GOLD:	Lazy people irritate their employers , like vinegar to the teeth or smoke in the eyes .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	▁Atal ondoak ▁kanpoko ▁atari rantz ▁jotzen ▁zuen ; ▁hormek ▁palmondoak ▁zituzten ▁alde ▁banatan ▁zizelkatu ta . ▁Zortzi ▁harmaila ▁igo ▁behar ▁ziren ▁sarrerara ▁iristeko .
PRED:	The entry room of the gateway to the outer courtyard , and there were eight steps leading to the entrance to the entrance of the gateway to its entrance .
GOLD:	Its entry room faced into the outer courtyard , and it had palm tree decorations on the columns . There were eight steps leading to its entrance .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	▁erasopean ▁bai , ▁baina ▁eskutik ▁utzi ta ▁ez ; ▁lurrera ▁botatzen ▁gaituzte , ▁baina ▁suntsitzen ▁ez ;
PRED:	They have turned away from your hand , but they can not let them go down to the ground .
GOLD:	We are hunted down , but never abandoned by God . We get knocked down , but we are not destroyed .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	▁Elkarketa - etxolaren ▁aurrera ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁Moisesek ▁agindu ▁ziena ; ▁elkarte ▁osoa ▁hurbildu ▁zen ▁eta ▁zutik ▁zegoen ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	So Moses took the entire community of the Tabernacle , and the whole community of the Lord appeared to the Lord .
GOLD:	So the people presented all these things at the entrance of the Tabernacle , just as Moses had commanded . Then the whole community came forward and stood before the Lord .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁orduan ▁eta ▁gehiago ▁ezkutatuko ▁diet ▁aurpegia , ▁jainko ▁arrotzen gana ▁bihurtuz ▁egingo ▁duten ▁gaiztakeria gatik .
PRED:	But I will turn my face and face to my face .
GOLD:	At that time I will hide my face from them on account of all the evil they commit by worshiping other gods .

ID:	1099
INPUT:	▁zi mur rez ▁bete ▁eta ▁hezur ▁eta ▁azal ▁utzi ▁nauzu : horre k ▁salatzen ▁eta ▁ak us atzen ▁nau .
PRED:	He has covered me with my skin , and he has broken me .
GOLD:	As if to prove I have sinned , you 've reduced me to skin and bones.My gaunt flesh testifies against me .

ID:	1100
INPUT:	▁Damaskoko ▁sinagog etarako ▁gutunak ▁eskatu ▁zizkion , ▁aurkitzen ▁zituen ▁kristau - bidearen ▁jarraitz aileak , ▁gizaseme ▁nahiz ▁emakume , ▁Jerusalemera ▁preso ▁eraman ▁ahal ▁izateko .
PRED:	One day he sent messengers to Damascus , and he asked them to send a woman to Jerusalem . He took some of the women and women and women to go to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He requested letters addressed to the synagogues in Damascus , asking for their cooperation in the arrest of any followers of the Way he found there . He wanted to bring them — both men and women — back to Jerusalem in chains .

ID:	1101
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁etorrera
PRED:	A Call to the Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Is Coming

ID:	1102
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zidan
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then I received this message from the Lord :

ID:	1103
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁errituzko ▁aurkezpen - keinua ▁eginez ▁eskaintzen ▁dizkidazun ▁beste ▁opari gaien ▁zati ▁bat ▁ematen ▁dizuet , ▁zuri ▁eta ▁zure ▁ondorengoei , ▁gizonezko ▁nahiz ▁emakumezko : ▁garbi ▁dagoen ▁edon ork ▁jan ▁dezake ▁horietatik . ▁Betiko ▁lege ▁izango ▁duzue ▁hau .
PRED:	In this way , I have given them as a special gift to you as a special gift to your descendants as a special gift to you . This is what you have promised to me .
GOLD:	“ All the sacred offerings and special offerings presented to me when the Israelites lift them up before the altar also belong to you . I have given them to you and to your sons and daughters as your permanent share . Any member of your family who is ceremonially clean may eat of these offerings .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	▁Etsai ▁indartsu agandik ▁salbatu ▁ninduen , ni ▁baino ▁indartsuago ▁ziren ▁arerio engandik .
PRED:	He saved me from their enemies ; their enemies were scattered .
GOLD:	They attacked me at a moment when I was in distress , but the Lord supported me .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁Josue ▁bere ▁ondorengo ▁izendatu
PRED:	The Lord 's Covenant to Joshua
GOLD:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Leader

ID:	1106
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitzatela , ▁beraz , ▁inork ▁gaitzets ▁jan - edan ak ▁edo ▁jaiegun , ▁ilberri ▁nahiz ▁larunbatak ▁direla ▁eta .
PRED:	Do n't be careful not eat any of you , or you will be ashamed of those who worship idols .
GOLD:	So do n't let anyone condemn you for what you eat or drink , or for not celebrating certain holy days or new moon ceremonies or Sabbaths .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Jakobek ▁otoitz ▁hau ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁« Jauna , ▁gure ▁guraso ▁Abrahamen ▁eta ▁Isaaken ▁Jainkoa , ▁zuk ▁esan ▁didazu : ▁“ Itzul ▁zaitez ▁zeure ▁lurraldera ▁eta ▁zeure ▁ahaideengana , ▁eta ▁bedeinkatuko ▁zaitut ”.
PRED:	Then Jacob prayed to Jacob , “ O Lord , the God of Abraham , Abraham , your ancestors , the God of Abraham , and your ancestors will bless you and your descendants . '
GOLD:	I am not worthy of all the unfailing love and faithfulness you have shown to me , your servant . When I left home and crossed the Jordan River , I owned nothing except a walking stick . Now my household fills two large camps !

ID:	1108
INPUT:	▁Azter ▁dezagun ▁arretaz ▁geure ▁jokabidea , eta ▁itzul ▁gaitezen ▁Jaunarengana .
PRED:	Let us go to the Lord , and let us go to the Lord .
GOLD:	Instead , let us test and examine our ways.Let us turn back to the Lord .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	▁Bet erik ▁b eude ▁gure ▁bi hi tegiak , den etariko ▁fru ituz ▁hornitu ak ; u gal ▁bitez ▁artaldeak ▁milaka ▁eta ▁milaka ▁gure ▁zelaietan ;
PRED:	The people of Beth-shemesh and sing for our livestock , and all the livestock of our livestock .
GOLD:	May our barns be filledwith crops of every kind.May the flocks in our fields multiply by the thousands , even tens of thousands ,

ID:	1110
INPUT:	▁Piz tiak ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁dituzun ▁hamar ▁adarrek ▁gorroto ▁izango ▁diote ▁emagaldu ari , ▁biluzik ▁eta ▁ezer ▁gabe ▁utziko ▁dute ; ▁haren ▁haragia ▁irentsi ▁egingo ▁dute ▁eta ▁hondarrak ▁sutan ▁erreko ;
PRED:	They have seen the beast , and the wild animals will be broken into the fire . They will be allowed to drink the fire , and they will burn them into the fire .
GOLD:	The scarlet beast and his ten horns all hate the prostitute . They will strip her naked , eat her flesh , and burn her remains with fire .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	▁M eun darrok ▁zerga ▁ordaindu ▁zioten ▁Uz iasi . Honen ▁izena ▁Egiptoko ▁mugetaraino ▁zabaldu ▁zen , ▁oso ▁indartsu ▁izatera ▁heldu ▁baitzen .
PRED:	The leader of the tribe of Egypt was sent to pay attention to the first of Egypt .
GOLD:	The Meunites paid annual tribute to him , and his fame spread even to Egypt , for he had become very powerful .

ID:	1112
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁senideok : ▁hizketa ▁arrotzez ▁hitz ▁eginez ▁aurkeztuko ▁banintz <unk> , ▁zer ▁on ▁ekarriko ▁lizu eke ▁horrek , ▁nire ▁hitzak ▁ez ▁balizue ▁emango ▁ager penik , ▁ez ▁ezagu erarik , ▁ez ▁Jainkoarengan diko ▁mezu rik , ▁ezta ▁irakaspen ik ▁ere ?
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , I will speak to you , and I will speak to you . Do n't tell you what I say , ‘ This is what I am saying . '
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , if I should come to you speaking in an unknown language , how would that help you ? But if I bring you a revelation or some special knowledge or prophecy or teaching , that will be helpful .

ID:	1113
INPUT:	▁— Maisu , ▁zein ▁da ▁lege ko ▁agindurik ▁nagusiena ?
PRED:	“ Teacher , what is the law of religious law ? Of course ,
GOLD:	“ Teacher , which is the most important commandment in the law of Moses ? ”

ID:	1114
INPUT:	▁Dam utu ▁zen ▁Jauna ▁gizakia ▁egin ▁izan az ▁eta , ▁bihoz min durik ,
PRED:	“ Please , ” the Lord said , “ you will laugh at your mind .
GOLD:	So the Lord was sorry he had ever made them and put them on the earth . It broke his heart .

ID:	1115
INPUT:	▁Z o raturik ▁dago ▁erregea ▁zure ▁eder tasunaz . Bera ▁da ▁zure ▁jaun ; ▁egiozu ▁agur .
PRED:	Wisdom is full of good , and your master is full of money .
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	▁Zor o ▁itsu ok ▁halakook ! ▁Zer ▁da ▁handiago , ▁urrea ▁ala ▁urrea ▁sagaratzen ▁duen ▁tenplua ?
PRED:	“ What is you blind ? ” he asked . “ He is the gold of gold ? ”
GOLD:	Blind fools ! Which is more important — the gold or the Temple that makes the gold sacred ?

ID:	1117
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak : ▁Joka ▁ezazue ▁zuzenbidez ▁eta ▁justiziaz , ▁askatu ▁zapaldua ▁zapal tzailearen ▁eskutik , ▁ez ▁eman ▁tratu ▁txarrik ▁etorkin , ▁umezurtz ▁eta ▁alargunei , ▁ez ▁egin ▁indar keriarik , ▁ez ▁hil ▁erru gaberik ▁toki ▁honetan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do not turn away from your sins and turn from your detestable gods . Do not turn away from the orphans , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : Be fair-minded and just . Do what is right ! Help those who have been robbed ; rescue them from their oppressors . Quit your evil deeds ! Do not mistreat foreigners , orphans , and widows . Stop murdering the innocent !

ID:	1118
INPUT:	▁Garb ikuntza - ohikun e ▁hau ▁erabiliko ▁duzu : ▁garbikun tzako ▁urez ▁zipriztinduko ▁dituzu ; ▁ondoren , ▁gorpu tzeko ▁ile ▁guztia ▁moztuko ▁dute ▁eta ▁arropak ▁garbituko . ▁Horren beste z , ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁dira .
PRED:	You must wash your hair in water , and you must wash your hair on the altar . They must wash your clothes and wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water .
GOLD:	Do this by sprinkling them with the water of purification , and have them shave their entire body and wash their clothing . Then they will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	1119
INPUT:	▁Auzoko ▁guztiak ▁beldurrak ▁hartu ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁Judeako ▁mendialde ▁guztian ▁zabaldu ▁zen ▁gertatuaren ▁berri .
PRED:	All of the crowd followed him and spread out to the hill country of Judea .
GOLD:	Awe fell upon the whole neighborhood , and the news of what had happened spread throughout the Judean hills .

ID:	1120
INPUT:	▁Adi - adi ▁entzun ▁diet , baina ▁ez ▁dira ▁hitz eko ▁jendea , ez ▁da ▁inor bere ▁gaiztakeriaz ▁damutzen , bere ▁hutsegiteak ▁aitortuz . Denak ▁beren ▁bidean ▁zuzen ▁aurrera , z iztu ▁bizian ▁borrokara oldartzen ▁den ▁z aldia ▁bezala .
PRED:	I listen to them , but they do not listen to them , but they do not know that they are saying , “ The people of Israel are saying , ‘ This is what the Lord says . '
GOLD:	I listen to their conversationsand do n't hear a word of truth.Is anyone sorry for doing wrong ? Does anyone say , “ What a terrible thing I have done ” ? No ! All are running down the path of sinas swiftly as a horse galloping into battle !

ID:	1121
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	The Lord gave me this message :

ID:	1122
INPUT:	▁Leh er ▁eginda ▁nago , ▁guztiz ▁lur ▁jota , garras ika ▁eta ▁aieneka ▁barru - barrutik .
PRED:	My heart is like a owl , O Lord , and your cry out .
GOLD:	You know what I long for , Lord ; you hear my every sigh .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bere ▁bizia ▁gorde ▁nahi ▁duenak ▁galdu ▁egingo ▁du ; ▁bere ▁bizia ▁niregatik ▁eta ▁berri ▁on agatik ▁galtzen ▁duenak , ▁ordea , ▁gorde ▁egingo ▁du .
PRED:	For if you refuse to lose your life , you will lose your life , but you will lose your life . But you will lose your life .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake and for the sake of the Good News , you will save it .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	▁Erantzun ▁nion : ▁« Ai ▁ene , ▁Jainko ▁Jauna ! ▁Baina ▁ez ▁duela ▁ez ▁gerrarik , ▁ez ▁gos erik ▁izango ▁ari ▁zaizkio ▁esaten ▁profetak , ▁eta ▁toki ▁honetan ▁egiazko ▁bakea ▁emango ▁diozula ».
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits me , O Sovereign Lord , ” says the Sovereign Lord . “ I will not punish you , ” says the Lord . “ I will punish you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , their prophets are telling them , ‘ All is well — no war or famine will come . The Lord will surely send you peace . ' ”

ID:	1125
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Jerusalemen ▁Mesias ▁bezala ▁sartu
PRED:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	1126
INPUT:	▁Egiptotik ▁igotzean , ▁israeldarrak ▁basamortuan ▁barrena ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri ra ▁jo ▁eta ▁Kadex ▁o asi raino ▁heldu ▁ziren .
PRED:	When the people of Israel arrived in the wilderness , they traveled through the Red Sea .
GOLD:	When the people of Israel arrived at Kadesh on their journey from Egypt after crossing the Red Sea ,

ID:	1127
INPUT:	▁Jar ▁zaitezte ▁horrelako ▁perts onen ▁gidaritzapean ▁eta ▁hori ena ▁bezalako ▁lanean ▁saiatzen ▁diren ▁guztien ean .
PRED:	So do whatever is happening to you , and do you do .
GOLD:	to submit to them and others like them who serve with such devotion .

ID:	1128
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁senitarteka ▁sartu ▁ohi ▁zituzten ▁erroldan ; ▁lebitarrak , ▁berriz , ▁hogei ▁urtez ▁goiko ak , ▁beren ▁eginkizun ▁eta ▁mail en ▁arabera .
PRED:	The priests went to the clans of the clans of the Kohathite clan , named after twenty years .
GOLD:	They distributed gifts to the priests who were listed by their families in the genealogical records , and to the Levites twenty years old or older who were listed according to their jobs and their divisions .

ID:	1129
INPUT:	▁« Herri tar ▁bi ▁elkarrekin ▁borrokan ▁ari ▁badira ▁eta ▁haietako ▁baten ▁emazteak , ▁senarra ▁j ip oi tik ▁libratzeko , ▁eskua ▁luzatu ▁eta ▁besteari ▁lots ari etatik ▁heltzen ▁badio ,
PRED:	“ If any of these people are doing , if you are going to help them , if you are willing to help them , I will take your hand and put them into your hand .
GOLD:	“ If two Israelite men get into a fight and the wife of one tries to rescue her husband by grabbing the testicles of the other man ,

ID:	1130
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁mutil aren ▁aitari ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Noiz tik ▁dago ▁horrela ? Hark ▁erantzun :— U m etan dik .
PRED:	Jesus asked him , “ How long will you look ? ” “ Yes , ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ How long has this been happening ? ” Jesus asked the boy 's father.He replied , “ Since he was a little boy .

ID:	1131
INPUT:	▁eta ▁bere ▁zerbitzariei ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Joan ▁Bataiatzailea ▁da ! ▁Hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁da , ▁eta ▁horregatik ▁dauka ▁mirariak ▁egiteko ▁ahalmen ▁hori ».
PRED:	He told them , “ John is John , John , the Baptist is coming from the dead , and he is coming from the dead . ”
GOLD:	he said to his advisers , “ This must be John the Baptist raised from the dead ! That is why he can do such miracles . ”

ID:	1132
INPUT:	▁Jende ▁guztia ▁bozkarioz ▁bete ▁zen ▁eta ▁hiria ▁baretu , ▁Atalia ▁hila ▁baitzuten ▁jauregian ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	So all the people rejoiced in the city , and the city was dead .
GOLD:	So all the people of the land rejoiced , and the city was peaceful because Athaliah had been killed at the king 's palace .

ID:	1133
INPUT:	▁Kon tura ▁zaitezte , ▁bada , ▁ergel ok ! Zen tzu gabeok , ▁noiz ▁ulertu ▁behar ▁duzue ?
PRED:	If you think you are wise , do n't understand what you think ?
GOLD:	Think again , you fools ! When will you finally catch on ?

ID:	1134
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna ▁Egiptoko ▁lurraldean ▁dagoenaren ▁ezaugarri ▁izango ▁dira . ▁Z apal tzen ▁dituztenen ▁aurka ▁Jaunari ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁dei ▁egingo ▁dioten ean , ▁hark ▁salbatzailea ▁bidaliko ▁die ▁defenda tzera ▁eta ▁askatzera .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will come upon them , and he will send them into battle .
GOLD:	It will be a sign and a witness that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is worshiped in the land of Egypt . When the people cry to the Lord for help against those who oppress them , he will send them a savior who will rescue them .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁jentilek , ▁Moisesen ▁legea ▁ezagutu ▁gabe ▁ere , ▁legeari ▁dagokiona ▁berez ▁egiten ▁dutenean , ▁nahiz ▁legea ▁ez ▁ezagutu , ▁beraiek ▁bihurtzen ▁dira ▁beren ▁buru arentzat ▁lege .
PRED:	Do n't realize that the law of Moses did not obey the law of Moses . They do n't know that the law of Moses , too , or they do n't know what they do .
GOLD:	Even Gentiles , who do not have God 's written law , show that they know his law when they instinctively obey it , even without having heard it .

ID:	1136
INPUT:	▁hiltzeko ▁tresnak ▁gertatzen ▁ditu , ▁suzko ▁geziak ▁pizten .
PRED:	They will be slaughtered by the fire of fire , and the fire will be slaughtered .
GOLD:	The wicked conceive evil ; they are pregnant with troubleand give birth to lies .

ID:	1137
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁batez , ▁Kareahen ▁seme ▁Johanan ▁eta ▁landetan ▁zebiltzan ▁gudarien ▁buruzagiak ▁Gedaliasen gana ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Mitzpara ,
PRED:	In that day the leaders of the other military leaders and the other military leaders went to Gedaliah .
GOLD:	Soon after this , Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders came to Gedaliah at Mizpah .

ID:	1138
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁prestaturiko ▁okela ▁eta ▁ogia ▁bere ▁seme ▁Jakoben ▁eskuetan ▁jarri ▁zituen .
PRED:	So he ate the meat of Jacob and put them into the hands of Jacob .
GOLD:	Then she gave Jacob the delicious meal , including freshly baked bread .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	▁Oroit ▁zaitezte ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁hots ▁egin ▁zizu eten ▁zeuen ▁zuzendari ez , ▁eta ▁jarraitu ▁berorien ▁fedeari , ▁nola ▁bizi ▁eta ▁nola ▁hil ▁diren ▁kontuan ▁hartuz .
PRED:	Do n't understand what the word of God says : Do n't be afraid of you , so that you might live in your presence and kill me .
GOLD:	Remember your leaders who taught you the word of God . Think of all the good that has come from their lives , and follow the example of their faith .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁senarrak ▁susmo ▁txarra ▁hartu ▁dio ▁emazteari , ▁hau ▁egiaz ▁errudun ▁delarik . ▁Baina ▁gerta ▁daiteke ▁emaztea ▁errugabea ▁izanik ▁ere ▁senarrak ▁susmo ▁txarra ▁hartzea .
PRED:	But if the woman has sexual intercourse with her husband , the woman must be guilty . But if the woman is guilty , the woman is guilty . But if the woman is guilty .
GOLD:	If her husband becomes jealous and is suspicious of his wife and needs to know whether or not she has defiled herself ,

ID:	1141
INPUT:	▁Eliasek ▁lehor tea ▁iragarri
PRED:	Elijah 's First Speech :
GOLD:	Elijah Fed by Ravens

ID:	1142
INPUT:	▁Zer bai ten gatik ▁esan ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁jakinduri an : ▁“ Prof etak ▁eta ▁apostoluak ▁bidaliko ▁dizkiet ▁eta ▁batzuk ▁hil ▁eta ▁besteak ▁erasoka ▁erabiliko ▁dituzte ”.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will send them into the church and will send them into exile . '
GOLD:	This is what God in his wisdom said about you : ‘ I will send prophets and apostles to them , but they will kill some and persecute the others . '

ID:	1143
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁Sinai ▁basamortuan ▁zeudelarik , ▁Jauna ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Moisesi ▁elkarketa - etxolan . ▁Egiptotik ▁irten ▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁urtea ▁zen , ▁bigarren ▁hilaren ▁lehen ▁eguna . ▁Hau ▁esan ▁zion :
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai , the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle in the wilderness of Sinai . On the first day of the second month of that year he said ,

ID:	1144
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁neure ▁espiritu ai su riko ▁diet ▁gizaki ▁guztiei . Zuen ▁seme - alabek prof et izatu ▁egingo ▁dute , zuen ▁zaharrek amets ak ▁egingo ▁dituzte , zuen ▁gazteek ▁ikuskariak ▁izango .
PRED:	“ I will raise my spirit in your presence , ” says the Lord . “ Your sons will come with your young men , your young men , and your young men will be filled with your young men .
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	1145
INPUT:	▁Eraiki ▁egoitza , ▁mendian ▁erakutsi ▁zaizun ▁ereduaren ▁arabera .
PRED:	“ When you build a place for the Tabernacle , you must pay it to the mountain .
GOLD:	“ Set up this Tabernacle according to the pattern you were shown on the mountain .

ID:	1146
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁erosi ▁zituen ▁Josek ▁Egiptoko ▁lur ▁guztiak ▁faraoi arentzat . ▁Egipto arrek ▁nork ▁bere ▁lurra ▁saldu ▁zuten , ▁gainean ▁zuten ▁gosete ▁latz arengatik ; ▁hala , ▁lurralde ▁osoaren ▁jabe ▁bilakatu ▁zen ▁faraoia .
PRED:	So Joseph took all the land of Egypt , for the land of Egypt had been sold in the land of Egypt . The land of Egypt was given to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh . All the Egyptians sold him their fields because the famine was so severe , and soon all the land belonged to Pharaoh .

ID:	1147
INPUT:	▁« Alde ▁talde ▁horretatik , ▁hor ▁bertan ▁galduko ▁baititut !»
PRED:	“ Get out of the town , ” says the Lord . “ I will come to you ! ”
GOLD:	“ Get away from all these people so that I may instantly destroy them ! ”

ID:	1148
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁lehenengo ▁ituna ▁ere ▁ez ▁zen ▁odol - isur ketarik ▁gabe ▁egin .
PRED:	So there was no covenant with the terms of the covenant .
GOLD:	That is why even the first covenant was put into effect with the blood of an animal .

ID:	1149
INPUT:	▁Arren , ▁beraz , ▁ager ▁iezaiozue ▁berriro ▁ere ▁zeuen ▁maitasuna .
PRED:	So if your servant remain in your presence , do not love your love .
GOLD:	So I urge you now to reaffirm your love for him .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁oparia ▁aurretik ▁bidali ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁bera ▁kanpalekuan ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁gau ▁hartan .
PRED:	So he sent the burnt offering to the Lord , and there was night in the camp .
GOLD:	During the night Jacob got up and took his two wives , his two servant wives , and his eleven sons and crossed the Jabbok River with them .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁behi ▁irten ▁ziren ▁Nilo tik , ▁itxura ▁tx arrekoak ▁eta ▁ar g alak , ▁eta ▁beste ▁beh ien ▁ondoan ▁jarri ▁ziren , ▁ibaiertzean .
PRED:	Then the seven healthy cows came out of the Nile River , and the seven heads of the Nile River came down to the ground .
GOLD:	Then he saw seven more cows come up behind them from the Nile , but these were scrawny and thin . These cows stood beside the fat cows on the riverbank .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁ordea , ▁Jerusalem ▁hautatu ▁dut ▁neure ▁bizileku ▁eta ▁David ▁neure ▁herri ▁Israelen ▁buruzagi ”.
PRED:	But now now I have chosen Jerusalem to honor my name . '
GOLD:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem as the place for my name to be honored , and I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	1153
INPUT:	▁ar tiz arra ▁bere ▁garaian ▁aterarazi edo <unk> ▁Em e ▁Handia ▁eta ▁Tx ikia ▁gidatu ?
PRED:	Do you realize that the Lord has given him a mighty gift to him ?
GOLD:	Can you direct the constellations through the seasonsor guide the Bear with her cubs across the heavens ?

ID:	1154
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁emakumerik ▁ederren , n ora ▁joan ▁zaizu ▁maitea ? Nor antz ▁abiatu ▁da ? Zurekin ▁nahi ▁dugu ▁bila ▁joan .
PRED:	O Lord , how can we go ? Who is your mother ? Who is your shield ? ”
GOLD:	Where has your lover gone , O woman of rare beauty ? Which way did he turnso we can help you find him ?

ID:	1155
INPUT:	▁Hiritik ▁kanpora ▁zapaldu ▁zuten ▁mahatsa ▁eta , ▁dolar etik ▁hainbeste ▁odol ▁atera ▁zenez , ▁zaldien ▁mutur reko etaraino ▁iritsi ▁zen , ▁hirurehun ▁kilometro ko ▁zabal eran .
PRED:	The people of the city was led by the wilderness to draw water into the wilderness . It was a winepress to measure the water of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	The grapes were trampled in the winepress outside the city , and blood flowed from the winepress in a stream about 180 miles long and as high as a horse 's bridle .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	▁Hau tsi ▁zenituen ▁harlauz etan ▁idatziak ▁zeuden ▁hitz ▁berberak ▁idatziko ▁ditut ; ▁gero , ▁kutx an ▁sartuko ▁dituzu .
PRED:	You have made the same words on the same way . I will send them on the ground , and you must enter the same way .
GOLD:	and I will write on the tablets the same words that were on the ones you smashed . Then place the tablets in the Ark . '

ID:	1157
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁arduratzen ▁da ▁herri ez , zer ▁jana ▁ematen ▁ugari .
PRED:	He gives food food to the poor , without food .
GOLD:	By these mighty acts he nourishes the people , giving them food in abundance .

ID:	1158
INPUT:	▁Har ▁itzazu ▁jarrai bide tzat ▁Kristo ▁Jesusengan ▁oinarritzen ▁diren ▁sinesmen ▁eta ▁maitasunari ▁buruz ▁niregandik ▁entzun ▁dituzun ▁hitz ▁osasun garriak .
PRED:	May you think of your faith in Christ Jesus Christ Jesus is with you .
GOLD:	Hold on to the pattern of wholesome teaching you learned from me — a pattern shaped by the faith and love that you have in Christ Jesus .

ID:	1159
INPUT:	▁K ez karik ▁gabe ▁haiekin ▁joateko ▁agindu ▁zidan ▁Espirituak . ▁Sei ▁senide ▁hauek ▁joan ▁ziren ▁nirekin , ▁eta ▁gizon ▁haren ▁etxean ▁sartu ▁ginen .
PRED:	So we went out to the Spirit of the Holy Spirit with me . So we went with me and went with me .
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit told me to go with them and not to worry that they were Gentiles . These six brothers here accompanied me , and we soon entered the home of the man who had sent for us .

ID:	1160
INPUT:	▁Az tiek , ▁berriro ▁ere , ▁erregeari :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁konta guzu ▁zer ▁amets ▁egin ▁duzun ▁eta ▁azalduko ▁dizugu ▁esanahia .
PRED:	But the wild animals told the king , “ We tell us what we have done . ”
GOLD:	They said again , “ Please , Your Majesty . Tell us the dream , and we will tell you what it means . ”

ID:	1161
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁uztar pean ▁jartzea ▁eta ▁haren ▁menpeko ▁izatea ▁onartzen ▁duen ▁nazioa , ▁lasai ▁utziko ▁dut ▁bere ▁lurraldean , ▁landu ▁dezan ▁eta ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁dadin . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	But the king of Babylon will become a foreigner in the land of Babylon . I will put them into your own land , and I will live in the land of Babylon . ”
GOLD:	But the people of any nation that submits to the king of Babylon will be allowed to stay in their own country to farm the land as usual . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	1162
INPUT:	▁Deabru a ▁garai tua
PRED:	The Danger of Life
GOLD:	The Defeat of Satan

ID:	1163
INPUT:	▁An imal ia ▁garbiak ▁eta ▁kutsatuak
PRED:	Instructions for God
GOLD:	The Giving of Tithes

ID:	1164
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁Akab ▁eta ▁ondorengo ▁erregea ▁haren ▁seme ▁Akazias ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	When Ahab died , he became king , he became the next king .
GOLD:	So Ahab died , and his son Ahaziah became the next king .

ID:	1165
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hau ▁ere ▁bururatu ▁zitzaidan :« Jainkoak ▁probatu ▁egin ▁nahi ▁ditu gizon - emakumeak , aber eak ▁bezalakoak ▁direla ikus arazteko ».
PRED:	He said to me , “ God has made me right with those who want me to worship me . ”
GOLD:	I also thought about the human condition — how God proves to people that they are like animals .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	▁Lur sail ik , ▁mahasti rik ▁eta ▁olibadi rik ▁ederrenak ▁kenduko ▁dizkizue , ▁bere ▁zerbitzariei ▁emateko .
PRED:	In the same way , you must take possession of your household and give it to your servants .
GOLD:	He will take away the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his own officials .

ID:	1167
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁etsaiak , ▁berriz , ▁lotsaz ▁beteko ▁dira , gaiztoen ▁egoitza ▁desagertu ▁egingo ▁da ».
PRED:	But your enemies will rejoice , O Lord , for your enemies will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Those who hate you will be clothed with shame , and the home of the wicked will be destroyed . ”

ID:	1168
INPUT:	▁hiri ▁batekoak ▁besteko engana ▁joango ▁dira ▁eta ▁esango ▁diete : ▁“ Goazen ▁Jaunaren ▁bila , ▁berari ▁mesede ▁eske ”. ▁Eta ▁erantzungo ▁diete : ▁“ Bai , ▁ba go az ▁gu ▁ere ”.
PRED:	They will say to the poor and say , ‘ Let us go to the Lord and say , ‘ Let us go to the Lord . '
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	1169
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁mendira ▁igo ▁zen ▁Moises . ▁L aino ak ▁mendia ▁estali ▁zuen ,
PRED:	Then Moses left Mount Sinai as a mountain , the mountain covered the mountain .
GOLD:	Then Moses climbed up the mountain , and the cloud covered it .

ID:	1170
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuek , ▁ene ▁maiteok , ▁jarrai ▁ezazue ▁zeuen ▁bizitza ▁sinesmen ▁tx it ▁santuaren ▁oinarri ▁gainean ▁eraikitzen . ▁Egin ▁otoitz ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaren ▁eraginez ;
PRED:	But you , my dear friends , listen to what you have done to the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	But you , dear friends , must build each other up in your most holy faith , pray in the power of the Holy Spirit ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	▁haren ▁lekuan ▁handitu ▁zuria ▁edo ▁mantxa ▁zuri - gorri xka ▁ateratzen ▁bazaio ▁norbaiti , ▁apaizarengana ▁joango ▁da .
PRED:	If the mildew finds that the affected area has been burned , the priest must be ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	but a white swelling or a reddish white spot develops in its place , that person must go to the priest to be examined .

ID:	1172
INPUT:	▁Zoazte ▁esnea ▁eta ▁eztia ▁darizkion ▁lurraldera ; ▁baina ▁ni ▁ez ▁naiz ▁zuekin ▁joango , ▁burugogor ▁baitzarete ; ▁bestela , ▁bidean ▁hondatuko ▁zintuzkete t ».
PRED:	Now go to the land of Canaan , but I am not with you . Do n't be with you , and I am sending you into a land . ”
GOLD:	Go up to this land that flows with milk and honey . But I will not travel among you , for you are a stubborn and rebellious people . If I did , I would surely destroy you along the way . ”

ID:	1173
INPUT:	▁Kristo ▁behin ▁betiko ▁sartu ▁da ▁santutegian , ▁ez ▁aker ▁eta ▁zekor ren ▁odola ▁eskainiz , ▁berea ▁baizik , ▁horrela ▁betiko ▁salbamena ▁lortu ▁digu larik .
PRED:	For Christ is able to enter his sanctuary , and he must never enter the blood of the blood . It is a sin offering to us .
GOLD:	With his own blood — not the blood of goats and calves — he entered the Most Holy Place once for all time and secured our redemption forever .

ID:	1174
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁eta ▁bere ▁gizonek , ▁heldu ▁zirenean , ▁hiria ▁sutan ▁eta ▁beren ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁gatibu ▁eraman ▁zituztela ▁aurkitu ▁zuten .
PRED:	When David arrived , David and his sons went out to the city , they found the city and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	When David and his men saw the ruins and realized what had happened to their families ,

ID:	1175
INPUT:	▁Haur ▁hauxe ▁eskatzen ▁nion ▁Jaunari ▁eta ▁eman ▁dit ▁eskatzen ▁ni ona .
PRED:	The baby gave me this message to the Lord .
GOLD:	I asked the Lord to give me this boy , and he has granted my request .

ID:	1176
INPUT:	▁Atz eman ▁zituen , ▁orduan , ▁Han un ek ▁Daviden ▁mandatariak ▁eta ▁alderdi ▁bateko ▁bizarra ▁moztu ▁zien , ▁baita ▁jantziak ▁ere ▁erditik ▁behera , ▁ip ur mas ail etatik ▁behera . ▁Eta ▁joaten ▁utzi ▁zien .
PRED:	Then David sent messengers to the other side of David , and he cut off his clothes and cut them away from the mountains .
GOLD:	So Hanun seized David 's ambassadors and shaved off half of each man 's beard , cut off their robes at the buttocks , and sent them back to David in shame .

ID:	1177
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1178
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁ordu ▁arte ▁ez ▁zuten ▁ikasleek ▁ulertu ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁dioena , ▁Jesusek ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁behar ▁zuela , ▁alegia .
PRED:	For the disciples did n't understand what the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say to the dead . ”
GOLD:	for until then they still had n't understood the Scriptures that said Jesus must rise from the dead .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁eman ▁zenidan ▁aintza ▁bera ▁eman ▁diet ▁nik , ▁bat ▁izan ▁daitezen , ▁gu ▁biok ▁bat ▁garen ▁bezala :
PRED:	I gave you the glory to you , just as I had given to you .
GOLD:	“ I have given them the glory you gave me , so they may be one as we are one .

ID:	1180
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hau ▁eraman ▁eta ▁zoritx arren ▁bat ▁gertatuko ▁balitz aio , ▁ni , ▁agure ▁hau , ▁atsekabez ▁hilko ▁nintzateke ».
PRED:	If he was with you , he would be able to kill me , he would die . ”
GOLD:	Now if you take his brother away from me , and any harm comes to him , you will send this grieving , white-haired man to his grave . '

ID:	1181
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁salbazioa ▁ez ▁dut ▁kol kor ako ▁gorde , zure ▁leialtasun ▁eta ▁salbamenaren ▁berri ▁eman ▁dut , zure ▁maitasun ▁eta ▁fin tasuna ▁ez ▁ditut ba tzar ▁nagusian ▁isildu .
PRED:	I have no peace ; your unfailing love is filled with joy . I have heard your faith in your presence , and I am filled with joy .
GOLD:	Lord , do n't hold back your tender mercies from me.Let your unfailing love and faithfulness always protect me .

ID:	1182
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1183
INPUT:	▁Em azue , ▁bada , ▁lan ▁hori ▁geldi arazteko ▁agindua ; ▁ez ▁dezatela ▁eraiki ▁hiria , ▁beste ▁agindurik ▁ematen ▁ez ▁dudan ▁bitartean .
PRED:	Now let us go to your work , and let it go to the town . If you do n't have any of it , do n't be able to pay it . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , issue orders to have these men stop their work . That city must not be rebuilt except at my express command .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	▁zeuen ▁joka eraren ▁fruituak ▁jango ▁dituzue , zeuen ▁egitasmo ▁gaizto ez ▁aseb eteko .
PRED:	When you eat your fruit , you will eat your fruit .
GOLD:	Therefore , they must eat the bitter fruit of living their own way , choking on their own schemes .

ID:	1185
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁etxera tzean , ▁adiskideak ▁eta ▁auzoko ak ▁bildu ▁eta ▁esaten ▁die : ▁“ Egin ▁festa ▁nirekin , ▁aurkitu ▁baitut ▁galdu tako ▁ardia !”
PRED:	When they arrived home , he said , ‘ This is what you have said to me , ‘ You have found me , for I am sending you back to my flock . '
GOLD:	When he arrives , he will call together his friends and neighbors , saying , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep . '

ID:	1186
INPUT:	▁Agian , ▁atzera ▁egineta ▁damutuko ▁da , eta ▁ondasunez ▁bedeinkatuko z ai tuzte ▁ostera . Orduan , ▁labore - opariak eta ▁isur - opariak egin ▁ahal ▁izango ▁dizkiozue Jaunari , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari .
PRED:	Who will change his vow to the Lord , and he will give it grain grain offerings to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Who knows ? Perhaps he will give you a reprieve , sending you a blessing instead of this curse.Perhaps you will be able to offer grain and wineto the Lord your God as before .

ID:	1187
INPUT:	▁Eman ▁ohore ▁Jaunari , iragarri ▁urrutiko ▁herrietan gores garri ▁dela .
PRED:	May the glory of the Lord listen to the nations of the nations .
GOLD:	Let the whole world glorify the Lord ; let it sing his praise .

ID:	1188
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁berriro ▁galdetu ▁zien :— Eta ▁zuek , ▁nor ▁naizela ▁diozue ? Ped rok ▁erantzun :— Zu ▁Mesias ▁zara .
PRED:	Jesus asked , “ Where are you ? ” he asked . “ You are the Messiah ? ” “ You are the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ But who do you say I am ? ” Peter replied , “ You are the Messiah . ”

ID:	1189
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Baina ▁ni , ▁Jaun ▁hau , zure ▁Jainkoa ▁naiz Egip ton ▁zeunden etik . Ez ▁duzu ▁ni ▁beste ▁jainkorik aitor tu ▁behar , ez ▁baita ▁nitaz ▁kanp ob este ▁salba tzailerik .
PRED:	“ But this is what the Lord says : “ I am the God of your God , and I will punish you , and you will not worship me .
GOLD:	“ I have been the Lord your Godever since I brought you out of Egypt.You must acknowledge no God but me , for there is no other savior .

ID:	1190
INPUT:	▁gure ▁eta ▁zuen ▁artean ▁eta ▁gure ▁ondorengo ▁belaunaldi en ▁artean ▁ezaugarri ▁izateko ▁baizik ; ▁hau ▁da , ▁beraren ▁tenpluan ▁geure ▁erre - opari ▁eta ▁elkartasun - opariak ▁eskainiz ▁Jaunari ▁kultu ▁eman ▁nahi ▁diogu la ▁adierazteko ▁ezaugarri . ▁Horrela , ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁ezin ▁esango ▁diete ▁gure ei ▁Jaunarekin ▁zerikusirik ▁ez ▁dutela .
PRED:	The descendants of our ancestors have been given to the Lord our ancestors . It is a peace offering to the Lord our God . And we will say to the Lord our God , ‘ This is a peace offering to the Lord . '
GOLD:	but as a memorial . It will remind our descendants and your descendants that we , too , have the right to worship the Lord at his sanctuary with our burnt offerings , sacrifices , and peace offerings . Then your descendants will not be able to say to ours , ‘ You have no claim to the Lord . '

ID:	1191
INPUT:	▁Haxab ias ▁eta ▁Isaias ▁ere , ▁Merariren ▁semeak , ▁bidali ▁zizki gu ten , ▁beren ▁seme ▁eta ▁anai ekin ; ▁guztira ▁hogei ▁lagun ;
PRED:	These were the names of the twelve sons of Nehemiah son of Asaph , who sent their brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	They also sent Hashabiah , together with Jeshaiah from the descendants of Merari , and twenty of his sons and brothers ,

ID:	1192
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zu , ▁zer ▁zabiltza ▁purpuraz ▁jantzia , urrezko ▁bitx iz ▁apaindua , begiak ▁bel tzez ▁pin taturik ? Alferrik ▁apaintzen ▁zara , mai ta leek ▁zapuztu ▁egin ▁zaituzte , bizia ▁kendu ▁nahi ▁dizute .
PRED:	And you see what you are clothed with gold , beautiful gold , beautiful jewels , and scarlet thread — your precious jewels — your precious jewels — your precious jewels .
GOLD:	What are you doing , you who have been plundered ? Why do you dress up in beautiful clothingand put on gold jewelry ? Why do you brighten your eyes with mascara ? Your primping will do you no good ! The allies who were your loversdespise you and seek to kill you .

ID:	1193
INPUT:	▁Gainerako ▁ikasleak ▁txalu paz ▁joan ▁ziren , ▁sarea ▁arrain ekin ▁ti raka ▁zekar tela , ▁leh orretik ▁hurbil ▁baitziren , ▁ehun en ▁bat ▁metro ra .
PRED:	The rest of the other disciples went into the boat , and the fish were filled with water .
GOLD:	The others stayed with the boat and pulled the loaded net to the shore , for they were only about a hundred yards from shore .

ID:	1194
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain , ▁joan ▁eta ▁nire ▁nagusiari ▁« Hemen ▁da ▁Elias » ▁adierazteko ▁esango ▁didazu , ▁bada ? ▁Hil ▁egingo ▁nau !
PRED:	And now I went to my master and said , “ Here is the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	And now you say , ‘ Go and tell your master , “ Elijah is here. ” ' Sir , if I do that , Ahab will certainly kill me . ”

ID:	1195
INPUT:	▁Josafaten ▁berrik untzak
PRED:	The Death of Jehoshaphat
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat Appoints Judges

ID:	1196
INPUT:	▁I rakaspen ▁hauek ▁guztiak ▁parabola ▁bidez ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁Jesusek ▁jendeari , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zien ▁ezer ▁irakasten ▁parabol az ▁izan ▁ezik .
PRED:	Then Jesus gave this story through the crowd , so he taught the crowds to understand everything he had done .
GOLD:	Jesus always used stories and illustrations like these when speaking to the crowds . In fact , he never spoke to them without using such parables .

ID:	1197
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Siri a ▁eta ▁Zil iz ia ▁eskualde etara ▁joan ▁nintzen .
PRED:	Then I took the entire army and went to the towns of the provinces .
GOLD:	After that visit I went north into the provinces of Syria and Cilicia .

ID:	1198
INPUT:	▁Bere iz ▁gaitezen , ▁beraz . ▁Hor ▁duzu ▁aurrean ▁eskualde ▁guztia ; ▁zuk ▁ezker rera ▁jotzen ▁baduzu , ▁ni ▁eskuinera ▁joango ▁naiz ; ▁zuk ▁eskuinera ▁jotzen ▁baduzu , ▁ni ▁ezker rera ▁joango ▁naiz ».
PRED:	So let us go to his palace , and let us go on the edge of the guard . If you go , you go to the other side of the guard , I will go to the camp . ”
GOLD:	The whole countryside is open to you . Take your choice of any section of the land you want , and we will separate . If you want the land to the left , then I 'll take the land on the right . If you prefer the land on the right , then I 'll go to the left . ”

ID:	1199
INPUT:	▁Guztiak ▁profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzo ▁badira , ▁ordea , ▁eta ▁entzu le ▁huts ▁den ▁edota ▁kristau ▁ez ▁den ▁bat ▁sartzen ▁bada , ▁bere ▁erruak ▁aitor tzera ▁eramango ▁dute ▁denen ▁artean ,
PRED:	But if the prophets are saying , ‘ If any of these prophets are saying , ‘ If anyone is able to be able to be able to be baptized among the other people . '
GOLD:	But if all of you are prophesying , and unbelievers or people who do n't understand these things come into your meeting , they will be convicted of sin and judged by what you say .

ID:	1200
INPUT:	▁Ti rok ▁gotorlekua ▁jaso ▁du , hautsa ▁adina ▁zilar ▁pilatu ▁du , kale etako ▁lokatza ▁adina ▁urre ;
PRED:	“ He will destroy the north of the north of the north , the city of silver , and everything in the city .
GOLD:	Tyre has built a strong fortressand has made silver and goldas plentiful as dust in the streets !

ID:	1201
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁itzazue ▁gogor ▁erabil ; ▁horrela ▁erakutsiko ▁duzue ▁begirune ▁diozuela ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari .
PRED:	Do n't fear you . Do n't fear your God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not treating them harshly .

ID:	1202
INPUT:	▁Korinton ▁dagoen ▁Jainkoaren ▁eliz ▁elkarteari ▁idazten ▁diogu . ▁Jesu ▁Kristok ▁sagaratu ▁zaituzte ▁eta ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁herri ▁santu ▁izateko ▁deitu , ▁edozein ▁leku tan ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunari ▁dei ▁egiten ▁dioten ▁guztiekin ▁batera , ▁hauek ▁eta ▁guk ▁Jaun ▁bat ▁bera ▁onartzen ▁baitugu .
PRED:	In this way , we are writing to the church in the church that Christ Jesus is holy to the Lord Jesus Christ , who is holy to the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I am writing to God 's church in Corinth , to you who have been called by God to be his own holy people . He made you holy by means of Christ Jesus , just as he did for all people everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , their Lord and ours .

ID:	1203
INPUT:	▁Horrelako en ▁azkena ▁hondamena ▁da ; ▁sabela ▁dute ▁jainko , ▁beren ▁lots ari etan ▁harrotzen ▁dira ▁eta ▁lurreko ▁gauzetan ▁bakarrik ▁pentsatzen ▁dute .
PRED:	These are the end of the wicked , but it is useless .
GOLD:	They are headed for destruction . Their god is their appetite , they brag about shameful things , and they think only about this life here on earth .

ID:	1204
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁izan ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁mando ▁adimen gabe en ▁antzeko : gal gaz ▁eta ▁ahoko z ▁eutsi ▁behar ▁zaio ▁haien ▁indar rari ; beste la , ▁ezin ▁zara ▁hurbildu ».
PRED:	Do n't be like a horse , and she is like a horse . He is like a sharp horse , and you ca n't turn away from them . ”
GOLD:	Do not be like a senseless horse or mulethat needs a bit and bridle to keep it under control . ”

ID:	1205
INPUT:	▁Ira tzar , ▁ipar - haize ! ▁H ator , ▁hego - haize ! Z abaldu ▁airean ▁nire ▁baratzeko ▁lurrin ak . Eta ▁zu , ▁ene ▁maitea , ▁sar ▁zeure ▁baratzean , jan ▁bertako ▁fruitu ▁zora garriak .
PRED:	It is like rain , O God , the doors of the Dead Sea , and the garden of Lebanon , the garden of Lebanon . You are like olive trees , O God , and I will make you strong and olive trees .
GOLD:	Awake , north wind ! Rise up , south wind ! Blow on my gardenand spread its fragrance all around.Come into your garden , my love ; taste its finest fruits .

ID:	1206
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Tam arrek . ▁Estal tzen ▁zuen ▁zapia ▁kendu ▁eta ▁alargun - soin ekoak ▁jantzi ▁zituen ▁berriro .
PRED:	Then she took her back to her , and she took her to her . He overlaid them with a widow .
GOLD:	Afterward she went back home , took off her veil , and put on her widow 's clothing as usual .

ID:	1207
INPUT:	▁Mezulariak ▁hi riz ▁hiri ▁ibili ▁ziren ▁Efraim ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurraldeetan ▁zehar , ▁eta ▁Zabulon ▁lurralderaino ▁ere ▁heldu ▁ziren ; ▁baina ▁burla ▁eta ▁barre ▁egin ▁zieten .
PRED:	These towns were the towns of Manasseh and Ephraim , the towns of Manasseh , the land of Manasseh , Zebulun , and the people of Manasseh arrived in the land of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The runners went from town to town throughout Ephraim and Manasseh and as far as the territory of Zebulun . But most of the people just laughed at the runners and made fun of them .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	▁Moisesen ▁legean ▁idatzirik ▁dagoen ▁bezalaxe , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁etorri ▁zaigu ▁gainera ▁hain besteko ▁zoritxar ▁hau ; ▁hala ▁ere , ▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁gara ▁zure ▁haserrea ▁baretzen ▁ahalegindu , ▁gure ▁bekatuetatik ▁urrundu z ▁eta ▁zure ▁leialtasuna ▁aitortuz .
PRED:	This is what the law of Moses has come to us , just as the Lord has commanded us . We have not turned away from your sins , and we have turned away from your sins .
GOLD:	Every curse written against us in the Law of Moses has come true . Yet we have refused to seek mercy from the Lord our God by turning from our sins and recognizing his truth .

ID:	1209
INPUT:	▁Gau ean , ▁Jainkoa ▁Balaami ▁agertu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Gizon ▁horiek ▁zure ▁bila ▁etorri ▁badira , ▁zoaz ▁beraiekin ; ▁baina ▁nik ▁esango ▁dizudana ▁bakarrik ▁egingo ▁duzu ».
PRED:	When God came to Balaam , he said to Balaam , “ If you are going to go to the night , go to the ground . If you are going to find me , you will find me . ”
GOLD:	That night God came to Balaam and told him , “ Since these men have come for you , get up and go with them . But do only what I tell you to do . ”

ID:	1210
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁gudarostea ▁os atzeko ▁gai ▁ziren ▁hogei ▁urtetik ▁gorako ▁israeldarren ▁izen - bil ketak
PRED:	There were older or older or older or older or older among the Israelites .
GOLD:	They were registered by families — all the men of Israel who were twenty years old or older and able to go to war .

ID:	1211
INPUT:	▁David ▁Mahanaimera ▁heldu ▁zen . ▁Bitartean , ▁Absalom ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldera ▁igaro ▁zen , ▁berekin ▁zituen ▁israeldar ▁guztiekin .
PRED:	When David arrived at the Jordan River , David went out to the Jordan River , and all the people of Israel crossed the Jordan River .
GOLD:	David soon arrived at Mahanaim . By now , Absalom had mobilized the entire army of Israel and was leading his troops across the Jordan River .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	▁egia ▁ezagut ▁dezazun eta ▁hartu ▁duzun ▁mandatu ari ▁leial ki ▁erantzun .
PRED:	When you hear the truth , you must tell you the truth .
GOLD:	In this way , you may know the truthand take an accurate report to those who sent you .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	▁Hiria ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁eskuetan ▁eroriko ▁da ▁erremediorik ▁gabe , ▁eta ▁konkistatu ▁egingo ▁du . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	This is what the king of Babylon says : ‘ The Lord will strike the king of Babylon and destroy it . ' ”
GOLD:	The Lord also says : ‘ The city of Jerusalem will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon , who will capture it . ' ”

ID:	1214
INPUT:	▁« Abere ▁xehea ▁eskaini ▁behar ▁duenak , ▁akats ▁gabea ▁eskainiko ▁du , ▁arra ▁nahiz ▁emea .
PRED:	“ If you present the offering to the poor , you must present no defects .
GOLD:	“ If you present an animal from the flock as a peace offering to the Lord , it may be a male or a female , but it must have no defects .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	▁ F araoiaren ▁ametsa ▁argitu ▁Josek
PRED:	Joseph Interprets Pharaoh 's Dream
GOLD:	Pharaoh 's Dreams

ID:	1216
INPUT:	▁Etor kizun eko ▁tenplua
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer for Worship
GOLD:	The New Temple Area

ID:	1217
INPUT:	▁Artz ainen ▁kontra ▁ekingo ▁diot : ▁neure ▁artaldea ▁itzul tzera ▁behartuko ▁ditut ▁eta ▁artzain - kar gu tik ▁botako , ▁ez ▁dituzte ▁aurrerantzean ▁beren ▁buruak ▁bazkatuko ; ▁horien ▁hortz ▁artetik ▁aterako ▁ditut ▁ardiak ▁eta ▁ez ▁dituzte ▁berriro ▁elikagai ▁izango .
PRED:	I will destroy my sheep and goats ; I will bring them out of your shepherd 's shepherd . They will throw them into pieces of sheep and goats and goats .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I now consider these shepherds my enemies , and I will hold them responsible for what has happened to my flock . I will take away their right to feed the flock , and I will stop them from feeding themselves . I will rescue my flock from their mouths ; the sheep will no longer be their prey .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁lebitarrak ▁israeldarren ▁lehen - seme ▁guztien ▁ordez ▁eta ▁lebitarren ▁abereak ▁israeldarren en ▁ordez : ▁neureak ▁ditut ▁lebitarrak . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna .
PRED:	“ Take the Levites for the firstborn sons of Israel . I am the Levites , the Levites , and all the Levites . I am the Lord . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Take the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn sons of the people of Israel . And take the livestock of the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn livestock of the people of Israel . The Levites belong to me ; I am the Lord .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diot : ▁« Oi ▁Jauna , ▁zu ▁zaitut ▁ene ▁Jaun , zuregan ▁baizik ▁ez ▁dut ▁zori onik ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am the Lord , I am saying , ‘ I have no peace ! '
GOLD:	I said to the Lord , “ You are my Master ! Every good thing I have comes from you . ”

ID:	1220
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁ahizpa ▁zaharrena ▁Samaria ▁da , ▁bere ▁hiriekin ▁zure ▁iparraldera ▁bizi ▁dena . ▁Zure ▁ahizpa ▁txikiena ▁Sodoma , ▁bere ▁hiriekin ▁zure ▁hegoaldera ▁bizi ▁dena .
PRED:	Your sister and daughters will live in the land of Sodom , and the houses of the south .
GOLD:	“ Your older sister was Samaria , who lived with her daughters in the north . Your younger sister was Sodom , who lived with her daughters in the south .

ID:	1221
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁ate - orri ak ▁olibondo - zurezko ak ▁ziren ; ▁haietan ▁ere ▁hegaldun ▁izaki - irudiak , ▁palmondo - ▁eta ▁lore - sor ten ▁irudiak ▁zizelkatu ▁zituen , ▁guztiak ▁urrez ▁estaliz .
PRED:	There were two olive trees , and the two olive trees were made of wood . There were two cherubim , overlaid with gold , and decorated with gold .
GOLD:	These double doors were decorated with carvings of cherubim , palm trees , and open flowers . The doors , including the decorations of cherubim and palm trees , were overlaid with gold .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	▁Ezagutzen ▁ez ▁duten ▁bidetik eraman go ▁ditut ▁itsuak , ibil bide ▁ezezagun etan ▁barrena . Ilun pea ▁argi ▁bihurtuko ▁diet , para je ▁mal karrak ▁bide ▁lau . Horra ▁zer ▁egiteko ▁asmotan ▁naizen , eta ▁ez ▁dut ▁etsiko .
PRED:	I will not hide the road ; I will hide it in the streets . I will make them a place where I am going .
GOLD:	I will lead blind Israel down a new path , guiding them along an unfamiliar way.I will brighten the darkness before themand smooth out the road ahead of them.Yes , I will indeed do these things ; I will not forsake them .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	▁Go dal ias , ▁Judako ▁gobernari
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hope for Israel 's Royal Line

ID:	1224
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁saduze ar ▁batzuk ▁etorri ▁zitzaizkion ▁Jesusi . ▁Hauek ▁ez ▁dute ▁sinesten ▁hildakoak ▁pizten ▁diren ik . ▁Eta ▁honela ▁galdegin ▁zioten :
PRED:	Then some of the Sadducees came to Jesus and believe in the resurrection of the dead . They said , ‘ They are dead . '
GOLD:	Then Jesus was approached by some Sadducees — religious leaders who say there is no resurrection from the dead . They posed this question :

ID:	1225
INPUT:	▁mendekatu ▁eta ▁merezia emango ▁diedan ▁arte , Israelen ▁etsaiek ▁lur ▁jo ▁dezaten ▁arte . Hurbil ▁dago ▁haien ▁hondamendia , ber andu ▁gabe ▁etorriko ▁da haien tzat ▁prestaturik ▁dagoena .
PRED:	I will send them back to the land of Israel , and they will come to fight against the ground . The whole earth will come down to the ground .
GOLD:	I will take revenge ; I will pay them back.In due time their feet will slip.Their day of disaster will arrive , and their destiny will overtake them . '

ID:	1226
INPUT:	▁Balaamen ▁astem ea
PRED:	Balaam Becomes Balaam 's Judge
GOLD:	Balaam and His Donkey

ID:	1227
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁bere ▁sum inean ▁amore ▁ematen , bere ▁oinpean ▁hartzen ▁ditu ▁Rahab - en ▁indarrak .
PRED:	Do n't you think you are doing this , for God has given them to me .
GOLD:	And God does not restrain his anger.Even the monsters of the sea are crushed beneath his feet .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁salatzen ▁bagaitu zu , ▁aske ▁geldituko ▁gara ▁eginarazi ▁diguzun ▁zin etik .
PRED:	But if we go to our friends , we will pay our vow to our Lord .
GOLD:	If you betray us , however , we are not bound by this oath in any way . ”

ID:	1229
INPUT:	▁Oraindik ▁kartzelako ▁atarian ▁atxilo tua ▁zegoela , ▁Jaunak ▁Jeremiasi ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zion ,
PRED:	While the Lord had arrested Jeremiah , the Lord spoke to Jeremiah .
GOLD:	The Lord had given the following message to Jeremiah while he was still in prison :

ID:	1230
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bainauzu ▁Herio ▁Leizera ▁botako , ▁zure ▁fededun a ▁ez ▁duzu ▁hilobian ▁galtzen ▁utziko .
PRED:	Do not defile your grave , for you will not enter your grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your Holy One to rot in the grave .

ID:	1231
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁aurkituko ▁etxekoandre ▁jatorra ? K ora l ek ▁baino ▁askoz ▁gehiago ▁balio ▁du .
PRED:	Who gives birth to her husband ? Who gives birth to her daughter ?
GOLD:	Who can find a virtuous and capable wife ? She is more precious than rubies .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	▁Sinesmena ▁salbamenaren ▁iturri
PRED:	Parable of the Church
GOLD:	Christ Took Our Punishment

ID:	1233
INPUT:	▁« Haren ▁gorputzak harri bitx ia ▁zirudien , aurpegi ak ▁tximis taren ▁distira ▁zuen ; begiak ▁suzko ▁zuz iak bez alako ak ▁zituen , bes o ▁eta ▁zangoak b ron tze ▁leundua ▁bezain ▁distira tsuak . Haren ▁ahotsak ▁jendetza ▁handi ▁baten z ara ta - hotsa ▁zirudien .
PRED:	“ His wings covered its wings ; it was like a mighty blast of fire . It was like a mighty man who looked like a mighty army , and it looked like a mighty army .
GOLD:	His body looked like a precious gem . His face flashed like lightning , and his eyes flamed like torches . His arms and feet shone like polished bronze , and his voice roared like a vast multitude of people .

ID:	1234
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁oroitzen ▁naiz ▁itxaropena ▁susper rarazten ▁didan ▁zerbai tez :
PRED:	But when you think of me , I am like chaff in the morning .
GOLD:	Yet I still dare to hopewhen I remember this :

ID:	1235
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁datoz ▁matxinsaltoak ▁p ilo ka , herri ▁indartsu ▁eta ▁kontaezin b aten ▁antzeko , nire ▁lurraldearen ▁aurka . Leh oiak ▁bezalako ▁hortzak ▁dituzte , dena ▁tris katzen ▁dute .
PRED:	“ The armies of the nations will become like an eagle , and their prey are like a lion .
GOLD:	A vast army of locusts has invaded my land , a terrible army too numerous to count.Its teeth are like lions ' teeth , its fangs like those of a lioness .

ID:	1236
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁printzeak ▁emaitza ▁bere ▁menpeko ren ▁bati ▁egiten ▁badio , ▁ondare - zati ▁hori ▁askapen - ur tera ▁arte ▁bakarrik ▁izango ▁da ▁menpeko arena ; ▁gero , ▁printz eari ▁itzuliko ▁zaio . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁beronen ▁semeei ▁bakarrik ▁dagokie ▁heren tzian ▁ondare ▁hori .
PRED:	But if a slave refuses to pay for his own property , he must return to the land of Canaan . He will return to his own property , for she will return to her .
GOLD:	But if the prince gives a gift of land from his inheritance to one of his servants , the servant may keep it only until the Year of Jubilee , which comes every fiftieth year . At that time the land will return to the prince . But when the prince gives gifts to his sons , those gifts will be permanent .

ID:	1237
INPUT:	▁« Ba ▁al ▁da ▁inor ▁zuen ▁artean ▁nire ▁tenplua ▁bere ▁lehengo ▁eder - han dian ▁ikusi ▁zuenik ? ▁Eta ▁orain ▁nola ▁dagoela ▁iruditzen ▁zaizue ? ▁Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁ikusten ▁ezerez tua ▁dagoela ?
PRED:	“ Have you seen my Temple ? ” says the Lord . “ Why do you know that I know how can you see ? ”
GOLD:	‘ Does anyone remember this house — this Temple — in its former splendor ? How , in comparison , does it look to you now ? It must seem like nothing at all !

ID:	1238
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁hiri ▁gotortu ez ▁jabetu ▁ondoren , ▁Jerusalem eraino ▁heldu ▁zen .
PRED:	After this , the fortified towns of Judah returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Shishak conquered Judah 's fortified towns and then advanced to attack Jerusalem .

ID:	1239
INPUT:	▁jokabide ▁tx arretik ▁alden araziko ▁zaituzte eta ▁hitz ▁maltzur reko engandik ,
PRED:	They will throw you into the trap you with evil evil ways .
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from evil people , from those whose words are twisted .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	▁Sar ▁bedi ▁etsaia ▁mahastian eta ▁hondatu , baina ▁erabat ▁deuseztatu ▁ez ! Era uz ▁bitza ▁mahats - ai henak , ez ▁baitira ▁nireak !
PRED:	Let your enemy fall out , but they are too proud , for they have no grapes . They will not stumble , O God , for I am too proud .
GOLD:	“ Go down the rows of the vineyards and destroy the grapevines , leaving a scattered few alive.Strip the branches from the vines , for these people do not belong to the Lord .

ID:	1241
INPUT:	▁guri , ▁berriz , ▁zuzen ▁dena ▁bereiz tea eta ▁ongi ▁zer ▁dagoen ▁azter tzea .
PRED:	But it is good to us , and it is what it is going to do .
GOLD:	So let us discern for ourselves what is right ; let us learn together what is good .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁egun ▁berean etorriko ▁zaizkio ▁gainera mer ezi tako ▁zigorrak : herio tza , ▁dolua ▁eta ▁gosea , eta ▁kiskali ▁egingo ▁da ▁sutan ; ahal tsua ▁baita bera ▁epaitu ▁duen ▁Jainko ▁Jauna ».
PRED:	In this day they will be humiliated , and no one will be raised from the fire . They will come down to the fire , and the Lord your God will save you . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , these plagues will overtake her in a single day — death and mourning and famine.She will be completely consumed by fire , for the Lord God who judges her is mighty . ”

ID:	1243
INPUT:	▁Justiz ian ▁sendo ▁ezarria ▁egongo ▁zara . Z apal kun tzatik ▁libre ▁izango ▁zaraeta ▁ez ▁duzu ▁ezeren ▁beldurrik ▁izango , ikara ▁ez ▁zaizu ▁inoiz ▁hurbilduko .
PRED:	Jerusalem will be shaken , O Lord , and you will not be afraid of your enemies . You will not fear you , and you will never fear you .
GOLD:	You will be secure under a government that is just and fair.Your enemies will stay far away.You will live in peace , and terror will not come near .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	▁hau ▁agindu ▁zien ▁Hilkias ▁apaizari , ▁Xafanen ▁seme ▁Ahik ami , ▁Mike asen ▁seme ▁Ak b orri , ▁Xafan ▁idazkariari ▁eta ▁erregearen ▁ministro ▁zen ▁As aiasi :
PRED:	He commanded the priest to Eleazar son of Hilkiah , Shebna the court secretary , the court secretary , the court secretary , the court secretary ,
GOLD:	Then he gave these orders to Hilkiah the priest , Ahikam son of Shaphan , Acbor son of Micaiah , Shaphan the court secretary , and Asaiah the king 's personal adviser :

ID:	1245
INPUT:	▁Ho dei ek , ▁as eak ▁dau d elarik , euria ▁egin ▁ohi ▁dute ▁lur ▁gainera . Zu h aitza , he gor antz ▁nahiz ▁ipar rer antz ▁erori , han ▁geldituko ▁da , erori ▁den ▁tokian .
PRED:	Those who live in the grave ; they have heard the pride of the earth . They will fall down , and the winds will fall into the valley .
GOLD:	When clouds are heavy , the rains come down.Whether a tree falls north or south , it stays where it falls .

ID:	1246
INPUT:	▁Esklabo ok , ▁izan ▁beti ▁mundu ▁honetan ▁nagusi ▁dituzuen en ▁esaneko ; ▁ez ▁jagole aren ▁begirada pean ▁edo ▁gizakiei ▁atsegin ▁izateko ▁bakarrik , ▁bihotz - bihotzez ▁baizik , ▁Jaunarenganako ▁begirune agatik .
PRED:	Be careful to obey all the world , for you are not faithful to the Lord . Instead , do not forget the sake of the Lord 's Armies .
GOLD:	Slaves , obey your earthly masters in everything you do . Try to please them all the time , not just when they are watching you . Serve them sincerely because of your reverent fear of the Lord .

ID:	1247
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁zeuen ▁jokabidea ▁eta ▁egintzak ▁benetan ▁zuzentzen ▁badituzue , ▁giz arte - <unk> etan ▁justizia ▁defendatzen ▁baduzue ,
PRED:	“ But if you do n't know what you are doing . If you do , you are going to obey the commandments of your justice .
GOLD:	But I will be merciful only if you stop your evil thoughts and deeds and start treating each other with justice ;

ID:	1248
INPUT:	▁Hil tzeko ▁moduko ▁zurezko ▁tresna ▁jaurtiz ▁norbait ▁jo ▁eta ▁hiltzen ▁duena , ▁hilketa - errudun ▁da : ▁heriotzara ▁emango ▁dute .
PRED:	Anyone who kills another person who kills a stone and kills another person who kills another person , and death will be put to death .
GOLD:	Or if someone strikes and kills another person with a wooden object , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	1249
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , zentzugabeak ▁zorakeria ▁ahoan , eta ▁asmo ▁txarrak ▁besterik ▁ez barruan ; Jaun az ▁arduratu ▁gabe ▁bizi ▁daeta ▁hari ▁irainka ▁mintzo ; gose ▁dena ▁hutsik ▁bidaltzen ▁dueta ▁egarri ▁denari ez ▁dio ▁edaten ▁ematen .
PRED:	For fools are trapped by their mouths , and their hearts are trapped in your heart . The Lord gives you water to your heart , and he gives you water .
GOLD:	For fools speak foolishnessand make evil plans.They practice ungodlinessand spread false teachings about the Lord.They deprive the hungry of foodand give no water to the thirsty .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁erantzun :
PRED:	The Lord replied ,
GOLD:	And the Lord replied to Moses ,

ID:	1251
INPUT:	▁Auzoko ▁herriak ▁zigor tuak ▁eta ▁salbatuak
PRED:	Blessings for All Nations
GOLD:	The Lord 's Reply to Jeremiah

ID:	1252
INPUT:	▁Nekaz ari ▁hiltzaileen ▁parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Parable
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	1253
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁erregeari , ▁esatera : ▁« U s tea ▁berarengan ▁duzun ▁arren , ▁ez ▁zaitzala ▁engaina ▁zeure ▁Jainko ▁horrek , ▁Jerusalem ▁nire ▁eskuetan ▁ez ▁dela ▁eroriko ▁esaten ▁badizu ▁ere .
PRED:	Then he said to the king , “ Do n't let anyone tell you what you say , ‘ May the God strike you . '
GOLD:	“ This message is for King Hezekiah of Judah . Do n't let your God , in whom you trust , deceive you with promises that Jerusalem will not be captured by the king of Assyria .

ID:	1254
INPUT:	▁Jakin ▁bezate ▁zure ▁eskua ▁dela , zu ▁zeu , ▁Jauna , ▁nire ▁alde ▁ari ▁dena .
PRED:	Let them see your hand , O Lord , do everything I have done .
GOLD:	Let them see that this is your doing , that you yourself have done it , Lord .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	▁jabea ▁bertan ▁bazen , ▁berriz , ▁ez ▁du ▁ordaindu ▁beharrik ▁izango . ▁Bal din ▁aberea ▁al ok atua ▁badu , ▁al ok <unk> - saria ▁bakarrik ▁emango ▁dio ».
PRED:	But there is no need to be no need . If you need to pay it , you must pay attention to the center of the olive oil . ”
GOLD:	“ If someone borrows an animal from a neighbor and it is injured or dies when the owner is absent , the person who borrowed it must pay full compensation .

ID:	1256
INPUT:	▁Kon ber tsi orako ▁deia
PRED:	Hope for Disobedience
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	1257
INPUT:	▁« Bihar ▁edo ▁etzi ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁galde tzean : ▁“ Zer ▁esan ▁nahi ▁dute ▁Jaunak ▁geure ▁Jainkoak ▁agindu ▁dizkigun ▁lege , ▁xedapen ▁eta ▁erabaki ▁horiek ?”,
PRED:	“ In the seventh year you will ask , ‘ What is the Lord your God ? What is the Lord our God has commanded us ? '
GOLD:	“ In the future your children will ask you , ‘ What is the meaning of these laws , decrees , and regulations that the Lord our God has commanded us to obey ? '

ID:	1258
INPUT:	▁Isakarren ▁leinutik , ▁Tzu arren ▁seme ▁Netanel ;
PRED:	The citizens of Issachar
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar

ID:	1259
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea j asan ▁beharra ▁dut , haren ▁aurka ▁egin ▁baitut ▁bekatu ; baina ▁laster ▁erabakiko ▁du ▁Jaunak nire ▁auzia ▁eta ▁nire ▁alde ▁aterako ▁da ; argi tara ▁eramango ▁nau , eta ▁ikusi ▁ahal ▁izango ▁dut haren ▁salbamena .
PRED:	The fierce anger of the Lord will come to fight against me , but he will bring my case against me . But I will bring my case against you .
GOLD:	I will be patient as the Lord punishes me , for I have sinned against him.But after that , he will take up my caseand give me justice for all I have suffered from my enemies.The Lord will bring me into the light , and I will see his righteousness .

ID:	1260
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Esan ▁Aaron ▁zeure ▁anaiari ▁ez ▁dadila ▁noiz nahi ▁sar ▁santutegian ▁errezelaz ▁barru aldera , ▁kutxa ▁gaineko ▁estalki aren ▁aurrera ; ▁hil ▁egingo ▁litzateke ▁bestela , ▁zeren ▁kutxaren ▁estalki ▁gainean ▁agertzen ▁bainaiz ▁ni ▁laino an .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Give Aaron the following instructions to Aaron . If you leave the inner curtain on the inner curtain , you must be put on the Ark of the Covenant . If you are standing on the Ark of the Covenant , you must be put on the Ark of the Ark .
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Warn your brother , Aaron , not to enter the Most Holy Place behind the inner curtain whenever he chooses ; if he does , he will die . For the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — is there , and I myself am present in the cloud above the atonement cover .

ID:	1261
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁erantzun :— Hemen txe ▁dut , ▁zeuk ▁T ereb in to ▁haranean ▁hil ▁zenuen ▁Goliat ▁filistearraren ▁ezpata , ▁oihal ▁batean ▁bildua , ▁efod ▁delako ▁apaiz - jantz iaren ▁atzean . ▁Hartzazu , ▁nahi ▁baduzu , ▁ez ▁baitago ▁besterik . Davidek ▁esan ▁zuen :— Ez ▁da ▁hori ▁baino ▁hober ik . ▁Emadazu !
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the priest replied , “ You have killed the ephod in the valley of Elah . You have been killed by the ephod , ” the priest replied . “ You are n't going to go to the camp . ”
GOLD:	So David escaped from Saul and went to King Achish of Gath .

ID:	1262
INPUT:	▁Atez ainak : ▁Xalum , ▁Ater , ▁T alm on , ▁Akub , ▁H at ita ▁eta ▁X o bairen ▁ondorengoak , ▁guztira , ▁ <unk> .
PRED:	The gatekeepers of the family of Shallum , Talmon , and Akkub .
GOLD:	The gatekeepers of the families of Shallum , Ater , Talmon , Akkub , Hatita , and Shobai139

ID:	1263
INPUT:	▁nazioak ▁argitzeko ▁argi eta ▁zure ▁herri ▁Israelen ▁ospe ».
PRED:	The nations of your glory will sing to your glory , and your glory will praise you . ”
GOLD:	He is a light to reveal God to the nations , and he is the glory of your people Israel ! ”

ID:	1264
INPUT:	▁Gogor keria ▁gogor keriaren ▁gain , faltsu keria ▁faltsu keriaren ▁gain , eta ▁ni ▁ez ▁naute ▁aintzat ▁hartu ▁nahi ».
PRED:	O Lord , I am with you , O people of Israel , for I do n't want to help me . ”
GOLD:	They all fool and defraud each other ; no one tells the truth.With practiced tongues they tell lies ; they wear themselves out with all their sinning .

ID:	1265
INPUT:	▁Egoitzan ▁erabilitako ▁meta lak
PRED:	The Church in the desert
GOLD:	Building the Courtyard

ID:	1266
INPUT:	▁Ore in - eme ▁maita garri , ▁gaz ela ▁eder ▁duzu . As e ▁zaitzatela ▁une ▁oroz ▁beraren ▁bul arrek , l il ura ▁zaitzala ▁beti ▁beraren ▁amo dioak !
PRED:	You may make a male goat for her husband , and you will bless you with you . May you bless you with her lust , and you will bless you with her .
GOLD:	She is a loving deer , a graceful doe.Let her breasts satisfy you always.May you always be captivated by her love .

ID:	1267
INPUT:	▁ F araoiak ▁Joseri ▁esan ▁zion :— Aita ▁eta ▁senideak ▁etorri ▁zaizkizu .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Father , Father , and your brothers came to you . ”
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Now that your father and brothers have joined you here ,

ID:	1268
INPUT:	▁Haiek , ▁orduan :— Ez ▁daukagu ▁hemen ▁bost ▁ogi ▁eta ▁bi ▁arrain ▁besterik .
PRED:	“ No , ” they said , “ Do n't have five loaves of bread and fish . ”
GOLD:	“ But we have only five loaves of bread and two fish ! ” they answered .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	▁« L ot ▁al ▁ditzak ezu ▁zuk ▁izar - multz oak edo ▁kon stel azioen ▁lotu rak ▁aska ,
PRED:	“ Have you rejected us ? Do you give us the stars of the heavenly beings that comes from the Most High .
GOLD:	“ Can you direct the movement of the stars — binding the cluster of the Pleiadesor loosening the cords of Orion ?

ID:	1270
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Noemik ▁erantzun :— Orain , ▁Rut , ▁zaude ▁lasai ▁arazoa ▁zer - nola ▁bu katuko ▁den ▁jakin ▁arte . ▁Boozek ▁ez ▁du ▁etsiko ▁gaur ▁bertan ▁auzia ▁erabaki ▁arte .
PRED:	But Naomi replied , “ I am going to kill you , ” Naomi replied . “ There is no one of you ! ”
GOLD:	Then Naomi said to her , “ Just be patient , my daughter , until we hear what happens . The man wo n't rest until he has settled things today . ”

ID:	1271
INPUT:	▁Laugarren ▁egunean , ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Samsonen ▁emazteari :— Atera ▁iezaiozu ▁azpikeriaz ▁senarrari ▁igar kizun ak ▁zer ▁esan ▁nahi ▁duen ; ▁bestela , ▁su ▁emango ▁dizugu , ▁baita ▁zuen ▁aitaren ▁etxeari ▁ere . ▁Gu ri ▁lapur tzeko ▁asmoz ▁gonbidatu ▁al ▁gaituzue ?
PRED:	On the seventh day the woman said to his wife , “ If you want to tell her husband to tell her husband to tell her husband , how can we be taken ? ”
GOLD:	On the fourth day they said to Samson 's wife , “ Entice your husband to explain the riddle for us , or we will burn down your father 's house with you in it . Did you invite us to this party just to make us poor ? ”

ID:	1272
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁gure ▁alde ▁izan ▁ez ▁balitz , ▁etsaiek ▁eraso ▁ziguten ean ,
PRED:	If we were not faithful to our Lord our enemies , we would not attack us .
GOLD:	What if the Lord had not been on our sidewhen people attacked us ?

ID:	1273
INPUT:	▁Horrelako rik ▁salatzen ▁badizu ete ▁edo , ▁zeuen ▁kabuz , ▁horrelako ▁zerbai ten ▁berri ▁jakiten ▁baduzue , ▁ikertu ▁zehatz - mehatz ▁arazoa ; ▁Israelen ▁horrelako ▁gaiztakeria ▁egiaz ▁gertatu ▁dela ▁ikusten ▁baduzue ,
PRED:	If you say , ‘ If you are going to attack your own country , you will attack the town of Israel . If you see what is happening , you have done . If you see what is done . '
GOLD:	When you hear about it , investigate the matter thoroughly . If it is true that this detestable thing has been done in Israel ,

ID:	1274
INPUT:	▁Ai patu riko ▁kasu az ▁aparte , ▁jarrai ▁beza ▁bakoitzak ▁Jaunak ▁ezarri ▁dion ▁bizi - ego eran , ▁hots , ▁Jainkoak ▁f e dera ▁dei ▁egitean ▁zuen ▁egoeran . ▁Hau ▁da ▁eliz ▁elkarte ▁guztietan ▁ematen ▁dudan ▁arau a .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who had been faithful to the Lord . If the Lord had finished speaking to the church , he called the church in the church , the church who was given to the church .
GOLD:	Each of you should continue to live in whatever situation the Lord has placed you , and remain as you were when God first called you . This is my rule for all the churches .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁beren ▁garbikuntza ▁egin ▁eta ▁ateak ▁zain tzera ▁joateko ▁agindu ▁nien ▁lebitarrei , ▁larunbat aren ▁santutasuna ▁errespeta tua ▁izan ▁zedin .« Izan ▁gogoan ▁hau ▁ere , ▁ene ▁Jainko ; ▁erruki ▁nitaz , ▁hain ▁onbera ▁baitzara !»
PRED:	Then I prayed to the Temple , for I had commanded them to go to the Lord your God . I will show you my holiness , for you are my God . ”
GOLD:	Then I commanded the Levites to purify themselves and to guard the gates in order to preserve the holiness of the Sabbath.Remember this good deed also , O my God ! Have compassion on me according to your great and unfailing love .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	▁Aitzitik , ▁harresi ▁gabeko ▁herri ▁ireki etako ▁etxeak ▁bas erri - lurren ▁arabera ▁hartuko ▁dira : ▁berreskura tze - eskubidea ▁noiz nah ikoa ▁da ▁eta , ▁dena ▁dela , ▁Jubileu ▁Urtean ▁etxea ▁bere ▁jatorrizko ▁jabeari ▁itzuliko ▁zaio .
PRED:	But if you return to the city , it will be allowed to enter the town of Jubilee , the houses will return to its own property . In the Year of Jubilee , the property will return to the property of Jubilee .
GOLD:	But a house in a village — a settlement without fortified walls — will be treated like property in the countryside . Such a house may be bought back at any time , and it must be returned to the original owner in the Year of Jubilee .

ID:	1277
INPUT:	▁Zuhur ra ▁bazara , ▁zeure ▁onerako ▁da ; harro putza ▁bazara , ▁zeure ▁kalterako .
PRED:	The wise will come to you , O Lord , and your heart will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If you become wise , you will be the one to benefit.If you scorn wisdom , you will be the one to suffer .

ID:	1278
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁isil tzeko ▁keinu ▁egin ▁zien ▁eskuaz , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁kartzelatik ▁nola ▁atera ▁zuen ▁kontatu ▁zien . ▁Azkenean , ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Jakin arazi ▁hau ▁Santiago ri ▁eta ▁beste ▁senideei ». ▁Ondoren , ▁atera ▁eta ▁beste ▁toki ▁batera ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	He told them what the Lord had told them about his dream , and he told them , “ This is what the Lord says : The brothers of James , James , James , James , James , and John went to the other side . ”
GOLD:	He motioned for them to quiet down and told them how the Lord had led him out of prison . “ Tell James and the other brothers what happened , ” he said . And then he went to another place .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	▁Zatozte , ▁ikus ▁Jaunaren ▁egintzak , lurrean ▁egin ▁duen ▁iraul keta :
PRED:	Come , let 's see what the Lord says :
GOLD:	He causes wars to end throughout the earth.He breaks the bow and snaps the spear ; he burns the shields with fire .

ID:	1280
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁esandako ▁hitzak ▁aditu ▁zituztelarik , ▁Sauli ▁jakinarazi ▁zioten . ▁Saulek ▁etorrarazi
PRED:	When David heard that Saul had finished speaking to Saul , he said to Saul .
GOLD:	Then David 's question was reported to King Saul , and the king sent for him .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁aingerua ▁Jerusalem ▁hondatzeko ▁eskua ▁luzatzen ▁ari ▁zelarik , ▁atzera ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jaunak ▁kalte ▁hura ▁bidal tzetik ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion ▁herria ▁xeh atzen ▁ari ▁zen ▁aingeruari :— A tzera ▁esku ▁hori ! ▁Aski ▁da ! Une ▁hartan ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua ▁Ara una ▁jebus tarraren ▁larrain ▁ondoan ▁zegoen .
PRED:	At that time the angel of Jerusalem came out to bring him back to the Lord , the Lord said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : The man of the Lord has spoken ! ” So the angel of the Lord said .
GOLD:	But as the angel was preparing to destroy Jerusalem , the Lord relented and said to the death angel , “ Stop ! That is enough ! ” At that moment the angel of the Lord was by the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite .

ID:	1282
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Saul ▁baztertu
PRED:	Saul Becomes Saul 's Judge
GOLD:	The Lord Rejects Saul

ID:	1283
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁faraoiari ▁berri ▁ematera ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Nire ▁aita ▁eta ▁senideak ▁etorri ▁dira ▁Kanaan dik ▁ardi ▁eta ▁behi ekin ▁eta ▁dauk aten ▁guztiarekin . ▁Orain ▁Goxen ▁eskualdean ▁aurkitzen ▁dira ».
PRED:	Joseph went to Pharaoh and told him , “ My father and mother came to Pharaoh and his brothers and sisters , all the livestock of the land of Canaan , and all the people of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph went to see Pharaoh and told him , “ My father and my brothers have arrived from the land of Canaan . They have come with all their flocks and herds and possessions , and they are now in the region of Goshen . ”

ID:	1284
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	and the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1285
INPUT:	▁S uz koak ▁bezalako ▁izaki ▁batzuk ▁zituen ▁gainean . ▁S e ina ▁hegal ▁zituzten : ▁bi ▁hegal ez ▁aurpegia ▁estaltzen ▁zuten , ▁beste ▁biz ▁gorputza , ▁eta ▁beste ▁biz ▁hegaz ▁egiten ▁zuten .
PRED:	The two cherubim were like the wings of the cherubim , and they covered the wings of the ground .
GOLD:	Attending him were mighty seraphim , each having six wings . With two wings they covered their faces , with two they covered their feet , and with two they flew .

ID:	1286
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁agindu ▁zion :— Egon ▁hor ▁atzean ! Joan ▁zen ▁atzera ▁eta ▁han ▁gelditu ▁zen .
PRED:	So the king said to him , “ Get ready , and go back to the town . ”
GOLD:	“ Wait here , ” the king told him . So Ahimaaz stepped aside .

ID:	1287
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion :— Jaitsi ▁eta ▁ohartarazi ▁herriari , ▁ez ▁dadila ▁ni ▁ikusten ▁ahalegindu , ▁asko ▁eta ▁asko ▁hilik ▁eror ▁ez ▁daitezen .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ May all the people go to their own land , and they will see many of them . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told Moses , “ Go back down and warn the people not to break through the boundaries to see the Lord , or they will die .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	▁Aitak ▁hilak ▁piztu ▁eta ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁dien ▁bezala , ▁Semeak ▁ere ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁die ▁berak ▁nahi ▁duen ei .
PRED:	The Father gives him life to those who are dead , just as he lives .
GOLD:	For just as the Father gives life to those he raises from the dead , so the Son gives life to anyone he wants .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	▁Horien ▁ahoan ▁ezer ▁ez ▁fidagarri rik , horien ▁barrena ▁leize - zul oa , ez tarria ▁hilobi ▁zabaldua , mih ia , ▁berriz , ▁leun ▁eta ▁lab aina .
PRED:	Do n't think they are trapped by their mouths , but they walk in the mouths of the sea .
GOLD:	O God , declare them guilty.Let them be caught in their own traps.Drive them away because of their many sins , for they have rebelled against you .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁su - egur re tarako ▁erabili ▁ohi ▁ditu : ▁nahiz ▁su ▁egin ▁eta ▁bero tzeko , ▁nahiz ▁ogia ▁erretzeko . ▁Baina ▁berak ▁jainko - irudi ▁bat ▁egiteko ▁erabiltzen ▁du . ▁Eta ▁gurtu ▁egiten , ▁ahuspezturik .
PRED:	The people of Israel have made a fire , and he made a fire with wood . But they worshiped the idols and worshiped idols . But they worshiped the gods and worshiped idols .
GOLD:	Then he uses part of the wood to make a fire.With it he warms himself and bakes his bread.Then — yes , it 's true — he takes the rest of itand makes himself a god to worship ! He makes an idoland bows down in front of it !

ID:	1291
INPUT:	▁Bera ▁da ▁gure ▁Jainkoa , eta ▁gu ▁hark ▁larra turiko ▁herria , ▁haren ▁gidari tza peko ▁artaldea . Egin go ▁al ▁diozue ▁gaur ▁kasu ▁haren ▁esanari :
PRED:	He is the God of our God , the sheep of the sheep , the sheep , the sheep , and the sheep of the sheep .
GOLD:	for he is our God.We are the people he watches over , the flock under his care.If only you would listen to his voice today !

ID:	1292
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁haren ▁ahotsak ▁orro ▁egiten ▁dut ru mo iak ▁ozenki ▁jotzean , eta ▁ez ▁ditu ▁oinaz tarriak ▁gehiago ▁lotzen tru mo iak ▁jotzen ▁duen ▁bitartean .
PRED:	Then the voice of the voice of his voice , and the Lord will shout , “ The foundations of the desert , and the stars will rise again . ”
GOLD:	Then comes the roaring of the thunder — the tremendous voice of his majesty.He does not restrain it when he speaks .

ID:	1293
INPUT:	▁Elkarketa - etxola ▁eta ▁aldarea ▁sagaratuko ▁ditut ; ▁baita ▁Aaron ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeak ▁ere , ▁nire ▁apaiz - zerbitzurako .
PRED:	I will make Aaron and his sons and his sons and his sons , Aaron , and his sons as priests .
GOLD:	Yes , I will consecrate the Tabernacle and the altar , and I will consecrate Aaron and his sons to serve me as priests .

ID:	1294
INPUT:	▁alegia , ▁Nabukodonosor ▁erregeak ▁— J oi aki men ▁seme ▁Jekonias ▁Judako ▁erregea , ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁handiki ekin ▁batera , ▁Babiloniara ▁erbesteratu ▁zuenean — ▁eraman ▁ez ▁zituen ▁tresn ei ▁buruz .
PRED:	This is what King Nebuchadnezzar of Judah had been exiled to Babylon , king of Judah , and he led them to Babylon to Babylon . He led them to Babylon to Babylon to Babylon .
GOLD:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon left them here when he exiled Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim , king of Judah , to Babylon , along with all the other nobles of Judah and Jerusalem .

ID:	1295
INPUT:	▁— Zer ▁ikusten ▁duzu , ▁Amos ? ▁— galdetu ▁zidan .— Sas kia ▁bete ▁fruitu ▁heldu ▁— erantzun ▁nion . Jaunak ▁esan ▁zidan :— Bai , ▁heldua ▁da ▁amaiera ▁nire ▁herri ▁Israelentzat . ▁Ez ▁dut ▁gehiago ▁ez ▁ikusi aren ik ▁egingo .
PRED:	“ Why do you see ? ” he asked . “ Yes , ” “ Yes , ” the Lord replied . “ Yes , I have seen my own land ! ”
GOLD:	“ What do you see , Amos ? ” he asked.I replied , “ A basket full of ripe fruit. ” Then the Lord said , “ Like this fruit , Israel is ripe for punishment ! I will not delay their punishment again .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	▁« S im eon ▁eta ▁Lebi ▁anai akin dar keria ▁erabil tzeko ▁bat ▁datoz .
PRED:	“ These are the sound of the tribe of Simeon and Issachar .
GOLD:	“ Simeon and Levi are two of a kind ; their weapons are instruments of violence .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	▁Itzul ▁zaitez , ▁beraz , ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁bakean . ▁Horrela , ▁ez ▁dira ▁sumin duko ▁filistearren ▁buruzagiak .
PRED:	Go and go home to the Philistines , and go into peace .
GOLD:	Please do n't upset them , but go back quietly . ”

ID:	1298
INPUT:	▁Tenpluko ▁atalondo ra ▁eraman ▁ninduen ▁gizonak ▁eta ▁neurtu ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁sarrerako ▁hormek , ▁atearen ▁bi ▁alde etako ek , ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdiko ▁lodiera ▁zuten , ▁ateak ▁zazpi ▁metroko ▁zabalera ▁eta ▁atearen ▁mun ta gek ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdiko ▁zabalera ▁bakoitzak .
PRED:	The man brought me out of the Temple , and he measured the entry room of the gateway to the entry room of the inner courtyard . It was 71/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .
GOLD:	Then he brought me to the entry room of the Temple . He measured the walls on either side of the opening to the entry room , and they were 83/4 feet thick . The entrance itself was 241/2 feet wide , and the walls on each side of the entrance were an additional 51/4 feet long .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁zegoela , ▁aberats ▁batzuk ▁ikusi ▁zituen ▁Jesusek ▁tenpluko ▁diru tegian ▁limosna ▁botatzen .
PRED:	When the rich man saw a rich man , he saw a rich man in the Temple .
GOLD:	While Jesus was in the Temple , he watched the rich people dropping their gifts in the collection box .

ID:	1300
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Kristorenak ▁baldin ▁bazarete , ▁Abrahamen ▁ondorengo ▁zarete , ▁Jainkoaren ▁agintzariaren ▁oinordeko .
PRED:	If you are circumcised , you will be circumcised with the descendants of Abraham .
GOLD:	And now that you belong to Christ , you are the true children of Abraham . You are his heirs , and God 's promise to Abraham belongs to you .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	▁Jantz ▁bitez ▁zure ▁apaizak ▁salbamen - indarrez , ekin ▁biezaiote ▁poz - oihuka ▁zure ▁fededun ek .
PRED:	May the priests bring them out of your salvation to your holy people .
GOLD:	May your priests be clothed in godliness ; may your loyal servants sing for joy .

ID:	1302
INPUT:	▁Eliz ▁elkarteak ▁fedean ▁sendo tuz ▁eta ▁egunetik ▁egunera ▁ugalduz ▁zihoazen .
PRED:	When the church in the church , there were no ordinary work in the day .
GOLD:	So the churches were strengthened in their faith and grew larger every day .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	▁Zuri ▁esker ▁jo ▁ditugu ▁etsaiak , zure ▁bidez ▁zapaldu ▁erasotzaileak .
PRED:	Let us go into your enemies , for we have set us into the dust .
GOLD:	I do not trust in my bow ; I do not count on my sword to save me .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	▁« S inago g etara ▁eta ▁buruzagien ▁eta ▁agintarien ▁aurrera ▁eramango ▁zaituzteten ean , ▁ez ▁egon ▁kez katan ▁nola ▁egin ▁edo ▁zer ▁esan ▁zeuen ▁alde ,
PRED:	“ If you are ready to be ready to go to the Jewish leaders and tell them what you have done .
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	1305
INPUT:	▁B akoitzari ▁merezi ▁duena emango ▁dio ▁ordainetan , baita ▁urrutiko ▁herrietako ei ▁ere ; mend ekua ▁eta ▁haserre - zigorra emango ▁die ▁etsaiei .
PRED:	Anyone who wants to obey him will be called to God , and he will rule over you . He will be put to death .
GOLD:	He will repay his enemies for their evil deeds.His fury will fall on his foes.He will pay them back even to the ends of the earth .

ID:	1306
INPUT:	▁akab o ▁Moaben ▁harro tasun ▁zena ! Hexb onen ▁prestatu ▁dituzte Moab ▁galtzeko ▁bideak :“ S un tsi ▁dezagun ▁nazioa !”, ▁zioten . Zu ▁ere ▁bai , ▁Mad men , mu tu ▁gelditu ▁zara : gainean ▁duzu ▁ezpata .
PRED:	The people of Moab have dried up ! The land of Moab have dried up ! The people of Moab have dried up ! We have been beaten with your sword .
GOLD:	No one will ever brag about Moab again , for in Heshbon there is a plot to destroy her. ‘ Come , ' they say , ‘ we will cut her off from being a nation . 'The town of Madmen , too , will be silenced ; the sword will follow you there .

ID:	1307
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁eliz ▁batz arretan
PRED:	The Death of the Church
GOLD:	Instructions for Public Worship

ID:	1308
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁zaitut ▁ene ▁gordeleku ▁eta ▁babes , zure ▁hitza ▁ene ▁itxaropen .
PRED:	I will rescue you , my fortress ; I hope in your hope .
GOLD:	You are my refuge and my shield ; your word is my source of hope .

ID:	1309
INPUT:	▁Esnatu ▁eta ▁zatoz ▁nire ▁eskubide aren ▁alde , jok atu ▁auzian ▁nire ▁alde , ▁ene ▁Jaun ▁eta ▁Jainko !
PRED:	Come , let me rejoice , O Lord , for I have done to you , O God !
GOLD:	Wake up ! Rise to my defense ! Take up my case , my God and my Lord .

ID:	1310
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁lapur , ▁hiltzaile ▁eta ▁adulteriogile ▁izan , ▁gezurretan ▁zin ▁egin , ▁Baali ▁intsentsua ▁erre , ▁zuekin ▁zerikusirik ▁ez ▁duten ▁jainko ▁arrotzen ▁atzetik ▁ibili
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ This is what you have done to me — your gods — your gods — your gods — your gods , your god , and your gods .
GOLD:	Do you really think you can steal , murder , commit adultery , lie , and burn incense to Baal and all those other new gods of yours ,

ID:	1311
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁jarri ▁du ▁Jainkoak ▁Kristoren ▁oinazpian , ▁eta ▁berau ▁egin ▁du ▁denen ▁gainetik ▁Elizaren ▁buru .
PRED:	But God has placed him on his own feet , and he made the other side of Christ .
GOLD:	God has put all things under the authority of Christ and has made him head over all things for the benefit of the church .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	▁Otoi , ▁barka ▁iezadazu ▁bekatua , ▁eta ▁zatoz ▁nirekin ▁Jauna ▁gurtzera .
PRED:	Please listen to me , Lord , and let me worship me .
GOLD:	But now , please forgive my sin and come back with me so that I may worship the Lord . ”

ID:	1313
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁Jauna ▁haserretu ▁egin ▁zitzaidan ▁zuen ▁erruz ▁eta ▁ez ▁zidan ▁erregua ▁onartu . ▁Esan ▁zidan : ▁Aski ▁da ! ▁Ez ▁zakizkit ▁mintza ▁berriro ▁horretaz .
PRED:	“ But the Lord was angry with me , and he refused to listen to me . He said to me , ‘ This is what I have done to me . '
GOLD:	“ But the Lord was angry with me because of you , and he would not listen to me . ‘ That 's enough ! ' he declared . ‘ Speak of it no more .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunarekin ▁alaituko ▁naiz , sal batu ▁nauelako ▁poz - pozik ▁izango .
PRED:	Then I will praise the Lord , for he will rejoice .
GOLD:	Then I will rejoice in the Lord.I will be glad because he rescues me .

ID:	1315
INPUT:	▁Bihur ▁bedi ▁haien ▁kanpalekua ▁basamortu , geldi ▁bitez ▁inor ▁gabe ▁haien ▁bizileku ak !
PRED:	Let them live in the land of their camp ; let them live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	To the one you have punished , they add insult to injury ; they add to the pain of those you have hurt .

ID:	1316
INPUT:	▁ez ▁duela ▁arbasoei ▁hitzemandako ▁lurraldea ▁ikusiko ▁mespretxatu ▁nauten ▁horietako ▁inork , ▁Egipton ▁eta ▁basamortuan ▁nire ▁aintza ▁eta ▁mirariak ▁ikusi ▁arren , ▁behin ▁eta ▁berriro ▁ni ▁auzitan ▁jarri ▁eta ▁desobedi tu ▁egin ▁baiti date .
PRED:	For I will never see the land I have seen my ancestors in the wilderness of Egypt . I saw that no longer happen to my ancestors .
GOLD:	not one of these people will ever enter that land . They have all seen my glorious presence and the miraculous signs I performed both in Egypt and in the wilderness , but again and again they have tested me by refusing to listen to my voice .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	▁legenak ▁jota ▁dago ▁gizona ; ▁kutsatuta ▁dago ▁eta ▁hala ▁aitortuko ▁du ▁apaizak ▁buruan ▁duen ▁gaitz arengatik .
PRED:	The priest is ceremonially unclean for the skin , and the priest is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	the man is indeed infected with a skin disease and is unclean . The priest must pronounce him ceremonially unclean because of the sore on his head .

ID:	1318
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁legeak ▁erregeen ▁aurrean ▁azalduko ▁ditut ▁lotsarik ▁gabe .
PRED:	I will tell you the kings of the kings , and I will do not obey your commandments .
GOLD:	I will speak to kings about your laws , and I will not be ashamed .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁erdainkuntza ▁eman ▁zion ▁itunaren ▁ezaugarri ; ▁hala , ▁Isaak ▁jaio ▁zitzaionean , ▁zortzigarren ▁egunean ▁erdaindu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Abrahamek ; ▁berdin ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Isaakek ▁ere ▁Jakobekin , ▁eta ▁Jakobek ▁hamabi ▁pat riar k ekin .
PRED:	When Isaac was born to the covenant of the covenant , Abraham was born to Abraham . In the first day Abraham was born , Abraham was born to Abraham .
GOLD:	“ God also gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision at that time . So when Abraham became the father of Isaac , he circumcised him on the eighth day . And the practice was continued when Isaac became the father of Jacob , and when Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs of the Israelite nation .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hark ▁gaixo ▁asko ▁sendatu ▁zituen , ▁edozein ▁zela ▁ere ▁haien ▁gaitza , ▁eta ▁deabru ▁asko ▁bota ▁ere ▁bai . ▁Deabru ei ▁ez ▁zien ▁hitzik ▁egiten ▁uzten , ▁baz ekiten - eta ▁nor ▁zen .
PRED:	He healed many sick and sick people , so many of the devil could n't know that he was sick . But he did n't know that he was sick .
GOLD:	So Jesus healed many people who were sick with various diseases , and he cast out many demons . But because the demons knew who he was , he did not allow them to speak .

ID:	1321
INPUT:	▁Isaiasek ▁berak ▁esan ▁zuen ▁zergatik ▁ezin ▁zuten ▁sinetsi :
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to him ,
GOLD:	But the people could n't believe , for as Isaiah also said ,

ID:	1322
INPUT:	▁Emakume ▁zuhurrak ▁eraiki ▁egiten ▁du ▁etxea , zentzugabeak ▁bere ▁esku ez ▁desegin .
PRED:	A wise person starts fights ; he does n't turn away from their homes .
GOLD:	A wise woman builds her home , but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	▁Joben ▁egun go ▁egoera ▁tam al garria
PRED:	Job 's Family
GOLD:	Job Speaks of His Anguish

ID:	1324
INPUT:	▁Kehaten ▁ondorengo ▁lebitarren ▁gainerako ▁senitarteei ▁Efraimen ▁leinuaren ▁zenbait ▁hiri ▁atera ▁zitzaien :
PRED:	The rest of the Levites were allotted to the clans of the clans of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	The rest of the Kohathite clan from the tribe of Levi was allotted the following towns and pasturelands from the tribe of Ephraim :

ID:	1325
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁kriseilu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁urre ▁garbiz ; ▁su - h atzak ▁eta ▁errautsontziak ▁ere ▁urre ▁garbiz koak ▁ziren .
PRED:	Each of the lampstand was made of pure gold , lamp , and petals .
GOLD:	He also made seven lamps for the lampstand , lamp snuffers , and trays , all of pure gold .

ID:	1326
INPUT:	▁Larri aldian ▁dei ▁egin ▁nion ▁Jaunari , ▁deiadar ▁ene ▁Jainkoari . Eta ▁aditu ▁zuen ▁bere ▁tenplutik ▁nire ▁oihua , haren ▁belarri etaraino ▁heldu ▁zen ▁nire ▁deiadarra .
PRED:	When I cried out to the Lord , I cried out to the Lord ,
GOLD:	Then the earth quaked and trembled.The foundations of the mountains shook ; they quaked because of his anger .

ID:	1327
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁ere , ▁beren ▁sinesgogor keriari ▁uko ▁egiten ▁badiote , ▁txer tatuko ▁ditu , ▁bai ▁baitu ▁Jainkoak ▁ahalmen ik ▁haiek ▁berriro ▁txer tatzeko .
PRED:	For the people of Israel do evil , and they will be allowed to drink the food of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And if the people of Israel turn from their unbelief , they will be grafted in again , for God has the power to graft them back into the tree .

ID:	1328
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁hilabet eren ▁buruan ▁atera ▁ginen , ▁negua ▁uhar tean ▁egina ▁zuen ▁Alexan d ri ako ▁ontzi ▁batean ; ▁K as tor ▁eta ▁P ol ux ▁zeramatzan ▁ik ur tzat .
PRED:	Three years later we went out to the town of Ephesus , and we were in Ephesus .
GOLD:	It was three months after the shipwreck that we set sail on another ship that had wintered at the island — an Alexandrian ship with the twin gods as its figurehead .

ID:	1329
INPUT:	▁Iragan ▁da ▁bigarren ▁zoritxarra ! ▁Baina ▁laster ▁etorriko ▁da ▁hirugarrena .
PRED:	But the second is coming , and the second will come to the second .
GOLD:	The second terror is past , but look , the third terror is coming quickly .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	▁bakoitza ▁ondoko ari ▁itsatsia ▁du , el karri ▁atxikiak , ▁ezin ▁bereiz iak .
PRED:	These are the Each side of the wise ; they ca n't understand the meaning of the Most High .
GOLD:	No , it is useless to try to capture it.The hunter who attempts it will be knocked down .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	▁Edan ▁asetzeraino haren ▁bular ▁gozo tik ! X ur gatu ▁atseginez haren ▁ug atz ▁oparo tik !
PRED:	It is good to enjoy a fool , for she gives birth to those who try to live .
GOLD:	Drink deeply of her gloryeven as an infant drinks at its mother 's comforting breasts . ”

ID:	1332
INPUT:	▁Jeroboamen ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah

ID:	1333
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁idia ▁zeuen ▁begi ▁aurrean ▁lepo ▁egingo ▁dute , ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁haragirik ▁jango ; ▁astoa ▁zeuen ▁aurrean ▁lapurtu , ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁berreskuratuko ; ▁zuen ▁ardiak ▁etsaiei ▁emango ▁dizkiete , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dizue ▁inork ▁lagunduko .
PRED:	You must not defile your neighbor before your neighbor , and you must not eat the meat of the sheep or goats . You must not touch your bow before you , and you will not touch your enemies .
GOLD:	Your ox will be butchered before your eyes , but you will not eat a single bite of the meat . Your donkey will be taken from you , never to be returned . Your sheep and goats will be given to your enemies , and no one will be there to help you .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	▁Pen tsa ▁ongi ▁zeure ▁oinak ▁non ▁jarri , izan ▁bitez ▁seguru ak ▁zure ▁ibil bide ▁guztiak .
PRED:	Do n't worry about your feet , and let your feet succeed .
GOLD:	Mark out a straight path for your feet ; stay on the safe path .

ID:	1335
INPUT:	▁Neure kin ▁dut ▁bidali ▁nauena ; ▁ez ▁nau , ▁ez , ▁bakarrik ▁utzi , ▁hark ▁atsegin ▁duena ▁egiten ▁baitut ▁beti .
PRED:	I sent me out to tell you , but he has not sent me . He is not faithful to me , for he is right .
GOLD:	And the one who sent me is with me — he has not deserted me . For I always do what pleases him . ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁urrutiko ▁lurraldetik , ▁zure ▁izen ▁handiaren ▁eta ▁zure ▁egintza ▁ahaltsu en ▁berri ▁adi turik , ▁zure ▁herri ▁Israelgo a ▁ez ▁den ▁arrotzen ▁bat ▁tenplu ▁honetara ▁otoitz ▁egitera ▁etortzen ▁bada ,
PRED:	“ Therefore , listen to your name , and all the nations of your enemies will hear your word and pray to this Temple . When you pray to this Temple , you will come to this Temple .
GOLD:	“ In the future , foreigners who do not belong to your people Israel will hear of you . They will come from distant lands when they hear of your great name and your strong hand and your powerful arm . And when they pray toward this Temple ,

ID:	1337
INPUT:	▁Nire a ▁da ▁maitea eta ▁ni ▁harena , l il iz ain arena .
PRED:	My lover is my lover ; he delights in me .
GOLD:	My lover is mine , and I am his.He browses among the lilies .

ID:	1338
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Xime iri :— Ez ▁zara ▁hilko , ▁ez ! Eta ▁zin ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	“ You must not die , ” he said . “ You must not die ! ”
GOLD:	Now Mephibosheth , Saul 's grandson , came down from Jerusalem to meet the king . He had not cared for his feet , trimmed his beard , or washed his clothes since the day the king left Jerusalem .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁diot : ▁« Hemen ▁nauzu ». ▁Liburuan ▁agintzen ▁zait ▁zure ▁nahia ▁betetzeko , ▁ene ▁Jainko .
PRED:	That is why I said to you , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , ‘ Look , I have come to do your will , O God — as is written about me in the Scriptures . ' ”

ID:	1340
INPUT:	▁Aaronek ▁lau ▁seme ▁zituen : ▁Nadab ▁lehen - semea , ▁Abihu , ▁Eleazar ▁eta ▁Itam ar .
PRED:	Aaron had four sons and Abihu , Abihu , Abihu , Abihu , Abihu , and Ithamar .
GOLD:	The names of Aaron 's sons were Nadab ( the oldest ) , Abihu , Eleazar , and Ithamar .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	▁Aleluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! Goretsazue ▁Jauna ▁zerutik , ▁goretsi ▁zeru ▁go ien etik !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise him from heaven ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord from the heavens ! Praise him from the skies !

ID:	1342
INPUT:	▁Zer ▁zoritxarra ▁zuretzat , ▁Moab ! G aldua ▁zara , ▁Kem o xen ▁herri ▁hori ! Zure ▁seme - alabak g atibu ▁eraman ▁dituzte ▁atzerrira .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O Moab ! You have rebelled against your people .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O people of Moab ! The people of the god Chemosh are destroyed ! Your sons and your daughtershave been taken away as captives .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ipini ▁efodaren ▁sorbalda - babeski etan . ▁Honela , ▁israeldarren ▁izenak ▁oroigarri ▁gisa ▁eramango ▁ditu ▁Aaronek ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrera .
PRED:	He will make the ephod in front of the ephod , and it will bring it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁Jauna , ▁dei ▁degizut ! ▁Erruki ▁nitaz ▁eta ▁erantzun !
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , for I have mercy on you .
GOLD:	Hear me as I pray , O Lord.Be merciful and answer me !

ID:	1345
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁Israel ▁herriari ▁beraren ▁arbasoei ▁zin ▁eginez ▁agindutako ▁lurralde ▁osoa . ▁Israeldarrak ▁beraren ▁jabe ▁egin ▁ziren ▁eta ▁bertan ▁jarri ▁bizitzen .
PRED:	So the Lord gave his people to the people of Israel . He swore to live in the land of the Lord and gave him to his ancestors .
GOLD:	So the Lord gave to Israel all the land he had sworn to give their ancestors , and they took possession of it and settled there .

ID:	1346
INPUT:	▁« Ets aien ▁aurka ▁borrokatzeko ▁kanpalekua ▁era tzean , ▁gorde ▁zeuen ▁buruak ▁kutsadura ▁orotatik ▁garbi .
PRED:	“ When you turn against your enemies , you will attack your enemies .
GOLD:	“ Any man who becomes ceremonially defiled because of a nocturnal emission must leave the camp and stay away all day .

ID:	1347
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁esan ▁zioten ▁elkarri :— Ez ▁gara ▁ongi ▁ari . ▁Berri ▁ona ▁izan ▁dugu ▁gaur ▁eta ▁gu ▁hemen ▁deus ▁ere ▁esan ▁gabe . ▁Eguna ▁argitu ▁arte ▁isilik ▁ba gau de , ▁Jainkoak ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁gaitu . ▁Goazen , ▁beraz , ▁erregearen ▁jauregira ▁berri ▁ematera .
PRED:	Then they said to each other , “ We are n't going to preach the Good News . We are going to stop the next day . ”
GOLD:	Finally , they said to each other , “ This is not right . This is a day of good news , and we are n't sharing it with anyone ! If we wait until morning , some calamity will certainly fall upon us . Come on , let 's go back and tell the people at the palace . ”

ID:	1348
INPUT:	▁Erregea ▁eta ▁beronen ▁zerbitzaria ▁zetoz kiola ▁ikustean , ▁Ara unak , ▁bidera ▁irten ▁eta ▁erregearen ▁aurrean ▁ahuspezturik ,
PRED:	The king and his servant came to the king and bowed low before the king .
GOLD:	When Araunah saw the king and his men coming toward him , he came and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁aingerua ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁eta ▁aingeruak ▁Asiriako ▁erregearen ▁gudarosteko ▁gudari ▁adoretsu ▁guztiak , ▁buruzagiak ▁eta ▁ofizi alak ▁hondatu ▁egin ▁zituen . S enakerib ek , ▁lotsaz ▁beterik , ▁bere ▁herrira ▁itzuli ▁behar ▁izan ▁zuen . ▁Eta ▁bere ▁jainkoen ▁jauretx era ▁sartu ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁semeek ▁hil ▁zuten ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	Then the angel of Assyria sent a message to the king of Assyria , the king of Assyria , and the commander of the god of the temple of the god of the god of the Covenant .
GOLD:	And the Lord sent an angel who destroyed the Assyrian army with all its commanders and officers . So Sennacherib was forced to return home in disgrace to his own land . And when he entered the temple of his god , some of his own sons killed him there with a sword .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁ahaztu ▁nahi ▁gaituzu ▁betiko ? Zergatik ▁utzi ▁nahi ▁bertan ▁behera ▁bizi ▁guztirako ?
PRED:	Why do you forget us ? Why do you want to live forever ?
GOLD:	Why do you continue to forget us ? Why have you abandoned us for so long ?

ID:	1351
INPUT:	▁Han ▁zeuden ▁juduek ▁esan ▁zuten :— Bai ▁maite ▁zuela !
PRED:	When the Jewish leaders heard him , they said , “ Yes , you love ! ”
GOLD:	The people who were standing nearby said , “ See how much he loved him ! ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	▁gero , ▁sinagogetan ▁predikatzen ▁hasi ▁zen , ▁Jesus ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea ▁dela ▁hots ▁eginez .
PRED:	Then Jesus began preaching in the synagogues and preached the Son of God .
GOLD:	And immediately he began preaching about Jesus in the synagogues , saying , “ He is indeed the Son of God ! ”

ID:	1353
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁San bala tek ▁eta ▁G ex emek ▁mandatu ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zidaten : ▁« Zatoz ▁On o ▁haran eko ▁Kef iri m era ▁gurekin ▁hitz ▁egitera ». ▁Niri ▁kalte ▁egiteko ▁asmoa ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then all the night , the servant of the Lord sent this message to me : “ Come , ” they said . “ Come and tell me what I have done to me . ”
GOLD:	So Sanballat and Geshem sent a message asking me to meet them at one of the villages in the plain of Ono.But I realized they were plotting to harm me ,

ID:	1354
INPUT:	▁Gizonak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— ▁Ez ! ▁Jaunaren ▁gudarosteko ▁buruzagia ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁etorri ▁berria ▁naiz . Orduan , ▁Josuek , ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspezturik , ▁esan ▁zion :— Zer ▁agintzen ▁diozu , ▁jauna , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁honi ?
PRED:	Then the man said to him , “ I have come to the Ark of the Lord ! ” So Joshua said , “ Why have you come to the ground ? ”
GOLD:	“ Neither one , ” he replied . “ I am the commander of the Lord 's army. ” At this , Joshua fell with his face to the ground in reverence . “ I am at your command , ” Joshua said . “ What do you want your servant to do ? ”

ID:	1355
INPUT:	▁Gizon ezko ek ▁bakarrik ▁jan ▁dezakete ▁opari ▁horietatik , ▁eta ▁toki ▁sakratuan ▁jango ▁dute , ▁guztiz ▁sakratuak ▁baitira .
PRED:	The priest must be eaten by the sacred offerings , and the sacred offerings must be eaten by the sacred sacred place .
GOLD:	You must eat it as a most holy offering . All the males may eat of it , and you must treat it as most holy .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	▁Begiratu ▁zuen ▁Abnerrek ▁atzera ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— As ah el ▁al ▁zara ? Honek ▁erantzun :— Bai !
PRED:	When Abner arrived , he asked Abner , “ What are you going ? ” “ Yes , ” Abner replied .
GOLD:	When Abner looked back and saw him coming , he called out , “ Is that you , Asahel ? ” “ Yes , it is , ” he replied .

ID:	1357
INPUT:	▁Esker ▁ona ▁eta ▁eskaria
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer

ID:	1358
INPUT:	▁Jantz iak ▁eta ▁gerri koak ▁egineta ▁merkatari ei ▁saltzen ▁dizkie .
PRED:	He gave them a piece of wine to feed you .
GOLD:	She makes belted linen garmentsand sashes to sell to the merchants .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herria ▁bidean
PRED:	A Warning to Israel
GOLD:	The Israelites Leave Sinai

ID:	1360
INPUT:	▁Bidean ▁zihoala , ▁putzu ▁bat ▁begiztatu ▁zuen ▁landan ▁eta ▁hiru ▁artalde ▁putzu ▁ondoan ▁etzan ak , ▁handik ▁edaten ▁baitzuten ▁artalde ek . ▁Harri ▁handi ▁batek ▁estaltzen ▁zuen ▁putzu ko ▁ahoa .
PRED:	As he was on the way , he went out to the country of the town of Galilee , and the flocks of sheep and goats at the cave .
GOLD:	He saw a well in the distance . Three flocks of sheep and goats lay in an open field beside it , waiting to be watered . But a heavy stone covered the mouth of the well .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁“ Ondoren go ▁ugari ▁emango ▁dizut ▁eta ▁herri ▁askoren ▁sor tzaile ▁bihurtuko ▁zaitut . ▁Zure ▁ondorengoei ▁lurralde ▁honen ▁jabetza ▁emango ▁diet ▁betiko ”.
PRED:	Then he said to them , ‘ I will give you many lands and many nations . I will give you this land to your descendants forever . '
GOLD:	He said to me , ‘ I will make you fruitful , and I will multiply your descendants . I will make you a multitude of nations . And I will give this land of Canaan to your descendants after you as an everlasting possession . '

ID:	1362
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁zen ▁Pazkoa , ▁juduen ▁jai ▁nagusia , ▁eta ▁herrietako ▁jende ▁asko ▁Jerusalemera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Pazkoa ▁baino ▁lehen , ▁garbikuntza - ohikun e etan ▁parte ▁hartzeko .
PRED:	When the Passover celebration was on the Passover celebration , many people went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover celebration .
GOLD:	It was now almost time for the Jewish Passover celebration , and many people from all over the country arrived in Jerusalem several days early so they could go through the purification ceremony before Passover began .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	▁Hango ▁senideak , ▁bai ▁baitzuten ▁gure ▁berri , ▁bidera ▁atera ▁zitzaizkigun ▁ F oro ▁Ap io ▁eta ▁Hiru ▁Ben tara . ▁Haiek ▁ikustean , ▁Jainkoari ▁eskerrak ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁Paulok , ▁eta ▁gogoa ▁bizkortu ▁zitzaion .
PRED:	Our brothers and sisters heard that we were rebuilding the way . They saw that Paul and camped at the center stem , and they worshiped God .
GOLD:	The brothers and sisters in Rome had heard we were coming , and they came to meet us at the Forum on the Appian Way . Others joined us at The Three Taverns . When Paul saw them , he was encouraged and thanked God .

ID:	1364
INPUT:	▁Gauza ▁guztiak beronen ▁bidez ▁egin ▁ziren , eta ▁egindako tik ▁ezerez ▁da ▁berau ▁gabe ▁egin .
PRED:	Then all the things he had done , and he made everything he had done .
GOLD:	God created everything through him , and nothing was created except through him .

ID:	1365
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁haurra ▁tenpluan
PRED:	Jesus Heals in the Temple
GOLD:	The Prophecy of Anna

ID:	1366
INPUT:	▁Esn ez ▁manten tzen ▁dena , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁da ▁gai ▁salbamenaren ▁doktrina ▁ulertzeko , ▁bularreko ▁haurra ▁baita .
PRED:	But if you eat anything to eat , it is n't true to the baby .
GOLD:	For someone who lives on milk is still an infant and does n't know how to do what is right .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁esan ▁nahi ▁dut : ▁Jainkoak ▁behar ▁bezala ▁egindako ▁ituna ▁ezin ▁zuen ▁indar gabetu ▁laurehun ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁hamar ▁urte ▁geroago ▁agertu riko ▁lege ▁batek , ▁agintzaria ▁indarrik ▁gabe ▁utziz .
PRED:	This is what God says : “ I am giving you a covenant with the covenant with the father of his covenant . He is the father of his father . He has been given to his father .
GOLD:	This is what I am trying to say : The agreement God made with Abraham could not be canceled 430 years later when God gave the law to Moses . God would be breaking his promise .

ID:	1368
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁Hamabiak ▁beregana ▁bildurik , ▁deabru ▁guztiak ▁botatzeko ▁eta ▁gaitzak ▁sendatzeko ▁indarra ▁eta ▁ahalmena ▁eman ▁zien .
PRED:	Then Jesus took the twelve disciples to the devil , and the power of the devil gave them authority to the devil .
GOLD:	One day Jesus called together his twelve disciples and gave them power and authority to cast out all demons and to heal all diseases .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	▁Han ▁hautsi ▁ditu ▁guda - ar mak : ar ku aren ▁geziak , ▁babeski ▁eta ▁ezpatak .
PRED:	He has broken his chariot and broken his arrows .
GOLD:	You are glorious and more majesticthan the everlasting mountains .

ID:	1370
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁badator ▁eguna , ▁neure ▁herri ▁honen , ▁Israel ▁eta ▁Judaren , ▁zoria ▁aldatuko ▁dudana . ▁Itzul arazi ▁egingo ▁ditut ▁beren ▁gurasoei ▁emandako ▁lurraldera ▁eta ▁beronen ▁jabe ▁izango ▁dira ▁berriro . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	For the day of the day I will return to my people , and I will give you this land . I will give you to your ancestors , and I will give them to your ancestors . ”
GOLD:	For the time is coming when I will restore the fortunes of my people of Israel and Judah . I will bring them home to this land that I gave to their ancestors , and they will possess it again . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1371
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Izan ▁zaitezte ▁etxezain ▁leial ▁eta ▁zentzuduna ▁bezala , ▁nagusiak ▁bere ▁orduan ▁otordua ▁banatzeko ▁morroien ▁buru ▁ipini ▁duena ▁bezala .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to his wife , “ Be sure to be a master 's wife , just as the Lord has commanded his servants . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ A faithful , sensible servant is one to whom the master can give the responsibility of managing his other household servants and feeding them .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	▁Erregearen ▁hitz ▁hauek ▁entzunik , ▁abiatu ▁egin ▁ziren . ▁Bidean , ▁sor taldean ▁ikusi tako ▁izarra ▁agertu ▁zitzaien ▁eta ▁biziki ▁poztu ▁ziren . ▁Iz arra ▁aurretik ▁joan ▁zitzaien , ▁haurra ▁zegoen ▁toki ▁gainean ▁gelditu ▁arte .
PRED:	When the king heard what the king had happened , they saw the voice of the Lord . When they saw that he had seen , they saw that the child had seen the child was coming .
GOLD:	After this interview the wise men went their way . And the star they had seen in the east guided them to Bethlehem . It went ahead of them and stopped over the place where the child was .

ID:	1373
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁engainatu ▁zeuen ▁buruak . ▁Ez ▁dago ▁Jainkoari ▁barre ▁egiterik . ▁Bakoitzak ▁zer ▁erein , ▁huraxe ▁bilduko ▁du :
PRED:	Do not defile your neighbor by saying , ‘ The farmer plants those who plant the fruit of your neighbor . '
GOLD:	Do n't be misled — you can not mock the justice of God . You will always harvest what you plant .

ID:	1374
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁gizakia ▁bere ▁eginkizun etara ▁doa , arra tsa ▁arte ▁lanera .
PRED:	When they need , they need to work until it goes to work .
GOLD:	Then people go off to their work , where they labor until evening .

ID:	1375
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁buruzagiak , ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁jakitean , ▁erregearen ▁jauregitik ▁tenplura ▁joan ▁eta ▁tenpluko ▁Ate ▁Berri aren ▁aurrean ▁eseri ▁ziren .
PRED:	When the rulers heard what the king had happened to hear the Temple of Judah , they sat down in the Temple .
GOLD:	When the officials of Judah heard what was happening , they rushed over from the palace and sat down at the New Gate of the Temple to hold court .

ID:	1376
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinua ▁ez ▁da ▁hitz - kon tua , ▁egintza - kon tua ▁baizik .
PRED:	For the Kingdom of God is not a kingdom , but it is not a kingdom .
GOLD:	For the Kingdom of God is not just a lot of talk ; it is living by God 's power .

ID:	1377
INPUT:	▁P rez ioa ▁ezartzeko , ▁honako ▁balio kide tza ▁hauek ▁erabiliko ▁dira :« P er ts ona ▁hogei ▁urtetik ▁hirurogei ▁artekoa ▁bada , ▁gizonezko arentzat ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁zilarrezko ▁txanpon , ▁santutegiko ▁diru tan ,
PRED:	This is the account of the tribe of Levi : “ The number of silver must be sold for twenty years .
GOLD:	here is the scale of values to be used . A man between the ages of twenty and sixty is valued at fifty shekels of silver , as measured by the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	▁Joanen ▁ikasleek ▁haren ▁gorpua ▁jasotzera ▁etorri ▁eta ▁lur ▁eman ▁zioten ; ▁gero , ▁Jesusi ▁berri ▁ematera ▁joan ▁ziren .
PRED:	The disciples came to the body of John 's body and told him what Jesus had happened .
GOLD:	Later , John 's disciples came for his body and buried it . Then they went and told Jesus what had happened .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	▁erabat ▁ziur ▁baitzegoen ▁hark ▁hitzemana ▁betetzeko ▁zuen ▁ahalmenaz .
PRED:	When he realized that he was powerful , he gave him his power to his power .
GOLD:	He was fully convinced that God is able to do whatever he promises .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁hedatu ▁dut ▁zerua eta ▁oinarritu ▁lurra , eta ▁Si oni ▁esaten ▁diot : ▁Zu ▁nire ▁herria ! Neure ▁mezuaren ▁bozera maile egin ▁zaitut , eta ▁neure ▁esku pean ▁babestu ».
PRED:	I say to the heavens , “ O heavens , O heavens , O God , O God , and I will praise you . ”
GOLD:	And I have put my words in your mouthand hidden you safely in my hand.I stretched out the sky like a canopyand laid the foundations of the earth.I am the one who says to Israel , ‘ You are my people ! ' ”

ID:	1381
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Elim as , ▁Az tia ▁— horixe ▁esan ▁nahi ▁baitu ▁izenak —, ▁aurka ▁atera ▁zitzaien , ▁kontsul ordea ▁sinesmenetik ▁aldentzeko .
PRED:	They said to them , “ That is why the names of the prophets said , ‘ This is what the Lord had commanded . '
GOLD:	But Elymas , the sorcerer ( as his name means in Greek ) , interfered and urged the governor to pay no attention to what Barnabas and Saul said . He was trying to keep the governor from believing .

ID:	1382
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁sorrarazi ▁dituzu ▁iturri ▁eta ▁errekak , zuk ▁agor rarazi ▁inoiz ▁lehortu ▁gabeko ▁ibaiak .
PRED:	O Lord , you have dried up your water , and you wo n't pick up your water .
GOLD:	You caused the springs and streams to gush forth , and you dried up rivers that never run dry .

ID:	1383
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Asak , ▁Jaunaren ▁etxe ▁eta ▁bere ▁jauregiko ▁altxor tegietan ▁gelditzen ▁zen ▁zilar ▁eta ▁urre ▁guztia ▁hartu ▁eta , ▁bere ▁zerbitzarien ▁bidez , ▁Siriako ▁erregeari ▁bidali ▁zion . ▁Ben - Hadad ▁zen ▁hura , ▁Tab ri mon - en ▁semea ▁eta ▁Hez ion - en ▁biloba ; ▁Damaskon ▁bizi ▁zen . ▁Honako ▁mezu ▁hau ▁eman ▁behar ▁zioten :
PRED:	Then King Asa sent this message to the Lord , the king of Aram , the royal palace , and the royal palace . He sent his servants to the king of Aram and his servants , the sons of Aram , and the sons of Aram .
GOLD:	Asa responded by removing all the silver and gold that was left in the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord and the royal palace . He sent it with some of his officials to Ben-hadad son of Tabrimmon , son of Hezion , the king of Aram , who was ruling in Damascus , along with this message :

ID:	1384
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁buruko ▁ileak ▁ere ▁denak ▁zenbatu ak ▁dauz ka ▁Jainkoak .
PRED:	Your head are all right , and your head are all right .
GOLD:	And the very hairs on your head are all numbered .

ID:	1385
INPUT:	▁Jainkoari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamek ▁Israeli ▁eginarazi ▁zizkion ▁bekatuetatik ▁aldendu ▁gabe , ▁beraietan ▁ibiliz ▁baizik .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord 's sight , but he refused to turn to the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But he did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bedi ▁zure ▁ah oaz alapar taka ▁mintza , zure ▁bihotzak ▁ere ez ▁dezala ▁bizkor ▁hitz ▁egin Jaunaren ▁aurrean ; zer uan ▁baita ▁Jainkoa eta ▁zu ▁lurrean . Ez ▁egin , ▁bada , ▁hitz ▁asko .
PRED:	Do n't let me speak to your heart , for you do n't understand your hearts . Instead , you do n't speak to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	As you enter the house of God , keep your ears open and your mouth shut . It is evil to make mindless offerings to God .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	▁« Ezin ▁izango ▁dizu ▁inork ▁ere ▁aurre ▁egin ▁bizi ▁zaren ▁artean , ▁zurekin ▁izango ▁bainaiz , ▁Moisesekin ▁izan ▁nintzen ▁bezala ; ▁ez ▁dizut ▁huts ▁egingo , ▁ez ▁zaitut ▁utziko .
PRED:	“ Do n't be able to stand against you , and I will live among you . I will never be with you , just as I am with you .
GOLD:	No one will be able to stand against you as long as you live . For I will be with you as I was with Moses . I will not fail you or abandon you .

ID:	1388
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁beraz , ▁ez ▁zara ▁esklabo , ▁seme ▁baizik ▁eta , ▁seme ▁zarenez , ▁baita ▁oinordeko ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁borondatez .
PRED:	So now you are not slaves , but you are not slaves to the son of God . You are a slave to be a slave of God .
GOLD:	Now you are no longer a slave but God 's own child . And since you are his child , God has made you his heir .

ID:	1389
INPUT:	▁bat ▁bakarra ▁Jauna , ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁sinesmena , ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁bataioa ,
PRED:	There is only one one who is only only the Lord , the one who is only one .
GOLD:	There is one Lord , one faith , one baptism ,

ID:	1390
INPUT:	▁Hurbildu ▁zitzaion ▁Sauli ▁emakumea ▁eta , ▁hain ▁larri tua ▁ikusirik , ▁esan ▁zion :— Nik , ▁zure ▁mirabe ▁honek , ▁entzun ▁dut ▁zure ▁hitza ▁eta ▁arriskuan ▁jarri ▁dut ▁neure ▁bizia , ▁zure ▁esana ▁bete tzearren .
PRED:	When she came to Saul and saw the woman , she said to Saul , “ I have heard your message to you , I have heard your word . ”
GOLD:	When the woman saw how distraught he was , she said , “ Sir , I obeyed your command at the risk of my life .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	▁ikusi ▁hango ▁harresiak , ▁ikertu ▁jauregiak , hur rengo ▁gizaldi ari ▁esateko :
PRED:	On the walls of the city , the siege is the end of the future .
GOLD:	For that is what God is like.He is our God forever and ever , and he will guide us until we die .

ID:	1392
INPUT:	▁H ik ▁ez ▁duk ▁honetan ▁eskurik , ▁ez ▁parterik , ▁hire ▁kontzientzia ▁ez ▁baita ▁zuzena ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your fellow believers in this way , for you are not guilty of God .
GOLD:	You can have no part in this , for your heart is not right with God .

ID:	1393
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁harrapaturiko ▁guztia ▁— abere ▁nahiz ▁gizaki — ▁hartu
PRED:	“ Then all these animals , animals , sheep , sheep , sheep , and animals ,
GOLD:	After they had gathered the plunder and captives , both people and animals ,

ID:	1394
INPUT:	▁Bake aren ▁Jainkoak ▁gai ▁egin ▁zaitzatela ▁egite ▁on ▁ororen ▁bidez ▁haren ▁nahia ▁betetzeko ; ▁burutu ▁dezala ▁guregan ▁berari ▁atsegin ▁zaion ▁guztia ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁bidez . ▁Aintza ▁beroni ▁menderen ▁mendetan ! ▁Amen .
PRED:	May God give us his glory to all his deeds , and may his glory be able to obey his glory . May his glory forever forever forever ! Amen . Amen .
GOLD:	may he equip you with all you needfor doing his will.May he produce in you , through the power of Jesus Christ , every good thing that is pleasing to him.All glory to him forever and ever ! Amen .

ID:	1395
INPUT:	▁Lagun ▁iezadazue ▁zuek ▁ere ▁zeuen ▁otoitz ez . ▁Horrela , ▁lagun ▁askoren ▁erregu ei ▁esker ▁Jainkoak ▁emango ▁didan ▁laguntza ▁dela ▁bide , ▁eskerrak ▁ere ▁askok ▁emango ▁dizkiote ▁niri ▁egindako ▁mesede engatik .
PRED:	I pray for you , for you do n't pray for me , for God has given me success .
GOLD:	And you are helping us by praying for us . Then many people will give thanks because God has graciously answered so many prayers for our safety .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	▁joan ▁egin ▁zen . ▁Eta ▁han ▁aurkitu ▁zuen ▁hilo tza ▁lurrean , ▁astoa ▁eta ▁lehoia ▁aldamenean ▁zutik ▁zituela . ▁Leh oiak ▁ez ▁zuen ▁gorpua ▁jan , ▁ezta ▁astoa ▁zatikatu ▁ere .
PRED:	When the lion arrived , he found a lion sitting on the ground . When he saw the lion 's body , the lion 's body was killed , the lion 's body would not eat .
GOLD:	and he went out and found the body lying in the road . The donkey and lion were still standing there beside it , for the lion had not eaten the body nor attacked the donkey .

ID:	1397
INPUT:	▁Kadex tik ▁abiatu ▁eta ▁Hor ▁mendira ▁iritsi ▁zen ▁israeldar ▁elkartea .
PRED:	So Moses left Mount Sinai and went out to the hill country of Israel .
GOLD:	The whole community of Israel left Kadesh and arrived at Mount Hor .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Bas amortuan ▁azaldu ▁diot neure ▁onginahia herio tzatik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁duen ▁herriari : bere ▁atseden - bidean ▁da ▁Israel .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will flee from my people , ” says the Lord. “ The people of Israel will flee from the place of safety .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Those who survive the coming destructionwill find blessings even in the barren land , for I will give rest to the people of Israel . ”

ID:	1399
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Jan ▁ezazue ▁gaur , ▁Jaunari ▁sagaraturiko ▁atseden - eguna ▁da ▁eta ; ▁gaur ▁ez ▁duzue ▁kanpoan ▁ezer ▁aurkituko .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ Go and go to the Lord , where you are standing on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	Moses said , “ Eat this food today , for today is a Sabbath day dedicated to the Lord . There will be no food on the ground today .

ID:	1400
INPUT:	▁Ekar dazue ▁gero ▁zeuen ▁anaia ▁gazteena , ▁eta ▁orduan ▁jakingo ▁dut ▁zelatariak ▁ez , ▁baizik ▁gizon ▁zintzoak ▁zaretela . ▁Ondoren ▁itzuliko ▁dizuet ▁anaia , ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁honetan ▁ibili ▁ahal ▁izango ▁zarete ”».
PRED:	Now go to me , your brother , and I will know that you will know the one of your brother , but I will return to you . Then you will return to this land . ”
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . Then I will know you are honest men and not spies . Then I will give you back your brother , and you may trade freely in the land . ' ”

ID:	1401
INPUT:	▁S egur tatu ▁on bidean ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁hau , ez ▁nazaten ▁harroputz ek ▁zapal .
PRED:	Honor your servant ; do n't desire your mind ; do not desire your mind .
GOLD:	Please guarantee a blessing for me.Do n't let the arrogant oppress me !

ID:	1402
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuk , ▁Jauna , ▁barre ▁egiten ▁diezu , is eka ▁sinesgabe ▁horiei .
PRED:	But you laugh at the Lord , O Lord , you cry out to their cries .
GOLD:	You are my strength ; I wait for you to rescue me , for you , O God , are my fortress .

ID:	1403
INPUT:	▁Lehen - semeen ▁hilketa ▁iragarri
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	Death for Egypt 's Firstborn

ID:	1404
INPUT:	▁Rimon - P ere tzetik ▁Libn ara ;
PRED:	They left Rithmah and camped at Rithmah .
GOLD:	They left Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah .

ID:	1405
INPUT:	▁izan ▁ere , ▁giza ▁ohorea ▁maiteago ▁zuten ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁datorrena ▁baino .
PRED:	For they were given to God , and they were given to God .
GOLD:	For they loved human praise more than the praise of God .

ID:	1406
INPUT:	▁Gaiz kilea ▁onik ▁irteten ▁da ▁hondamendi koan , babes ean ▁egoten ▁zigor - egunean .
PRED:	When the godless flee , it will be destroyed by the day of death .
GOLD:	Evil people are spared in times of calamityand are allowed to escape disaster .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	▁Bego ▁hau ▁idatzirik ▁hurrengo ▁gizaldi arentzat , sor tzeko ▁dagoen ▁herriak ▁Jauna ▁gore ts ▁dezan .
PRED:	May the next generation be read to the Lord and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Tell them the Lord looked downfrom his heavenly sanctuary.He looked down to earth from heaven

ID:	1408
INPUT:	▁esanez :— Hau ▁ez , ▁aita ; ▁bestea ▁da ▁lehen - semea ; ▁ezarri ▁esku ina ▁horren ▁buru ▁gainean .
PRED:	“ This is what the father says : The oldest son is on the oldest son .
GOLD:	“ No , my father , ” he said . “ This one is the firstborn . Put your right hand on his head . ”

ID:	1409
INPUT:	▁Lege - maisuak , ▁orduan :— Ederki , ▁Maisu ; ▁egia ▁diozu ▁Jainkoa ▁bakarra ▁dela ▁eta ▁ez ▁dela ▁besterik ▁esatean .
PRED:	The teachers of religious law said , “ Rabbi , Rabbi , the one who is true . ”
GOLD:	The teacher of religious law replied , “ Well said , Teacher . You have spoken the truth by saying that there is only one God and no other .

ID:	1410
INPUT:	▁T apuah ekoa , ▁Hef er koa ,
PRED:	The land of fools are trapped ,
GOLD:	The king of TappuahThe king of Hepher

ID:	1411
INPUT:	▁Be tzai renak ▁ <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Jorah112
GOLD:	The family of Bezai324

ID:	1412
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁errege ▁edo ▁handikien ▁famili etako ▁israeldar ▁gazte ▁batzuk ▁aukeratzeko ▁agindu ▁zion ▁jauregiko ▁funtzionario buru ▁zen ▁Ax pen azi .
PRED:	Then the kings of Israel , king of Israel , and all the kings of the royal palace .
GOLD:	Then the king ordered Ashpenaz , his chief of staff , to bring to the palace some of the young men of Judah 's royal family and other noble families , who had been brought to Babylon as captives .

ID:	1413
INPUT:	▁Denak ▁okertu ▁dira , ▁bat ▁egin ▁dute ▁galdu kerian , ez ▁da ▁inor ▁on ▁dagienik , ▁bat ▁bera ▁ere ▁ez .
PRED:	For all have turned away , and he does n't have a single person .
GOLD:	Will those who do evil never learn ? They eat up my people like breadand would n't think of praying to God .

ID:	1414
INPUT:	▁Lan gile ▁frog atua
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	An Approved Worker

ID:	1415
INPUT:	▁Egiptora ▁bidean ▁zurekin ▁izango ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁neuk ▁itzularaziko ▁zaitut ▁berriro . ▁Eta ▁hiltzean , ▁Josek ▁itxiko ▁dizkizu ▁begiak .
PRED:	I will send you back to Egypt , and you will be watch over to Egypt . Then Joseph will rise again .
GOLD:	I will go with you down to Egypt , and I will bring you back again . You will die in Egypt , but Joseph will be with you to close your eyes . ”

ID:	1416
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁jendetzari ▁bigarrenez ▁jaten ▁eman
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Four Thousand

ID:	1417
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁bera ▁izango ▁dut ▁salb abide , sin es gaberik ▁ezin ▁baita ▁haren ▁aurrera ▁aurkeztu .
PRED:	For I will rescue the nations ; they have no attention to their evil schemes .
GOLD:	But this is what will save me — I am not godless.If I were , I could not stand before him .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	▁G eziak ▁jaurtiz ▁sakabanatu ▁zituen , tx imista ▁eginez ▁ihes ▁eragin .
PRED:	He scattered them into the sea , and he scattered them .
GOLD:	Then at your command , O Lord , at the blast of your breath , the bottom of the sea could be seen , and the foundations of the earth were laid bare .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	▁S inago gatik ▁ateratzean , ▁hurrengo ▁larunbatean ▁ere ▁gai ▁beraz ▁hitz ▁egiteko ▁erregutu ▁zien ▁jendeak .
PRED:	When the next day , the people went out to the Sabbath day , he prayed to them .
GOLD:	As Paul and Barnabas left the synagogue that day , the people begged them to speak about these things again the next week .

ID:	1420
INPUT:	▁Hauek ▁uharte ▁eta ▁itsas ▁h egira ▁hedatu ▁ziren . Horiek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁Jaf eten ▁ondorengoak ; ▁leinu ▁eta ▁herri ▁bakoitzak ▁bere ▁lurraldea ▁eta ▁hizkuntza ▁ditu .
PRED:	These were the names of the sea and the people of the sea . These were the territory of the Jordan River , and the descendants of Anak .
GOLD:	Their descendants became the seafaring peoples that spread out to various lands , each identified by its own language , clan , and national identity .

ID:	1421
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁da ▁inor ▁zerura ▁igo , ▁zerutik ▁jaitsi ▁zena ▁baizik , ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea .
PRED:	“ No one can go down to heaven , but the Son of Man came to the Son of Man .
GOLD:	No one has ever gone to heaven and returned . But the Son of Man has come down from heaven .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	▁Hau ts ▁egin ▁ditu ▁bere ▁haserre ▁bizian ▁Israelen ▁indar ▁guztiak . Ets aia ▁iristean , ▁atzean ▁gorde ▁du ▁eskua . S ua ▁piztu ▁du ▁bere ▁herrian , ▁inguru ▁guztiak ▁iren tsiz .
PRED:	He has heard his fierce anger , and he has rescued his enemies . He has turned his hand to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	All the strength of Israelvanishes beneath his fierce anger.The Lord has withdrawn his protectionas the enemy attacks.He consumes the whole land of Israellike a raging fire .

ID:	1423
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁guardiaburu arekin ▁batera ▁zetorren ▁babiloniar ▁gudarosteak ▁Jerusalemgo ▁harresia ▁bota ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then the Babylonian army captured the city of Jerusalem , and he drove out the wall of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁batez , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Eliseok ▁semea ▁biziarazi ▁zion ▁emakumeari :— Alde ▁egizu ▁hemendik ▁zeure ▁etxekoekin ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁ahal ▁duzun ▁tokira , ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁gosetea ▁bidaliko ▁baitu ▁Jaunak ▁lurralde ▁honetara .
PRED:	One day Elisha said to the woman , “ Get your son and live in the land of Canaan , and go home to the land of the Lord , for you will send a famine to this land . ”
GOLD:	Elisha had told the woman whose son he had brought back to life , “ Take your family and move to some other place , for the Lord has called for a famine on Israel that will last for seven years . ”

ID:	1425
INPUT:	▁« Gizaseme , ▁Israelen ▁hirietako ▁hondakin en ▁artean ▁bizi ▁direnek ▁esaten ▁dute : ▁“ Abrah amek , ▁bakarra ▁izanik , ▁lurraldearen ▁jabetza ▁izan ▁bazuen , ▁are ▁gehiago ▁guk , ▁hain ▁ugari ▁izanik ”.
PRED:	“ Son of man , the land of Israel , says the Lord , ‘ There is no one who lives among you . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , the scattered remnants of Israel living among the ruined cities keep saying , ‘ Abraham was only one man , yet he gained possession of the entire land . We are many ; surely the land has been given to us as a possession . '

ID:	1426
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁jatorrikoak ▁bagara , ▁ez ▁gen ezake ▁pentsa ▁Jainkoa ▁giza ▁treb etasun ak ▁eta ▁irudi menak ▁landu tako ▁urre , ▁zilar ▁edo ▁harrizko ▁irudi en ▁antzeko ▁denik .
PRED:	That is why we can not be like silver or gold , silver , gold , silver , silver , gold , silver , gold , silver , silver , gold , and gold , and gold .
GOLD:	And since this is true , we should n't think of God as an idol designed by craftsmen from gold or silver or stone .

ID:	1427
INPUT:	▁Krista uen ▁alde ▁otoitza
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer for Wisdom
GOLD:	Christ Is Supreme

ID:	1428
INPUT:	▁Akixek ▁uste ▁osoa ▁zuen ▁Daviden gan ▁eta ▁honela ▁zioen ▁bere ▁baitan : ▁« Gorro tagarri ▁egin ▁da ▁David ▁bere ▁herri ▁Israelentzat . ▁Neure ▁menpe ▁izanen ▁dut ▁betiko ».
PRED:	But when they were afraid of David , they cried out to David , “ I am afraid of my people , and I will bless my people . ”
GOLD:	Achish believed David and thought to himself , “ By now the people of Israel must hate him bitterly . Now he will have to stay here and serve me forever ! ”

ID:	1429
INPUT:	▁A teak ▁or poan ▁bira , ▁alfer rak ▁ohean .
PRED:	He made the cherubim in the inner courtyard , and all the kingdoms of the altar .
GOLD:	As a door swings back and forth on its hinges , so the lazy person turns over in bed .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Herodesek , ▁jakintsuak ▁isilean ▁deiturik , ▁izarra ▁noiz ▁agertu ▁zitzaien ▁jakin ▁zuen ▁zehatz .
PRED:	Herod had heard what he had happened , so he knew what he had happened .
GOLD:	Then Herod called for a private meeting with the wise men , and he learned from them the time when the star first appeared .

ID:	1431
INPUT:	▁Jesusi ▁jarraitzeko ▁bal d intzak
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	The Cost of Following Jesus

ID:	1432
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁otordu ▁handia ▁eman ▁zien ▁erregeak ▁buruzagi ▁eta ▁funtzionarioei , ▁Ester ren ▁omenez . ▁Zer gak ▁ar indu ▁zituen ▁eskualde etan , ▁eta ▁erregeari ▁dagokion ▁oparo tasunez ▁banatu ▁zituen ▁erregal iak .
PRED:	Then the king gave a great feast to Queen Esther , and he gave her to Queen Esther 's nobles . He gave her to the king and gave her to the king .
GOLD:	To celebrate the occasion , he gave a great banquet in Esther 's honor for all his nobles and officials , declaring a public holiday for the provinces and giving generous gifts to everyone .

ID:	1433
INPUT:	▁Aingeruak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ni ▁G ab riel ▁naiz ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁zerbitzura ▁nago ; ▁berak ▁bidali ▁nau ▁zuri ▁hitz ▁egitera ▁eta ▁berri ▁hau ▁ematera .
PRED:	Then the angel said to him , “ I am in the place of God , and I sent me to speak to you . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel said , “ I am Gabriel ! I stand in the very presence of God . It was he who sent me to bring you this good news !

ID:	1434
INPUT:	▁Denek ▁nahi ▁zuten ▁Salomon ▁ikusi , ▁Jainkoak ▁eman ▁zion ▁jakinduriaren ▁berri ▁izateko .
PRED:	Then all the nations of Solomon saw that God had given him wisdom .
GOLD:	Kings from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	1435
INPUT:	▁Biz iko ▁zareten ▁edozein ▁leku tan , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁hegazti - ▁edo ▁abere - odol ik ▁jango .
PRED:	And you must be baptized in any of you , and you must never eat any of the blood of blood .
GOLD:	No matter where you live , you must never consume the blood of any bird or animal .

ID:	1436
INPUT:	▁B anias , ▁Merem ot , ▁Eliaxib ,
PRED:	Shecaniah , Harim ,
GOLD:	Vaniah , Meremoth , Eliashib ,

ID:	1437
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁inork ▁ezin ▁jakin zer ▁gertatuko ▁den . Adi eraz ▁ote ▁diezaioke ▁norbaitek ?
PRED:	For no one can know how can I say , ‘ What will you happen ? '
GOLD:	Indeed , how can people avoid what they do n't know is going to happen ?

ID:	1438
INPUT:	▁Nadab en ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak ▁eta ▁egin ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jotham 's reign and everything he did . The rest of the Kings of Israel are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Nadab 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	▁Jakinarazi ▁zioten ▁Joabi ▁erregea ▁negarrez ▁eta ▁aieneka ▁ari ▁zela ▁Absalomen gatik .
PRED:	But when the king heard this , he became deeply troubled and weeping .
GOLD:	As all the people heard of the king 's deep grief for his son , the joy of that day 's victory was turned into deep sadness .

ID:	1440
INPUT:	▁Davidek , ▁orduan , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁ekarri ▁zion ▁gazte ari :— Non goa ▁zara ?— Zuen ▁artean ▁etorkin ▁gisa ▁bizi ▁den ▁amalek tar ▁baten ▁semea ▁nauzu ▁— erantzun ▁zuen ▁hark .
PRED:	David asked him , “ Where is your young men ? Where is your young men ? ” “ Where is your son ? ” “ Yes , ” David replied . “ I am your son . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to the young man who had brought the news , “ Where are you from ? ” And he replied , “ I am a foreigner , an Amalekite , who lives in your land . ”

ID:	1441
INPUT:	▁Mu tzri tik ▁ekarritako ▁guda - gurdi ▁batek ▁zilarrezko ▁seiehun ▁txanpon ▁balio ▁zuen ▁eta ▁zaldi ▁batek ▁ehun ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamar . ▁Salomonen ▁merkatariek ▁hititen ▁eta ▁aramearren ▁errege ▁guztientzat ▁ekarri ▁ohi ▁zituzten ▁halakoak .
PRED:	It will be bought from Egypt with silver and silver , silver , silver , silver , and ten pieces of silver and gold . In addition to the land of King Solomon .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	▁Ira u pena ▁behar ▁duzue , ▁Jainkoaren ▁borondatea ▁betez ▁agintzaria ▁eskura tzeko .
PRED:	Do not be able to obey God 's promise .
GOLD:	Patient endurance is what you need now , so that you will continue to do God 's will . Then you will receive all that he has promised .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	▁Honek ▁lagunen ▁aurrean ▁kantatuko ▁du ▁esanez :“ Bekatu ▁egin ▁eta ▁zuzenbidea ▁hautsi ▁nuen , baina ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁dit ▁merezi takoa ▁eman .
PRED:	She said to her , ‘ He has broken me , but God has refused to punish me . '
GOLD:	He will declare to his friends , ‘ I sinned and twisted the truth , but it was not worth it .

ID:	1444
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁herriaren ▁aurrean ▁profanatzen ▁nauzue ▁esku ▁bete ▁garagar ▁eta ▁ogi - zati ▁batzu engatik ; ▁honela , ▁engainatu ▁egiten ▁duzue ▁sines korra ▁den ▁nire ▁herria , ▁hiltzea ▁merezi ▁ez ▁zutenak ▁hil araziz ▁eta ▁bizitzea ▁merezi ▁ez ▁zutenak ▁bizi araziz .
PRED:	I am sending you out of my people to sin against my people . In this way , you have been sold to death , and you have been killed by the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You bring shame on me among my people for a few handfuls of barley or a piece of bread . By lying to my people who love to listen to lies , you kill those who should not die , and you promise life to those who should not live .

ID:	1445
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Amatziasek ▁mezulariak ▁igorri ▁zizkion ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Joaxi , ▁Joakazen ▁seme ▁eta ▁Jehuren ▁bilob ari , ▁esatera : ▁« Zatoz , ▁neur ▁ditzagun ▁indarrak !»
PRED:	Then Amaziah sent messengers to King Amaziah of Israel , son of Jehoahaz and grandson of Jehu 's reign . “ Come , ” he said .
GOLD:	One day Amaziah sent messengers with this challenge to Israel 's king Jehoash , the son of Jehoahaz and grandson of Jehu : “ Come and meet me in battle ! ”

ID:	1446
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁Suko tetik ▁irten ▁eta ▁Eta men , ▁basamortu ▁ertzean , ▁kokatu ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the Israelites left the town of Jericho and settled in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The Israelites left Succoth and camped at Etham on the edge of the wilderness .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁ez ▁zuri ▁begirune , ▁Jauna ? Nork ▁ez ▁goretsi ▁zure ▁izena ? Zu ▁bakarrik ▁zara ▁santu ! Herriak ▁oro ▁etorri eta ▁zure ▁aurrean ahuspez tuko ▁dira , zure ▁salbamen - asmoak den en ▁aurrean ▁agertu ▁baitira ».
PRED:	Who will fear you ? Who is your name ? Who is your name , O Lord , and I will praise your name ? ”
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	1448
INPUT:	▁Esterrek ▁erantzun ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zion ▁Mardokeori :
PRED:	Esther sent this message to Mordecai :
GOLD:	Then Esther sent this reply to Mordecai :

ID:	1449
INPUT:	▁Go gai tua ▁nago eguzkipean ▁egin ▁ditudan lan ▁nek etsu ez , neure ▁ondorengo ari ▁utzi behar ▁izango ▁baitizki ot .
PRED:	I have stayed in trouble , for I have been destroyed , for I have been destroyed .
GOLD:	I came to hate all my hard work here on earth , for I must leave to others everything I have earned .

ID:	1450
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁bakar dade an ▁otoitzean ▁ari ▁zen ▁batean , ▁ikasleak ▁bildu ▁zitzaizkion , ▁eta ▁Jesusek ▁galdetu ▁zien :— Nor ▁naizela ▁dio ▁jendeak ?
PRED:	One day Jesus went out to Capernaum , and the disciples met him . “ Who is the people ? ” he asked . “ Who is I ? ”
GOLD:	One day Jesus left the crowds to pray alone . Only his disciples were with him , and he asked them , “ Who do people say I am ? ”

ID:	1451
INPUT:	▁« Hara , ▁zoritxarra ▁bidaliko ▁dizut ; ▁desagerraraziko ▁ditut ▁zure ▁ondorengoak ▁eta ▁suntsituko ▁Akaben ▁etxeko ▁gizasemeak ▁oro , ▁libre ▁nahiz ▁esklabo , ▁Israel ▁osoan .
PRED:	“ Look , I will send you out of the family of Ahab , and I will destroy the family of Ahab 's family .
GOLD:	So now the Lord says , ‘ I will bring disaster on you and consume you . I will destroy every one of your male descendants , slave and free alike , anywhere in Israel !

ID:	1452
INPUT:	▁landan ▁aurkitu ▁baitu ▁gizonak ▁eta , ▁neskak ▁deiadar ▁eginda ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zen ▁han ▁laguntzeko ▁inor .
PRED:	For the man found a man in the field , and there was no one in the fields .
GOLD:	Since the man raped her out in the country , it must be assumed that she screamed , but there was no one to rescue her .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	▁Azkenik , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ▁Jose ▁bere ▁senideei : ▁« Las ter ▁hilko ▁naiz ▁ni ; ▁baina ▁Jainkoak ▁zuen ▁alde ▁esku ▁hartuko ▁du ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁honetatik ▁eramango ▁zaituzte , ▁Abrahami , ▁Isaaki ▁eta ▁Jakobi ▁zin ▁eginez ▁hitzemandako ▁lurraldera ».
PRED:	Then Joseph said to his brothers , “ I will die with all the brothers and sisters , and I will bring you into this land . ”
GOLD:	“ Soon I will die , ” Joseph told his brothers , “ but God will surely come to help you and lead you out of this land of Egypt . He will bring you back to the land he solemnly promised to give to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob . ”

ID:	1454
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁Jainkoak ▁Isaias ▁profetaren ▁bidez ▁esana ▁bete ▁zen :
PRED:	This fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah :
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God said through the prophet Isaiah :

ID:	1455
INPUT:	▁Batzuk ▁ez ▁dira ▁ezkontzen ▁jaiotzaz ▁ezin ▁dutelako ; ▁beste ▁batzuk , ▁giza ▁eskuz ▁ezin duak ▁izan ▁direlako ; ▁beste ▁batzuk , ▁berriz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁errege tzagatik ▁hala ▁erabaki ▁dutelako . ▁Onar ▁dezake enak ▁onar ▁beza .
PRED:	They can not be married to anyone , but they can not be allowed to eat anything . But if they have the Kingdom of God . But if they are trying to eat the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Some are born as eunuchs , some have been made eunuchs by others , and some choose not to marry for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven . Let anyone accept this who can . ”

ID:	1456
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zien :— Atera ▁pixka ▁bat ▁eta ▁eraman ▁mah aiz ain ari . Hala ▁egin ▁zuten ▁haiek .
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ He took a widow who was sitting on the head . ”
GOLD:	he said , “ Now dip some out , and take it to the master of ceremonies. ” So the servants followed his instructions .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hartan , ▁inguruan ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁Jesus ▁bakarrik ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁berekin , ▁eta ▁besterik ▁inor ▁ez .
PRED:	So they looked at that time and saw him , and they saw no one .
GOLD:	Suddenly , when they looked around , Moses and Elijah were gone , and they saw only Jesus with them .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁seme - alabak ▁eta ▁bilobak , ▁bere ▁ondare ▁guztia , ▁eraman ▁zituen ▁Jakobek ▁Egiptora .
PRED:	He chose his sons and daughters to leave them as a special possession .
GOLD:	sons and grandsons , daughters and granddaughters — all his descendants .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁askatu ▁nahian ▁Pilato ▁berriro ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ;
PRED:	Then Jesus told them ,
GOLD:	Pilate argued with them , because he wanted to release Jesus .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	▁Bet - T o gar mako ek ▁ibiltzeko ▁edo ▁garra i orako ▁zaldiak ▁eta ▁man doak ▁ekartzen ▁zizkizuten .
PRED:	Do n't worry about your horses , or drink wine or drink wine .
GOLD:	“ From Beth-togarmah came riding horses , chariot horses , and mules , all in exchange for your goods .

ID:	1461
INPUT:	▁Haiek , ▁berriro :— Zer ▁egin ▁dizu ? ▁Nola ▁ireki ▁dizkizu ▁begiak ?
PRED:	“ What have you done ? ” they asked . “ What do you see ? ”
GOLD:	“ But what did he do ? ” they asked . “ How did he heal you ? ”

ID:	1462
INPUT:	▁Jabe ak ▁ez ▁du ▁onak ▁ala ▁txarrak ▁diren ▁begiratu ▁behar , ▁ezta ▁aukeratua ▁beste ▁batez ▁tru katu ▁ere . ▁Hala ▁ere ▁tru katzen ▁badu , ▁bai ▁aukeraturiko ▁aberea , ▁bai ▁ordez koa , ▁biak ▁gelditzen ▁dira ▁sagaraturik ▁eta , ▁beraz , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁dira ▁berreskuratu ».
PRED:	But if the people do n't turn away from these good things , do not turn to the place of worship . They must not be allowed to take a place for the sacred place . ”
GOLD:	You may not pick and choose between good and bad animals , and you may not substitute one for another . But if you do exchange one animal for another , then both the original animal and its substitute will be considered holy and can not be bought back . ”

ID:	1463
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁“ Hon ako ▁hau ▁eraikitzen ▁hasi ▁huen ▁eta ▁ezin ▁izan ▁dik ▁amaitu ”.
PRED:	He said to them , ‘ Do n't be angry with your servant . '
GOLD:	They would say , ‘ There 's the person who started that building and could n't afford to finish it ! '

ID:	1464
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁nor ▁zerbitzatuko ▁nuke ▁nik ▁Daviden ▁semea ▁izan ▁ezik ? ▁Zuen ▁aitaren ▁zerbitzari ▁izan ▁naizen ▁bezala ▁izango ▁naiz ▁zurea ▁ere .
PRED:	And I will serve my son , as I would serve you ? I will serve you as your servant David .
GOLD:	“ And anyway , why should n't I serve you ? Just as I was your father 's adviser , now I will be your adviser ! ”

ID:	1465
INPUT:	▁Nebuzaradan ▁guardiaburuak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Riblara ▁eraman ▁zituen , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregeagana ,
PRED:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	1466
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁parabola ▁bat ▁ere ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« I tsua ▁itsu aren ▁gidari ▁izan ▁ote ▁li teke ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁biak ▁zulora ▁eroriko ?
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Who is a blind man ? Who is the one who plants the blind ? Who will fall ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus gave the following illustration : “ Can one blind person lead another ? Wo n't they both fall into a ditch ?

ID:	1467
INPUT:	▁Hil tzailea ▁hirian ▁geldituko ▁da , ▁elkartearen ▁aurrean ▁auzitara ▁agertu ▁arte ▁edota ▁aldi ▁horretan ▁karguan ▁egongo ▁den ▁apaiz ▁nagusia ▁hil ▁arte . ▁Gero , ▁itzul ▁daiteke ▁hiltzailea ▁bere ▁herrira ▁eta ▁etxera , ▁handik ▁egin ▁baitzuen ▁ihes ».
PRED:	In the time the house will come to court before the high priest . If the high priest returns to the high priest , he would flee to the high priest , he fled to the town . ”
GOLD:	But the slayer must stay in that city and be tried by the local assembly , which will render a judgment . And he must continue to live in that city until the death of the high priest who was in office at the time of the accident . After that , he is free to return to his own home in the town from which he fled . ”

ID:	1468
INPUT:	▁Ahuspez ▁gaitezen ▁lotsaturik , de so ho rez ▁beterik ; zeren ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁baitugu Jaunaren , ▁geure ▁Jainkoaren , ▁kontra ge uk ▁eta ▁geure ▁gurasoek gaztetandik ▁gaurdaino . Ez ▁dugu ▁aditu Jaunaren , ▁geure ▁Jainkoaren , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Come , let us stand before the Lord our God , and we have sinned against the Lord our God . We have sinned against the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	Let us now lie down in shameand cover ourselves with dishonor , for we and our ancestors have sinnedagainst the Lord our God.From our childhood to this daywe have never obeyed him . ”

ID:	1469
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁laster ▁ahaztu ▁zituzten ▁haren ▁egintzak eta ▁ez ▁zuten ▁itxaropenik ▁jarri ▁haren <unk> m oan .
PRED:	But when they forget him , they would not forget his hope .
GOLD:	Yet how quickly they forgot what he had done ! They would n't wait for his counsel !

ID:	1470
INPUT:	▁Baztertu ▁naute lako , ▁jainko ▁arrotzei ▁intsentsua ▁erre ▁diete lako ▁eta ▁idoloak ▁eginez ▁iraindu ▁naute lako , ▁sutu ▁egin ▁zait ▁haserrea ▁Jerusalemen ▁kontra , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zait ▁itzaliko ”.
PRED:	My enemies have abandoned me , and I have sinned against me . They have not sinned against me , and I have not sinned against me . '
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will burn against this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	1471
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁badakizue ▁ni ▁noan ▁toki rako ▁bidea ».
PRED:	You know where I am going . ”
GOLD:	And you know the way to where I am going . ”

ID:	1472
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁egunean ▁berriro ▁miatuko ▁du . ▁Ikusten ▁badu ▁ezkabia ▁ez ▁dela ▁zabaldu , ▁ezta ▁ilea ▁hori tu ▁ere , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dela ▁azalekoa ▁baino ▁sakonagoa ,
PRED:	On the seventh day the seventh day the priest finds that the affected area is not better than skin-deep and the hair of the priest .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the sore again . If he finds that the scabby sore has not spread , and there is no yellow hair on it , and it appears to be only skin-deep ,

ID:	1473
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁harresietan , ▁Jerusalem , begira leak ▁jarri ▁ditut , gau ▁eta ▁egun ▁isildu ▁gabe ari ▁daitezen . Ez ▁hartu ▁atseden , Jaunari ▁bere ▁agintzariak gogor arazten ▁dizkio zuen ok !
PRED:	Look at Jerusalem , O Jerusalem , and I will praise you . They will not be silent , and they will not be afraid of the Lord .
GOLD:	O Jerusalem , I have posted watchmen on your walls ; they will pray day and night , continually.Take no rest , all you who pray to the Lord .

ID:	1474
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien ▁bere ▁ikasleei :— Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Nek ez ▁sartuko ▁dira ▁aberatsak ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuan .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to his disciples , “ I tell you the truth , and they will enter the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his disciples , “ I tell you the truth , it is very hard for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁ibilaldi etan , ▁Matan atik ▁Nah ali el era , ▁Nah ali el etik ▁B am o tera ,
PRED:	The next day after day they were camped at Eglon .
GOLD:	Nahaliel , and Bamoth .

ID:	1476
INPUT:	▁ez ▁lilura tzailerik , ▁ezta ▁espiritu ei ▁edo ▁hildako ei ▁deika ▁dabil keen ik ▁ere .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the dead , or those who are trying to kill the dead .
GOLD:	or cast spells , or function as mediums or psychics , or call forth the spirits of the dead .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	▁I za dia ▁bera ▁ere ▁irrikaz ▁dago , ▁zain - zain , ▁Jainkoak ▁noiz ▁agertuko ▁zer ▁den ▁beraren ▁seme - alaba ▁izatea .
PRED:	In fact , when God returns to us , he will be sure to be sure that he will be able to be able to be his son .
GOLD:	For all creation is waiting eagerly for that future day when God will reveal who his children really are .

ID:	1478
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zu , ▁Judako ▁Belen , ▁ez ▁zara , ▁ez , ▁Judako ▁hirietan ▁txikiena ; ▁zuregandik ▁aterako ▁baita ▁buruzagia , ▁Israel ▁nire ▁herria ▁gobernatuko ▁duena ▁.
PRED:	But you are Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem , no one will rule over the towns of Judah . But you will rule over my people .
GOLD:	‘ And you , O Bethlehem in the land of Judah , are not least among the ruling cities of Judah , for a ruler will come from youwho will be the shepherd for my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	1479
INPUT:	▁Batek , ▁bizirik ▁dagoen ▁bitartean , ba du ke ▁itxaropen : hobe ▁zakur ▁bizia , ▁lehoi ▁hila ▁baino .
PRED:	Even while those who live in the grave , there is no better than a lion .
GOLD:	There is hope only for the living . As they say , “ It 's better to be a live dog than a dead lion ! ”

ID:	1480
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁maiteok , ▁ez ▁ahaztu ▁Jaunarentzat ▁egun ▁bat ▁mila ▁urte ▁bezala ▁dela ▁eta ▁mila ▁urte ▁egun ▁bat ▁bezala .
PRED:	Dear friends , listen to the Lord , just as a thousand years .
GOLD:	But you must not forget this one thing , dear friends : A day is like a thousand years to the Lord , and a thousand years is like a day .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	▁Babiloniatik ▁bizirik ▁ihes ▁egindako ek Sion ▁hirian ▁ematen ▁dute ▁berri ▁hau :« Jaunaren , ▁gure ▁Jainkoaren , mend ekua ▁da , tenpl ua ▁hondatu ▁zutenen kon trako ▁mendekua ».
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has fled to Jerusalem , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : He is the God of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	Listen to the people who have escaped from Babylon , as they tell in Jerusalemhow the Lord our God has taken vengeanceagainst those who destroyed his Temple .

ID:	1482
INPUT:	▁Ar kul ariek ▁haser rarazten ▁dute , aur ka ▁jaikitzen , ▁eraso ▁egiten .
PRED:	The wicked turn from their ropes ; they flee to the grave .
GOLD:	Archers attacked him savagely ; they shot at him and harassed him .

ID:	1483
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁israeldarren ▁lehen - semeen ▁izen - bilketa ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Jaunak ▁agindu ▁bezala .
PRED:	So Moses did as the Lord had commanded the sons of Israel .
GOLD:	So Moses counted the firstborn sons of the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	1484
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁nire ▁Jainkoak : ▁« Zaindu ▁hiltzeko ▁diren ▁ardiak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The sheep of sheep will die .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord my God says : “ Go and care for the flock that is intended for slaughter .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	▁Ezekiasek ▁erlijio - bizitza ▁ber ran tolatu
PRED:	Hezekiah 's Prayer for Spiritual Wisdom
GOLD:	Hezekiah 's Religious Reforms

ID:	1486
INPUT:	▁pertsegi ▁itzazu ▁zeure ▁ekaitz az , ▁izutu ▁zeure ▁haize - eraun tsi az .
PRED:	Do n't look at your fierce storm , O Lord , and thunder is filled with violence .
GOLD:	Utterly disgrace themuntil they submit to your name , O Lord .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	▁Zoritxarrekoa ▁aitari ▁esaten ▁diona :« Zergatik ▁sortu ▁ninduzun ?», eta ▁amari :« Zergatik ekarri ▁ninduzun ▁mundura ?»
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , my father , my mother , saying , “ Why have I heard my mother ? ”
GOLD:	How terrible it would be if a newborn baby said to its father , ‘ Why was I born ? 'or if it said to its mother , ‘ Why did you make me this way ? ' ”

ID:	1488
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁diozue ▁mutur reko rik ▁ipiniko ▁gari ▁jotzen ▁ari ▁den ▁idi ari .
PRED:	“ Do not use an ox to pay attention to the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	“ You must not muzzle an ox to keep it from eating as it treads out the grain .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	▁Toki ▁hartatik ▁hurbil , ▁etx alde ▁bat ▁zuen ▁uhar teko ▁buruak , ▁P ub l io ▁zeritzan ak . ▁Honek ▁bere ▁etxean ▁ostatu ▁eman ▁zigun ▁hiru ▁egunetan ▁arreta ▁guztiaz .
PRED:	When he arrived at the town of Gath , he went to the town of Gath , he named him there at the home of the guard . ”
GOLD:	Near the shore where we landed was an estate belonging to Publius , the chief official of the island . He welcomed us and treated us kindly for three days .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	▁Erdain dua ▁nahiz ▁erdain gabea ▁izate ak ▁ez ▁du ▁garrantz irik ; ▁Jainkoaren ▁aginduak ▁betetzea ▁da ▁balio ▁duena .
PRED:	Anyone who does not be circumcised or does not have sexual relations with the law of God .
GOLD:	For it makes no difference whether or not a man has been circumcised . The important thing is to keep God 's commandments .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁Hamabiak ▁bidali
PRED:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Disciples

ID:	1492
INPUT:	▁Jende ▁burugogor ▁eta ▁setatsu agana ▁bidaltzen ▁zaitut ▁nire ▁mezua ▁adieraztera .
PRED:	You are stubborn and stubborn and stubborn . I am sending you to distant lands .
GOLD:	They are a stubborn and hard-hearted people . But I am sending you to say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says ! '

ID:	1493
INPUT:	▁gero , ▁Akaziasen ▁bila ▁joan ▁zen . ▁Akazias ▁Samarian ▁gorde ▁zen ; ▁baina ▁harrapatu ▁eta ▁Jeh ur engana ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁eta ▁honek ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen ▁hura ▁ere . ▁Lur ▁eman ▁zioten , ▁Jaunarengana ▁bihotzez ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Josafaten ▁semea ▁zela ▁kontuan ▁izanik . ▁Akaziasen ▁senitar tean ▁ez ▁zegoen ▁inor ▁ere ▁errege ▁izateko ▁gai ▁zenik .
PRED:	So Ahaziah went to search for the king , but Ahaziah was killed by King Ahaziah of Judah . He was killed by the king of King Ahaziah of Judah , and he was buried in the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	Then Jehu 's men searched for Ahaziah , and they found him hiding in the city of Samaria . They brought him to Jehu , who killed him . Ahaziah was given a decent burial because the people said , “ He was the grandson of Jehoshaphat — a man who sought the Lord with all his heart. ” But none of the surviving members of Ahaziah 's family was capable of ruling the kingdom .

ID:	1494
INPUT:	▁« Esan ▁israeldarrei : ▁Er respetatu ▁nire ▁larunbatak , ▁hauxe ▁baita ▁belaunez ▁belaun ▁nire ▁eta ▁zuen ▁arteko ▁lotu raren ▁ezaugarria , ▁jakin ▁dezazuen ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁honek , ▁aukeratu ▁zaituzte dala .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . This is what the Lord says : “ This is what the Lord says : I have chosen you from generation to generation .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel : ‘ Be careful to keep my Sabbath day , for the Sabbath is a sign of the covenant between me and you from generation to generation . It is given so you may know that I am the Lord , who makes you holy .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	▁Goizean ▁goiz ▁jaikirik , ▁Abimelekek ▁bere ▁zerbitzari ▁guztiak ▁deitu ▁zituen , ▁ametsaren ▁berri ▁emateko . ▁Denak ▁harriturik ▁gelditu ▁ziren .
PRED:	When Abimelech got up early the next morning , he called his servants to tell him what he had happened .
GOLD:	Abimelech got up early the next morning and quickly called all his servants together . When he told them what had happened , his men were terrified .

ID:	1496
INPUT:	▁Simonek ▁azaldu ▁digu , ▁nola ▁hasiera - hasi eratik ▁Jainkoak ▁jentilen ▁artetik ▁beretzat ▁herri ▁bat ▁aukeratu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁duen .
PRED:	In the same way , the first of the other people who were chosen by the Gentiles to be given to the Gentiles .
GOLD:	Peter has told you about the time God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people for himself .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	▁U n etxo ▁batez ▁utzi ▁zintudan , baina ▁gupidarik ▁handien az hartuko ▁zaitut .
PRED:	I warned you , but I would not help you , but I will help you .
GOLD:	“ For a brief moment I abandoned you , but with great compassion I will take you back .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	▁« Lege ▁berbera ▁gordeko ▁dute ▁bertan ▁jaio ek ▁eta ▁zuen ▁artean ▁bizitzen ▁jarri ▁diren ▁atzerritarrek ».
PRED:	“ The first allotment of land will be born among the nations . ”
GOLD:	This instruction applies to everyone , whether a native-born Israelite or a foreigner living among you . ”

ID:	1499
INPUT:	▁« Bete ▁arretaz ▁itun ▁honen ▁xedapenak , ▁zeuen ▁eginkizun ▁guztietan ▁arrakasta ▁izan ▁dezazuen .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey all the terms of the covenant with you .
GOLD:	We took their land and gave it to the tribes of Reuben and Gad and to the half-tribe of Manasseh as their grant of land .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	▁Ulertzeko ▁gauza ▁denak ▁uler ▁beza ▁Espirituak ▁eliz ▁elkarteei ▁esaten ▁diena . ▁Garai leak ▁ez ▁du ▁bigarren ▁heriotzaren ▁zigorrik ▁jasango .
PRED:	“ Anyone who refuses to hear the Spirit must listen to the Spirit and listen to the angel who does not listen to the second generation .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . Whoever is victorious will not be harmed by the second death .

ID:	1501
INPUT:	▁Hildakoen ▁Egoitza ▁eta ▁Hondamen ▁Leiz ea ▁as eg aitzak ▁dira ; as eg aitzak , ▁h alaber , ▁gizakiaren ▁begiak .
PRED:	For there is no hope in the grave ; it is no hope for people .
GOLD:	Just as Death and Destruction are never satisfied , so human desire is never satisfied .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	▁Zah ar ▁eta ▁gazte , hor ▁daude ▁kaleetan ▁zehar ▁lurrean ▁etzanik ; nire ▁neska - mutil ak ▁ezpataz ▁jota ▁erori ▁dira . Zeure ▁haserre - egunean ▁hil ▁dituzu , ▁erruki ▁gabe ▁garbitu .
PRED:	“ Your young men are like a young woman , and your young young young women are killed by the sword of your horses , and your horses will be burned on the ground .
GOLD:	“ See them lying in the streets — young and old , boys and girls , killed by the swords of the enemy.You have killed them in your anger , slaughtering them without mercy .

ID:	1503
INPUT:	▁Ezpata ▁Jerusalemen ▁aurka
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Message about Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Lord 's Sword of Judgment

ID:	1504
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁hau ▁al darrik arazi ▁zuen ▁hirian : ▁« Erregearen ▁eta ▁beronen ▁gobernari en ▁aginduz , ▁gizaki ▁eta ▁abere , ▁behi ▁eta ▁ardi , ▁inork ▁ez ▁beza ▁ezertxo ▁ere ▁das ta , ▁ez ▁bitez ▁larra , ▁ez ▁bezate ▁edan ;
PRED:	Then he said to his own people , “ Do n't you hear the king and his officials , the king of Babylon and his sheep , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , sheep , sheep , goats , sheep , sheep , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	Then the king and his nobles sent this decree throughout the city : “ No one , not even the animals from your herds and flocks , may eat or drink anything at all .

ID:	1505
INPUT:	▁hilobitik ▁libratzeko , bizi aren ▁argi az ▁horn itzeko .
PRED:	When they come to the grave , they will be brought to the grave .
GOLD:	He rescues them from the graveso they may enjoy the light of life .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	▁Era berri ▁gaitzazu , ▁Jainko ▁gure ▁salbatzaile , ken ▁gure ▁kontra ▁duzun ▁sumina !
PRED:	May the Lord our God give us victory over our enemies , O God !
GOLD:	Will you be angry with us always ? Will you prolong your wrath to all generations ?

ID:	1507
INPUT:	▁Aita ▁Jainkoak ▁aurrez ▁erabaki ta ▁zuen aren ▁arabera ▁aukeratu ▁zaituzte ▁eta ▁Espirituaren ▁bidez ▁sagaratu , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁esanera ▁bizitzeko ▁eta ▁beronen ▁odolaz ▁garbi tuak ▁izateko . ▁Grazia ▁eta ▁bakea ▁oparo ▁zuei !
PRED:	For God has commanded you to be holy , so he has chosen you to obey the Spirit of Christ . He has given you the blood of Christ and his blood .
GOLD:	God the Father knew you and chose you long ago , and his Spirit has made you holy . As a result , you have obeyed him and have been cleansed by the blood of Jesus Christ.May God give you more and more grace and peace .

ID:	1508
INPUT:	▁Indar rera ▁jo ? ▁Bera ▁da ▁indartsu ena . Zuzen bidera ? ▁Nork ▁egin ▁nire ▁alde ▁testigantza ?
PRED:	Who is my strength ? Who gives me justice to me ? Who is my way ?
GOLD:	If it 's a question of strength , he 's the strong one.If it 's a matter of justice , who dares to summon him to court ?

ID:	1509
INPUT:	▁bizi ▁bagara , ▁Jaunarentzat ▁gara ▁bizi ; ▁eta ▁hiltzen ▁bagara , ▁Jaunarentzat ▁gara ▁hiltzen . ▁Beraz , ▁nahiz ▁bizi ▁nahiz ▁hil , ▁Jaunarenak ▁gara .
PRED:	If we live in the Lord 's presence , we die , we die and die , we are killed by the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	If we live , it 's to honor the Lord . And if we die , it 's to honor the Lord . So whether we live or die , we belong to the Lord .

ID:	1510
INPUT:	▁« Honela ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : ▁Epai ▁ezazue ▁zuzentasunez , ▁izan ▁on ▁eta ▁errukitsu ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Judge fairly , and show mercy and kindness to one another .

ID:	1511
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁esan ▁zion ▁herriari :— Hara , ▁gaur ▁erosi ▁zaituztet ▁zuek ▁eta ▁zuen ▁lurrak ▁faraoi arentzat . ▁Hemen ▁duzue ▁hazia ; ▁erein ▁zeuen ▁lur retan .
PRED:	“ Look , ” Joseph said to the people . “ I am giving you today , and you will plant it in the land . ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph said to the people , “ Look , today I have bought you and your land for Pharaoh . I will provide you with seed so you can plant the fields .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	▁Zein ▁ote ▁da ▁handiago , ▁mahaian ▁dagoena ▁ala ▁zerbitzatzen ▁ari ▁dena ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁mahaian ▁dagoena ? ▁Bada , ▁ni ▁zerbitzari ▁bezala ▁nago ▁zuen ▁artean .
PRED:	“ Where is anyone else ? ” he asked . “ No , I am willing to be baptized with me . ”
GOLD:	Who is more important , the one who sits at the table or the one who serves ? The one who sits at the table , of course . But not here ! For I am among you as one who serves .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	▁« Neure ▁bizil ekura ▁itzul tzera ▁noa , beren ▁errua ▁aitortu eta ▁bila ▁nazaten ▁arte . Ats ekabe - aldian ▁niregan ab ihur tuko ▁dira ▁agian ... ▁».
PRED:	“ I will search for you , ” says the Lord . “ I will search for you , and I will search for you . ”
GOLD:	Then I will return to my placeuntil they admit their guilt and turn to me.For as soon as trouble comes , they will earnestly search for me . ”

ID:	1514
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁adierazi ▁Israel ▁herriari ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Itzuli , ▁aldendu ▁zeuen ▁idolo etatik , ▁egin ▁uko ▁zeuen ▁jokabide ▁higuingarri ▁guztiei .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : When you turn away from your detestable sins and turn from your detestable sins .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , tell the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Repent and turn away from your idols , and stop all your detestable sins .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁hango ▁jendea ▁irtenarazi ▁eta ▁zer raz , ▁burdinazko ▁p iko tx az ▁eta ▁burdinazko ▁aizko raz ▁lan ▁egitera ▁behartu ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁adreilu gin tzara ▁eraman . ▁Horixe ▁bera ▁egin ▁zuen ▁amondarren ▁hiri ▁guztietan . ▁Ondoren , ▁David ▁Jerusalemera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁bere ▁gudaroste ▁osoarekin .
PRED:	Then David and his entire army attacked them with iron , iron , iron , iron , and iron , and Abednego . He went to Jerusalem with an iron army , and he went to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He also made slaves of the people of Rabbah and forced them to labor with saws , iron picks , and iron axes , and to work in the brick kilns . That is how he dealt with the people of all the Ammonite towns . Then David and all the army returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁ene ▁Jainko ▁salbatzailea ! Gau ▁eta ▁egun ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁deiadar ▁degizut .
PRED:	O Lord , do not forget me ; I cry out to you .
GOLD:	Now hear my prayer ; listen to my cry .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁deabruak ▁hiri ▁santura , ▁Jerusalemera , ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁eta , ▁tenpluaren ▁goren eko ▁er tzera ▁jasorik ,
PRED:	Then the devil brought him to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , and he brought him to the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Then the devil took him to the holy city , Jerusalem , to the highest point of the Temple ,

ID:	1518
INPUT:	▁Emakumea ▁eta ▁herensuge ▁gorria
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	The Woman and the Dragon

ID:	1519
INPUT:	▁R efidi m dik ▁abiaturik , ▁Sinai ▁basamortura ▁heldu ▁ziren ;
PRED:	They left Mount Sinai and camped at the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	They left Rephidim and camped in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jaunak ▁dio : ▁« Erru karriak ▁zapaltzen ▁dituztelako , behar tsuak ▁intzirika ▁ari ▁direlako , orain txe ▁jaikiko ▁naiz ▁eta ▁salbatuko ▁dut ▁has peren ka ▁ari ▁dena ».
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ The wicked are trapped by your enemies , for they are trapped by the wicked . ”
GOLD:	The Lord 's promises are pure , like silver refined in a furnace , purified seven times over .

ID:	1521
INPUT:	▁Amor ru ▁biziz ▁zapaldu ▁ditut ▁herriak , neure ▁sumin - e dariz ▁mozkortu eta ▁haien ▁odola ▁lurrean ▁isuri .
PRED:	Yes , I will turn my anger against you , and I will pour out my fury on them .
GOLD:	I crushed the nations in my angerand made them stagger and fall to the ground , spilling their blood upon the earth . ”

ID:	1522
INPUT:	▁Aro den gandik ▁ar o d tarrak ▁eta ▁Are l iren gandik ▁ar el itarrak .
PRED:	The descendants of Kohath were named after their ancestor , named after their ancestor .
GOLD:	The Arodite clan , named after their ancestor Arodi.The Arelite clan , named after their ancestor Areli .

ID:	1523
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁lurreko ▁bizilagun ▁guztiek ▁gurtuko ▁dute , ▁lepo ▁eginiko ▁Bildotsaren ▁biziaren ▁liburuan ▁beren ▁izenak ▁munduaren ▁hasieratik ▁idatzirik ▁dituztenak ▁izan ▁ezik .
PRED:	And all the people who worship in the Book of the earth will worship in the Book of the Lamb .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	1524
INPUT:	▁Josue ▁zahartua , ▁adinean ▁aurreratua , ▁zegoen . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Zah artu ▁zara ▁eta ▁adinean ▁aurreratu , ▁eta ▁oso ▁handia ▁da ▁oraindik ▁eskura tzeko ▁gelditzen ▁zaizuen ▁lurraldea .
PRED:	So Joshua was very old when the Lord was very old , the Lord said to him , “ You have been very very very very very very very very large and the land of the Lord has been very very very very very large . ”
GOLD:	When Joshua was an old man , the Lord said to him , “ You are growing old , and much land remains to be conquered .

ID:	1525
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ezin ▁du ▁inork ▁mihia ▁hezi , ▁gaiztoa ▁eta ▁mendera gaitza ▁baita , ▁pozoi ▁hil garriz ▁betea .
PRED:	But evil people do n't plot evil , and their mouths are filled with violence .
GOLD:	but no one can tame the tongue . It is restless and evil , full of deadly poison .

ID:	1526
INPUT:	▁Eliasek ▁erantzun :— Bere ▁zerbitzari ▁nauen ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna ▁bizi ▁dela ▁bezain ▁egia ▁da , ▁ni ▁gaur ▁bertan ▁agertuko ▁naizela ▁Akaben ▁aurrera .
PRED:	Elijah replied , “ Elijah is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is just as well as I am going . ”
GOLD:	But Elijah said , “ I swear by the Lord Almighty , in whose presence I stand , that I will present myself to Ahab this very day . ”

ID:	1527
INPUT:	▁Dei ▁egin ▁zion , ▁beraz , ▁Akixek ▁Davidi ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— Z uzena ▁zara , ▁ala ▁Jauna ! ▁Begi ko ▁dut ▁zu ▁nirekin ▁izatea ▁gudarostearen ▁joan - etorri ▁guztietan . ▁Ez ▁dut ▁zuregan ▁deus ▁txarrik ▁ikusi , ▁niregana ▁etorri ▁zinen ez ▁geroztik . ▁Buruzagi ek , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zaituzte ▁begiko .
PRED:	So he became king , and he said to David , “ I am the Lord , ” he said to David . “ I am going to speak to you , but I have not seen you . ”
GOLD:	So Achish finally summoned David and said to him , “ I swear by the Lord that you have been a trustworthy ally . I think you should go with me into battle , for I 've never found a single flaw in you from the day you arrived until today . But the other Philistine rulers wo n't hear of it .

ID:	1528
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁Isaak ▁urrutiratu ▁egin ▁zen ▁leku ▁hartatik ▁eta , ▁Gerar ko ▁ibarrean ▁oihal - etxola ▁kokatu z , ▁bertan ▁jarri ▁zen ▁bizitzen .
PRED:	So Isaac stayed there .
GOLD:	So Isaac moved away to the Gerar Valley , where he set up their tents and settled down .

ID:	1529
INPUT:	▁ene ▁maitea ▁gaz ela ▁bezalako , ore in kume aren ▁antzeko . Gure ▁horm aren ▁atzean ▁gelditu ▁da , leiho etatik ▁zelatan , leiho - sare etatik ▁ki rika .
PRED:	My lover is like a lovely fountain ; my lover is like the road to the wall .
GOLD:	My lover is like a swift gazelleor a young stag.Look , there he is behind the wall , looking through the window , peering into the room .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁gela ▁zabal ▁bat ▁erakutsiko ▁dizue ▁goian , ▁jantzirik ▁eta ▁aton dua ; ▁prestatu ▁hantxe ▁behar ▁ditugun ak .
PRED:	He will show you a large room to prepare a large room for you .
GOLD:	He will take you upstairs to a large room that is already set up . That is where you should prepare our meal . ”

ID:	1531
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien :— Jainkoaren ▁gauzetan ▁itsu ▁zaretelako ▁eman ▁zizuen ▁lege ▁hori ▁Moisesek .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ This is what the law of God has given you . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus responded , “ He wrote this commandment only as a concession to your hard hearts .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	▁Esklab oen ▁askapena ▁zazpigarren ▁urtean
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer for Spiritual Wisdom
GOLD:	Release for Hebrew Slaves

ID:	1533
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁neurtzeko ▁kanabera ▁eman ▁zidaten , ▁makila ▁baten ▁antzekoa , ▁esanez : ▁« Jaiki ▁eta ▁neur ▁itzazu ▁Jainkoaren ▁tenplua ▁eta ▁aldarea , ▁eta ▁zenbatu ▁bertan ▁kultu ▁egiten ▁ari ▁direnak .
PRED:	Then I gave birth to a ram 's staff , saying , “ Stand up a stone and build a bronze altar for the Temple of God . ”
GOLD:	Then I was given a measuring stick , and I was told , “ Go and measure the Temple of God and the altar , and count the number of worshipers .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	▁bata ▁ertz ▁batean , ▁bestea ▁bestean ; ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egingo ▁dute ▁estalki arekin .
PRED:	Each of the two cherubim will be made of atonement ; it will be made of atonement .
GOLD:	Mold the cherubim on each end of the atonement cover , making it all of one piece of gold .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	▁Izaki ▁biak ▁bos na ▁metro ▁ziren ▁gora .
PRED:	All the living beings was 15 feet wide , and 45 feet wide .
GOLD:	each was 15 feet tall .

ID:	1536
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁kristau ▁ez ▁direnen ▁errespe tua ▁zeuen ganatuko ▁duzue , ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁inoren ▁beharrik ▁izango .
PRED:	And if you have no mercy on the name of the Lord your God , you will need a person to need .
GOLD:	Then people who are not believers will respect the way you live , and you will not need to depend on others .

ID:	1537
INPUT:	▁« Ets aiak ▁ez ▁du ▁engainatuko , ▁ez ▁giz atx arrak ▁makurtuko .
PRED:	“ He will not abandon your enemies ; he will not abandon you .
GOLD:	I will beat down his adversaries before himand destroy those who hate him .

ID:	1538
INPUT:	▁Jende ▁guztiak ▁entzun ▁zuen ▁hori ▁eta ▁ongi ▁iruditu ▁zitzaion , ▁erregeak ▁egiten ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁ongi ▁iruditzen ▁zitzaion ez .
PRED:	When all the people heard this , the king said to him ,
GOLD:	This pleased the people very much . In fact , everything the king did pleased them !

ID:	1539
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zien ▁Saulek ▁bere ▁laguntzaile ei :— Bil atu ▁nekromante - ahal mena ▁du keen ▁emakum eren ▁bat , ▁berarengana ▁joan ▁eta ▁kontsulta ▁egiteko . Lagun tzaileek ▁erantzun ▁zioten :— Bada ▁En d or - en ▁nekromante - ahal mena ▁duen ▁emakume ▁bat .
PRED:	Then Saul said to his men , “ Let us go to fight against us . ”
GOLD:	Saul then said to his advisers , “ Find a woman who is a medium , so I can go and ask her what to do. ” His advisers replied , “ There is a medium at Endor . ”

ID:	1540
INPUT:	▁Salomon ▁erregeak ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁kutxaren ▁aitzinean ▁bildua ▁zegoen ▁israeldar ▁batzar ▁osoak ▁ezin ▁zenbatu ▁ahalako ▁ardi - ▁eta ▁idi - multzo ▁handia ▁eskaini ▁zuten ▁opari .
PRED:	So King Solomon made the Ark of the Covenant , and all the people of Israel did not worship idols .
GOLD:	There , before the Ark , King Solomon and the entire community of Israel sacrificed so many sheep , goats , and cattle that no one could keep count !

ID:	1541
INPUT:	▁Mardokeo ▁zein ▁herri takoa ▁zen ▁adierazi ▁ziotenean , ▁eskua ▁berari ▁bakarrik ▁eran s tea ▁gutxi ▁zelakoan , ▁Asu er oren ▁erresum an ▁ziren ▁judu ▁guztiak ▁ere ▁galdu ▁egin ▁nahi ▁izan ▁zituen , ▁harekin ▁batera .
PRED:	When Mordecai heard what had happened to Mordecai had done , he went back to him . He was not faithful to him , he became the Jewish leaders .
GOLD:	He had learned of Mordecai 's nationality , so he decided it was not enough to lay hands on Mordecai alone . Instead , he looked for a way to destroy all the Jews throughout the entire empire of Xerxes .

ID:	1542
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jaunaren ▁aingeruak ▁dei ▁egin ▁zion ▁zerutik :— Abraham ! ▁Abraham !— Hemen ▁nauzu ! ▁— erantzun ▁zuen ▁Abrahamek .
PRED:	But the angel of the Lord called him from heaven , “ Yes , Abraham , ” Abraham replied . “ Yes , I am the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	At that moment the angel of the Lord called to him from heaven , “ Abraham ! Abraham ! ” “ Yes , ” Abraham replied . “ Here I am ! ”

ID:	1543
INPUT:	▁Biharamun ▁goizean , ▁Paxhur rek ▁askatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jeremias ▁egur - z e potik . ▁Orduan , ▁Jeremiasek ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« P <unk> , ▁Jaunak ▁aldatu ▁egin ▁dizu ▁izena : ▁“ Izu - ikara ▁inguruan ” ▁izango ▁duzu ▁aurrerantzean .
PRED:	But the next morning Jeremiah left the next morning , Jeremiah said to Jeremiah , “ This is what the Lord says : You will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	The next day , when Pashhur finally released him , Jeremiah said , “ Pashhur , the Lord has changed your name . From now on you are to be called ‘ The Man Who Lives in Terror . '

ID:	1544
INPUT:	▁zu , ▁ordea , ▁ho bi ratu ▁gabe bota ▁zaituzte , gauza ▁nazkagarri aren ▁pare ; leiz eko ▁harri ▁ar ter ab o ta ▁dituzten ekin ▁zaude , ezpataz ▁hildakoen ▁gorp uen ▁artean , han ka pean ▁zapaltzen ▁den gor pu aren ▁pare .
PRED:	But you are crushed by the noise of the wicked , and the fire of the wicked are filled with fire .
GOLD:	but you will be thrown out of your gravelike a worthless branch.Like a corpse trampled underfoot , you will be dumped into a mass gravewith those killed in battle.You will descend to the pit .

ID:	1545
INPUT:	▁Makir ri ▁Galaad ▁eskualdea ▁eman ▁nion .
PRED:	So I gave them the father of Gilead .
GOLD:	I gave Gilead to the clan of Makir .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁makila ▁eta , ▁zeure ▁anaia ▁Aaron ▁lagun ▁duzula , ▁bildu ▁israeldarren ▁elkartea ; ▁gero , ▁guztien ▁aurrean , ▁agindu ▁harkaitz ari , ▁eta ▁honek ▁ura ▁emango ▁du . ▁Harkaitz etik ▁ura ▁sorraraziko ▁duzu , ▁eta ▁elkarteari ▁eta ▁abere ei ▁emango ▁diezu ▁edaten ».
PRED:	“ Take your staff with Aaron and your brother , your brother , and the people of Israel , the Lord has commanded you to enter the rock . Then you will give you water to the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Aaron must take the staff and assemble the entire community . As the people watch , speak to the rock over there , and it will pour out its water . You will provide enough water from the rock to satisfy the whole community and their livestock . ”

ID:	1547
INPUT:	▁« Eraman ▁zeuen ▁lurreko ▁lehen ▁fruituak ▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁etxera .« Ez ▁egosi ▁antx umerik ▁bere ▁amaren ▁esn etan .
PRED:	“ The rest of the firstborn sons of the Lord your God is left in the house of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ As you harvest your crops , bring the very best of the first harvest to the house of the Lord your God. “ You must not cook a young goat in its mother 's milk .

ID:	1548
INPUT:	▁norbaitek ▁kilometro ▁bat ▁egitera ▁behartzen ▁bazaitu ▁egin ▁bi ▁berarekin .
PRED:	If you go to the land , you must be prepared with two quarts of grain .
GOLD:	If a soldier demands that you carry his gear for a mile , carry it two miles .

ID:	1549
INPUT:	▁Oker turik ▁eta ▁makur ▁nabil , ▁egun ▁osoan ▁kopetilun .
PRED:	My heart is so angry with me , and he delights in me .
GOLD:	A raging fever burns within me , and my health is broken .

ID:	1550
INPUT:	▁hormetan ▁zizel katuak ▁zor utik ▁ate buru etaraino .
PRED:	Make it open to the Temple and make it open to the Temple .
GOLD:	from the floor to the top of the walls , including the outer wall of the sanctuary .

ID:	1551
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁erregealdiko ▁laugarren ▁urteko ▁Z ib ▁hilean ▁ezarri ▁zituzten ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁oinarriak ,
PRED:	The fourth year of Solomon 's reign in the eleventh year of the reign of the Lord 's reign ,
GOLD:	The foundation of the Lord 's Temple was laid in midspring , in the month of Ziv , during the fourth year of Solomon 's reign .

ID:	1552
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁Judaren ▁eta ▁Benjaminen ▁leinuko ▁batzuk ▁Jerusalemen ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁bizitzen . Judaren ▁leinukoak : ▁A ta ias , ▁Uziasen ▁semea ▁— hau ▁Zakarias ena , ▁hau ▁Amarias ena , ▁hau ▁Xeb at iasena , ▁hau ▁Mah al ale elena —, ▁Peretzen ▁ondorengo etakoak ;
PRED:	So the people of Judah lived in Jerusalem , including the tribe of Benjamin , who lived in Jerusalem . These were the tribe of Simeon , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son
GOLD:	but some of the people from Judah and Benjamin resettled in Jerusalem . ) From the tribe of Judah : Athaiah son of Uzziah , son of Zechariah , son of Amariah , son of Shephatiah , son of Mahalalel , of the family of Perez .

ID:	1553
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zitzaien ▁hiltzeko ▁baimenik ▁eman , ▁baina ▁bai ▁bost ▁hilabetez ▁oinaze tzekoa . ▁Horiek ▁emandako ▁oinaz ea ▁eskorpio ien ▁zizta d arena ▁bezalakoa ▁da .
PRED:	He did not kill him , but he did n't mean that he was very upset . They were so heavy for him .
GOLD:	They were told not to kill them but to torture them for five months with pain like the pain of a scorpion sting .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁deiadarka ▁esan ▁zion :— Zer ▁duzu ▁nirekin , ▁Jesus , ▁goi - goiko ▁Jainkoaren ▁Seme ▁horrek ? ▁Jainko arren , ▁ez ▁nazazu ▁oinaze tu !
PRED:	“ Why have you come to me ? ” he said . “ Why have you come to me ? ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	1555
INPUT:	▁Hilkias ▁apaiz ▁nagusiak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Xafan ▁idazkariari :— Lege - liburua ▁aurkitu ▁dut ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean . Eta ▁Hilk iasek ▁Xaf ani ▁eman ▁zion ▁liburua . ▁Xaf anek , ▁irakurri ▁zuelarik ,
PRED:	Then the high priest said to Hilkiah , “ I have found the Law of the Lord . I have read it to the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the court secretary , “ I have found the Book of the Law in the Lord 's Temple ! ” Then Hilkiah gave the scroll to Shaphan , and he read it .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	▁ F untzionari o ek , ▁azpilana ▁eginez , ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuten ▁Joax ▁Bet - Mil on , ▁Sil ara ▁bidean ▁zihoala .
PRED:	When Athaliah heard the court secretary , he died , he killed the believers in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The assassins were Jozacar son of Shimeath and Jehozabad son of Shomer — both trusted advisers . Joash was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Amaziah became the next king .

ID:	1557
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁profeta ▁zen ▁eta ▁bazekien ▁hark ▁Jainkoak ▁zin ▁eginez ▁hitzeman ▁ziona : ▁beraren ▁odoleko ▁bat ▁ezarriko ▁zuela ▁bere ▁tronuan .
PRED:	But God said to his prophet , “ This is what God promised to his father , and he promised to his throne . ”
GOLD:	But he was a prophet , and he knew God had promised with an oath that one of David 's own descendants would sit on his throne .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Jeroboami ▁emaniko ▁hitza
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer for Jeroboam
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	1559
INPUT:	▁Ahaltsua ▁izan ▁balu ▁bere ▁atsegin , un e ▁oroz ▁dei ▁egingo ▁zi ok een ▁Jainkoari ”.
PRED:	But if he gives birth to the Almighty , he will help them . '
GOLD:	Can they take delight in the Almighty ? Can they call to God at any time ?

ID:	1560
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁itsas ▁herriok , adi ▁egon , ▁urrutiko ▁nazio ok . J aio ▁aurretik ▁izan ▁nindu engo goan ▁Jaunak , amaren ▁sabelean ▁nengoela , neure ▁izenez ▁deitu .
PRED:	Listen to the nations of the earth , you who lived in distant lands . I called to you , ‘ I am the Lord . '
GOLD:	Listen to me , all you in distant lands ! Pay attention , you who are far away ! The Lord called me before my birth ; from within the womb he called me by name .

ID:	1561
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁zerbitzari ▁hark , ▁irten ▁orduko , ▁diru ▁pixka ▁bat ▁zor ▁zion ▁zerbitzu - lagun ▁batekin ▁egin ▁zuen ▁topo ▁eta , ▁lepotik ▁heldurik ▁eta ▁ito ▁beharrean , ▁esaten ▁zion : ▁“ Em adak ▁zor ▁du ana ”.
PRED:	But when he went out to Jerusalem , he took some money to the money . He said to him , ‘ Come , and he sent him back to Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	“ But when the man left the king , he went to a fellow servant who owed him a few thousand dollars . He grabbed him by the throat and demanded instant payment .

ID:	1562
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁etxeko ▁tresnak , ▁handiak ▁nahiz ▁txik iak , ▁tenpluko ▁eta ▁jauregiko ▁altxorrak , ▁baita ▁buruzagi enak ▁ere , ▁Babiloniara ▁eraman ▁zituen ▁denak .
PRED:	He also took all the articles of the Temple of God and all the treasures of the Temple of God . He also took them into the Temple of God .
GOLD:	The king took home to Babylon all the articles , large and small , used in the Temple of God , and the treasures from both the Lord 's Temple and from the palace of the king and his officials .

ID:	1563
INPUT:	▁Ongi ▁jokatzen ▁ahalegintzen ▁naiz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁ez ▁ezik , ▁baita ▁gizakien ▁aurrean ▁ere .
PRED:	I know God 's plans , for I do n't know God .
GOLD:	We are careful to be honorable before the Lord , but we also want everyone else to see that we are honorable .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Abrahamek , ▁berriro :— Gerta ▁daiteke ▁berrogei ▁besterik ▁ez ▁izatea .— Ba ▁— ihar <unk> ▁zion ▁Jaunak —, ▁ez ▁dut ▁suntsituko ▁berrogei ▁horiengatik .
PRED:	Then Abraham said to them , “ There will be no more than forty days ? ” And Abraham said , “ I will destroy the gods of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham pressed his request further . “ Suppose there are only forty ? ” And the Lord replied , “ I will not destroy it for the sake of the forty . ”

ID:	1565
INPUT:	▁irakatsi ▁zaion ▁egiazko ▁mezuari ▁atxikia , ▁irakaspen ▁zuzen ez ▁besteak ▁ahol katzeko ▁eta ▁kontra ▁dauden en ▁irakatsiak ▁gezur tatzeko ▁gai ▁izan ▁dadin .
PRED:	They teach the truth , teaching of the truth ; teach those who say to the truth .
GOLD:	He must have a strong belief in the trustworthy message he was taught ; then he will be able to encourage others with wholesome teaching and show those who oppose it where they are wrong .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	▁Mate ori ▁deia . ▁Jesus ▁bekatariekin ▁bazkaltzen
PRED:	Jesus Calls Levi ( Matthew )
GOLD:	Jesus Calls Matthew

ID:	1567
INPUT:	▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamen ▁eta ▁Ahiasen ▁seme ▁Baxaren ▁senitarteak ▁zigortu ▁nituen ▁bezalaxe ▁zigortuko ▁dut ▁Akaben ▁senitartea ▁ere .
PRED:	I will destroy the dynasty of Jeroboam son of Jeroboam son of Nebat . I will punish the family of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	I will destroy the family of Ahab as I destroyed the families of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah .

ID:	1568
INPUT:	▁Saulek , ▁ordea , ▁bere ▁mandatariak ▁igorri ▁zituen ▁Daviden ▁etxera , ▁zaindu ▁eta ▁biharamun ▁goizean ▁hil ▁zezaten . ▁Bere ▁emazte ▁Mikalek ▁berri ▁hau ▁eman ▁zion ▁Davidi : ▁« Orain ▁gauez ▁ihes ▁egin ▁eta ▁salbatzen ▁ez ▁bazara , ▁bihar ▁hil ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ».
PRED:	But when Saul sent messengers to his home , he sent his wife to kill David and sent him home to the next day . When he was killed by the next day , he said to David , “ Now go home to the night . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul sent troops to watch David 's house . They were told to kill David when he came out the next morning . But Michal , David 's wife , warned him , “ If you do n't escape tonight , you will be dead by morning . ”

ID:	1569
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁nagusi ▁egipto arraren ▁etxean ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Jose . ▁Dena ▁ongi ▁ateratzen ▁zitzaion , ▁Jauna ▁berekin ▁baitzuen .
PRED:	But his sister was born to Pharaoh 's home , for the Lord had given him to his servants .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	1570
INPUT:	▁— Ez ▁dugu ▁aditu ▁nahi ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁ematen ▁ari ▁zaren ▁mezu ▁hori .
PRED:	“ Do not listen to the name of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ We will not listen to your messages from the Lord !

ID:	1571
INPUT:	▁Geh ien ek ▁ref atar tzat ▁zeuzkaten , ▁baina ▁moabdarrek ▁em itar ▁deitzen ▁zieten .
PRED:	The rest of the godless were the father of Moab , but they worshiped the father of Moab .
GOLD:	Both the Emites and the Anakites are also known as the Rephaites , though the Moabites call them Emites .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	▁Rebekak ▁ere ▁jaso ▁zituen ▁begiak ▁eta , ▁Isaak ▁ikusirik , ▁gamelu tik ▁jaitsi ▁zen ,
PRED:	When she saw that she was blind , she went down from the camels and came down from the land of Jacob .
GOLD:	When Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac , she quickly dismounted from her camel .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁denek ▁bat ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁Josue ▁eta ▁Israel ▁herriaren ▁kontra ▁borrokatzeko .
PRED:	Then all the people of Israel came to fight against Joshua and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	These kings combined their armies to fight as one against Joshua and the Israelites .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	▁ F ilistearrak ▁israeldarren ▁aurka ▁borrokatzeko ▁asmotan
PRED:	War with Philistia
GOLD:	Saul Consults a Medium

ID:	1575
INPUT:	▁Lur ▁ematera ▁joan ▁zirenean , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁haren ▁bu rez urra , ▁oinak ▁eta ▁eskuak ▁baizik ▁aurkitu .
PRED:	But when the people went to the town , they searched for their hands , but they found his hands on their feet .
GOLD:	But when they went out to bury her , they found only her skull , her feet , and her hands .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	▁Eguna ▁argitu ▁baino ▁lehen , ▁deiadar ▁degizut ▁laguntza ▁eske : zure ▁promes etan ▁dut ▁itxaropen !
PRED:	At dawn I cry out to you , O Lord , for I hope in your hope .
GOLD:	I rise early , before the sun is up ; I cry out for help and put my hope in your words .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	▁A gi ria ▁idatzi , ▁lekuko en ▁aurrean ▁zigil atu ▁eta ▁zilarra ▁pisatu ▁nuen .
PRED:	I write these words on the scroll , which is the weight of my witness .
GOLD:	I signed and sealed the deed of purchase before witnesses , weighed out the silver , and paid him .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	▁Lots az ▁nahas turik ▁geldi ▁bitez ▁burla ▁egiten ▁didatenak !
PRED:	How long will we be filled with joy , and there will be no joy .
GOLD:	But may all who search for yoube filled with joy and gladness in you.May those who love your salvationrepeatedly shout , “ The Lord is great ! ”

ID:	1579
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁argi ▁eta ▁garbi ▁diotsuet ▁gaur ▁ez ▁dudala ▁neure ▁gain ▁hartzen ▁inori ▁gerta ▁dak io keen aren ▁erantz uk izun ik .
PRED:	So I tell you that I am pure , and I will tell you what I have happened to tell you . ”
GOLD:	I declare today that I have been faithful . If anyone suffers eternal death , it 's not my fault ,

ID:	1580
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain , ▁abiatu ▁eta ▁igaro ▁Zer ed ▁erreka .« Hala ▁egin ▁genuen .
PRED:	So we went out to the Jordan River and went out to the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ Then the Lord said to us , ‘ Get moving . Cross the Zered Brook . ' So we crossed the brook .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	▁Zintzoa ▁estuasun etik ▁atera ▁duteeta ▁gaiztoa ▁sartu ▁da ▁haren ▁lekura .
PRED:	They will enter the land of their land , and they will enter the place of land .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	1582
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁zergatik ▁zuzendu ▁zuen ▁Jaunak ▁hitz ▁hura ▁Baxaren ▁eta ▁beronen ▁etxekoen ▁aurka , ▁Hanan iren ▁seme ▁Jehu ▁profetaren ▁bitartez : ▁alde ▁batetik , ▁Jeroboamen ▁etxeko ek ▁bezalaxe , ▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaion ▁guztia ▁egin ▁zuelako , ▁bere ▁egintzengatik ▁Jauna ▁haserraraziz ; ▁bestetik , ▁Jeroboamen ▁etxekoak ▁suntsitu ▁zituelako .
PRED:	That is why the Lord had spoken against the family of Baasha and his family , just as he had promised to the Lord . He was very angry with the sins of Jeroboam 's family . He did not destroy the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	The message from the Lord against Baasha and his family came through the prophet Jehu son of Hanani . It was delivered because Baasha had done what was evil in the Lord 's sight ( just as the family of Jeroboam had done ) , and also because Baasha had destroyed the family of Jeroboam . The Lord 's anger was provoked by Baasha 's sins .

ID:	1583
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁erantzun ▁zidan : ▁« Ederki , ▁giza ▁gor o tzaren ▁gainean ▁egin ▁ordez , ▁zeure ▁ogia ▁behi - gor o tzaren ▁gainean ▁prestatzeko ▁baimena ▁ematen ▁dizut ».
PRED:	He said to me , “ Look , I have done to you , for you have plenty to eat the food for your flocks . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” the Lord said . “ You may bake your bread with cow dung instead of human dung . ”

ID:	1584
INPUT:	▁Agar rek ▁« Zeu ▁zara ▁ikusi ▁nauzun ▁Jainkoa » ▁eman ▁zion ▁izen ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jainkoari , ▁hau ▁baitzioen : ▁« Ez ▁dut , ▁bada , ▁ni ▁ikusi ▁nauena ▁bera ▁ikusi ?»
PRED:	When Ishmael saw her , she said to him , “ I am the God of Abraham , the God of Abraham , I have seen God . ”
GOLD:	Thereafter , Hagar used another name to refer to the Lord , who had spoken to her . She said , “ You are the God who sees me. ” She also said , “ Have I truly seen the One who sees me ? ”

ID:	1585
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁zerbitzu ▁hau ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁errukiz ▁eman ▁digu la ▁jakinik , ▁ez ▁dugu ▁kemen ik ▁galtzen .
PRED:	That is why we have been faithful to us , so we can not understand .
GOLD:	Therefore , since God in his mercy has given us this new way , we never give up .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	▁ondoren , ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁galburu ▁m ehar ▁sortu ▁ziren , ▁haize ▁erreak ▁ihartu ak .
PRED:	After seven heads of grain , the seven heads of the seven heads of the seven heads of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	Then seven more heads of grain appeared , but these were shriveled and withered by the east wind .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	▁M ultz otan ▁pilatu ▁zituzten ▁eta ▁ki rats ez ▁bete ▁zen ▁lurralde ▁osoa .
PRED:	They piled up and camped at Mizpah .
GOLD:	“ Do it tomorrow , ” Pharaoh said. “ All right , ” Moses replied , “ it will be as you have said . Then you will know that there is no one like the Lord our God .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁Isaiasi , ▁hau ▁jauregitik ▁tenplua ▁bitartean ▁zelarik :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Isaiah ,
GOLD:	But before Isaiah had left the middle courtyard , this message came to him from the Lord :

ID:	1589
INPUT:	▁Natana elek ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Nondik ▁ezagutzen ▁nauzu ? Jesusek ▁erantzun :— F elipek ▁deitu ▁aurretik ▁ikusi ▁zintudan ▁piku pean .
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” Jesus asked . “ Yes , ” he asked . “ Yes , ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ How do you know about me ? ” Nathanael asked.Jesus replied , “ I could see you under the fig tree before Philip found you . ”

ID:	1590
INPUT:	▁Gar ▁bizian ▁ari ▁da ▁gaiztakeria , sua ▁sasi ▁eta ▁l ahar ▁artean ▁bezala ; hartu ak ▁ditu ▁denak , suak ▁tx ara dia ▁bezala , k ea ▁ki ri bil ean ▁gorantz ▁doala .
PRED:	They are saying , “ The fire is like a field , like a field , and it is like a field that goes down in the field .
GOLD:	That is why the Lord takes no pleasure in the young menand shows no mercy even to the widows and orphans.For they are all wicked hypocrites , and they all speak foolishness.But even then the Lord 's anger will not be satisfied.His fist is still poised to strike .

ID:	1591
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁egin ▁ziren ▁arrainak ▁eta ▁kira s tua ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁ibaia ; ▁egiptoarrek ▁ezin ▁izan ▁zuten ▁bertako ▁urik ▁edan . ▁O dola ▁zegoen ▁Egipto ▁lurralde ▁osoan !
PRED:	When the Egyptians saw that the Egyptians were dead , they stopped eating the ground . The Egyptians did not drink from the land of Egypt . The Egyptians did n't drink the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	The fish in the river died , and the water became so foul that the Egyptians could n't drink it . There was blood everywhere throughout the land of Egypt .

ID:	1592
INPUT:	▁ihartzen ▁da ▁belarra , ▁zimeltzen ▁lorea ; gure ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitzak , ▁ordea , betiko ▁dirau ».
PRED:	The godly are like grass , but the words of our God is like grass . ”
GOLD:	The grass withers and the flowers fade , but the word of our God stands forever . ”

ID:	1593
INPUT:	▁Guztiz ▁ospetsu ▁dago ▁printz es a , urrez ▁apain ▁bor daturiko ▁jantzi tan .
PRED:	She is clothed in purple , and he makes him linen .
GOLD:	In her beautiful robes , she is led to the king , accompanied by her bridesmaids .

ID:	1594
INPUT:	▁R is atik ▁Keh el at ara ;
PRED:	They left Mithcah and camped at Moseroth .
GOLD:	They left Rissah and camped at Kehelathah .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	▁Horra , ▁jakinaren ▁gainean ▁jarri ▁zaituztet ▁aldez ▁aurretik .
PRED:	Look , I gave you this command to you .
GOLD:	See , I have warned you about this ahead of time .

ID:	1596
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁beteko ▁dizu ▁niri ▁eman ▁didan ▁hitza : ▁“ Zure ▁semeok ▁zintzo ▁jokatzen ▁badute , ▁bihotz ▁osoz ▁eta ▁gogo ▁guztiz ▁nire ▁aurrean ▁leial ▁ibiltzen ▁badira , ▁beti ▁izanen ▁da ▁zure etariko ▁norbait ▁Israelgo ▁errege - aulkian ”.
PRED:	The Lord has given you this message : ‘ Your sons are following me , and they will obey me . '
GOLD:	If you do this , then the Lord will keep the promise he made to me . He told me , ‘ If your descendants live as they should and follow me faithfully with all their heart and soul , one of them will always sit on the throne of Israel . '

ID:	1597
INPUT:	▁mundu ▁honetan ▁gelditzen ▁zaizkion ▁egunetan ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁bezala ▁bizitzeko , ▁eta ▁ez ▁giza ▁grinen ▁arabera .
PRED:	In this way , there is no better to live in the world , just as God has done .
GOLD:	You wo n't spend the rest of your lives chasing your own desires , but you will be anxious to do the will of God .

ID:	1598
INPUT:	▁Sis erak ▁burdinazko ▁bederatziehun ▁guda - gurdi ▁zituen ▁eta ▁hogei ▁urtez ▁gogor ▁zanpatu ▁zituen ▁israeldarrak ; ▁horregatik , ▁israeldarrek ▁dei ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	He turned his chariot and led them back to the Lord , and he sent them back to the Lord . So they called out to the Lord .
GOLD:	Sisera , who had 900 iron chariots , ruthlessly oppressed the Israelites for twenty years . Then the people of Israel cried out to the Lord for help .

ID:	1599
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁berriz , ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Hauek ▁ditut ▁nik ▁ama ▁eta ▁anai - arreba : ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁entzun ▁eta ▁betetzen ▁dutenak .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Look , these are my brothers and sisters , my brothers and sisters , all who listen to God . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My mother and my brothers are all those who hear God 's word and obey it . ”

ID:	1600
INPUT:	▁Herriaren ▁buruzagiak : ▁Paro x , ▁Pahat - M oh ab , ▁Elam , ▁Zatu , ▁Bani ,
PRED:	These are the names of the people of Israel : The descendants of Jeshua , Kadmiel , Bani ,
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	1601
INPUT:	▁Bildotsak ▁bigarren ▁zigilua ▁ireki ▁zuenean , ▁bigarren ▁izakiak ▁hau ▁esaten ▁zuela ▁entzun ▁nuen : ▁« Zatoz ».
PRED:	When the Lamb broke the second seal , I heard that the second seal . “ Come , ” the Lamb said , “ Come , let 's listen to me . ”
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the second seal , I heard the second living being say , “ Come ! ”

ID:	1602
INPUT:	▁Lehoi ▁gaztea ▁zu , ▁Juda ! E h iz atik ▁heldu ▁zara , ▁seme ! Mak urtu ▁eta ▁luze ▁etzaten ▁d al eh oi aren ▁antzera , lehoi - eme aren ▁antzera . Nor ▁ausartu ▁aurre ▁egitera ?
PRED:	“ O daughter of Judah , ” she exclaimed . “ You have a son of man , ” she said . “ Who is you like a son ? Who is you like a man ? Who is you like a man ? ”
GOLD:	Judah , my son , is a young lionthat has finished eating its prey.Like a lion he crouches and lies down ; like a lioness — who dares to rouse him ?

ID:	1603
INPUT:	▁Koreren ▁semeak , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁ziren ▁hil .
PRED:	But the sons of Korah died , but the sons of Levi died .
GOLD:	However , the sons of Korah did not die that day .

ID:	1604
INPUT:	▁« Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna , ▁bizidun ▁guztien ▁Jainkoa . ▁Nire tzat ▁ez ▁da ▁ezer ▁ezinezko rik .
PRED:	“ I am the Lord , ” says the Lord . “ I am God , and there is no difference between you . ”
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord , the God of all the peoples of the world . Is anything too hard for me ?

ID:	1605
INPUT:	▁ F edeari ▁esker , ▁Noek , ▁oraindik ▁ikusten ▁ez ▁ziren ▁gauzen ▁berri ▁izan ▁zuelarik , ▁ontzia ▁egin ▁zuen ▁etxekoak ▁salbatzeko , ▁Jainkoaren ▁esaneko ▁izanez . ▁Bere ▁fede az ▁gaitzetsi ▁egin ▁zuen ▁mundu ▁sines gabea , ▁eta ▁fede tik ▁datorren ▁salbamenaren ▁oinordeko ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	It was by faith that Noah had not seen the same way . So Noah did not know that God was with him . And the believers did not know that God had promised us by the power of God .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Noah built a large boat to save his family from the flood . He obeyed God , who warned him about things that had never happened before . By his faith Noah condemned the rest of the world , and he received the righteousness that comes by faith .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁erregutu ▁zion ▁Jaunari :— Erak us tazu , ▁otoi , ▁zeure ▁aintza .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ Do n't let your glory bow before the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Moses responded , “ Then show me your glorious presence . ”

ID:	1607
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁beso ei ▁goian ▁eusten ▁zienean , ▁israeldarrak ▁ziren ▁garaile ; ▁behera ▁erortzen ▁zitzaizkion ean , ▁berriz , ▁amalektarrak .
PRED:	When Moses saw that the people of Israel had done , the people of Israel began to fall into the Amalekites .
GOLD:	As long as Moses held up the staff in his hand , the Israelites had the advantage . But whenever he dropped his hand , the Amalekites gained the advantage .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ez ▁dizut ▁inolako ▁okerrik ▁egin ; ▁zu ▁ari ▁zatzaizki t ▁erasoka . ▁Jauna ▁da ▁epaile . ▁Era baki ▁beza ▁berak ▁israeldar ▁eta ▁amondarren ▁artean ».
PRED:	I have no wrong to speak , but I am the Lord , the God of Israel , says the Lord. “ The Lord , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , I have not sinned against you . Rather , you have wronged me by attacking me . Let the Lord , who is judge , decide today which of us is right — Israel or Ammon . ”

ID:	1609
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁lehertu ▁egin ▁da ▁nire ▁haserre - sumina , ▁eta ▁erre ▁egin ▁ditu ▁Judako ▁hiriak ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁kal eak : ▁hondamendi ▁eta ▁eremu ▁bihurtu ▁dira , ▁eta ▁halaxe ▁daude ▁orain .
PRED:	But my anger has broken my anger , and my anger has broken my anger and broken its towns . They have broken its towns and broken its towns .
GOLD:	And so my fury boiled over and fell like fire on the towns of Judah and into the streets of Jerusalem , and they are still a desolate ruin today .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : ▁Denbora ▁gutxi ▁barru , ▁zeru - lur rei ▁eta ▁itsaso - leh orrei ▁dardara ▁eragingo ▁diet .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ I will pour down the earth , and the earth will fall into the sky .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : In just a little while I will again shake the heavens and the earth , the oceans and the dry land .

ID:	1611
INPUT:	▁aurkitzen ▁ez ▁badute , ▁berriz , ▁etxeko ▁nagusia ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrera ▁aurkeztuko ▁da , ▁eta ▁bere ▁lagun aren ▁ondasun ik ▁ez ▁duela ▁ukitu ▁aitortuko .
PRED:	But if they do not return to the house of God , he must present a slave to the house of God .
GOLD:	“ Suppose someone leaves money or goods with a neighbor for safekeeping , and they are stolen from the neighbor 's house . If the thief is caught , the compensation is double the value of what was stolen .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Davidena . Jaunarengan ▁babesten ▁naiz . ▁Nolatan ▁esaten ▁didazue :« Alde ▁mendira , ▁hegaztiak ▁bezala !
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O Lord , O God ! I say , “ Listen to you ! ”
GOLD:	I trust in the Lord for protection.So why do you say to me , “ Fly like a bird to the mountains for safety !

ID:	1613
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erre - oparia ▁bukatzean , ▁erregea ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁ziren ▁guztiak ▁ahuspeztu ▁egin ▁ziren .
PRED:	When all the burnt offering , they worshiped the king and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	Then the king and everyone with him bowed down in worship .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	▁Bera , ▁berriz , ▁basamortuan ▁aurrera ▁joan ▁zen ▁eta ▁egun ▁osoan ▁ibili . ▁Azkenean , ▁ip uru ▁baten ▁azpian ▁eseri ▁zen . ▁Heriotza ▁opa ▁zion ▁bere ▁buruari . ▁Hau ▁zioen : ▁« Aski ▁da ! ▁Orain , ▁Jauna , ▁hartzazu ▁ene ▁bizia , ▁ez ▁bainaiz ▁ni ▁neure ▁gurasoak ▁baino ▁hobea ».
PRED:	But the man went out to the wilderness , and he went out to the wilderness . He said , “ Yes , you are your father , ” he said . “ I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then he went on alone into the wilderness , traveling all day . He sat down under a solitary broom tree and prayed that he might die . “ I have had enough , Lord , ” he said . “ Take my life , for I am no better than my ancestors who have already died . ”

ID:	1615
INPUT:	▁eduki ▁ardiak ▁ar t ile az ▁jantziak ▁egiteko , an tx umeak , ▁alor ▁bat ▁erosteko ▁beste ▁ateratzeko ,
PRED:	Take the sheep of sheep , goats , goats , and a young lion .
GOLD:	your sheep will provide wool for clothing , and your goats will provide the price of a field .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	▁Ar n asa ▁izango ▁dudan ▁bitartean , Jainkoaren ▁h ats a ▁nire ▁sudur retan ,
PRED:	Yes , I will be like a stranger , and I will put your neck .
GOLD:	As long as I live , while I have breath from God ,

ID:	1617
INPUT:	▁Paulo ▁Zesareara ▁eramana
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Paul Is Sent to Caesarea

ID:	1618
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁berriro :— Ez ▁gaitzazu ▁utz ! ▁Zuk ▁ongi ▁ezagutzen ▁dituzu ▁basamortuan ▁etxola tzeko ▁para j eak ▁eta ▁gidari ▁izan ▁zaitzak egu .
PRED:	Then Moses said , “ Do n't be afraid , Lord , and you know that you are so strong , and you know the day of the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Please do n't leave us , ” Moses pleaded . “ You know the places in the wilderness where we should camp . Come , be our guide .

ID:	1619
INPUT:	▁Santua ▁eta ▁zuzena ▁zen , ▁baina ▁zuek ▁ukatu ▁egin ▁zenuten , ▁eta ▁hiltzaile ▁bat ▁askatzeko ▁eskatu ;
PRED:	For the Holy Spirit was good , but you wanted to commit adultery .
GOLD:	You rejected this holy , righteous one and instead demanded the release of a murderer .

ID:	1620
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitzatela ▁engaina ▁Ezekiasek ; ▁ez ▁diezazuela ▁iruzur rik ▁egin . ▁Ez ▁sinetsi ! ▁In ongo ▁jainko k ▁bere ▁nazioa ▁nahiz ▁erreinua ▁ezin ▁izan ▁badu ▁ez ▁nire , ▁ez ▁nire ▁aurreko en ▁eskuetatik ▁libratu , ▁are ▁gutxiago ▁libratuko ▁zaituzte ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ”».
PRED:	Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you ; do n't believe me . Do n't be afraid of you , or you can not be able to save you from my kingdom . ”
GOLD:	Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you ! Do n't let him fool you like this ! I say it again — no god of any nation or kingdom has ever yet been able to rescue his people from me or my ancestors . How much less will your God rescue you from my power ! ”

ID:	1621
INPUT:	▁A izko ra ▁k am uts arekin , zorro zten ▁ez ▁baduzu , lan ▁handiagoa ▁egin ▁beharko . Jo ka ▁ezazu ▁buruz , ahal egin ari ▁onura ▁ateratzeko .
PRED:	If a wise man has sex with a fool , do n't be able to get up with her . If you do n't want to pick up a hand to someone else ! ”
GOLD:	Using a dull ax requires great strength , so sharpen the blade.That 's the value of wisdom ; it helps you succeed .

ID:	1622
INPUT:	▁Eliseo ▁hizketan ▁ari ▁zelarik , ▁heldu ▁zen ▁mezularia ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— Begira , ▁hondamendi ▁hau ▁Jaunak ▁bidalia ▁da . ▁Zer ▁itxaron ▁dezaket ▁Jaunarengandik ?
PRED:	When Elisha arrived , he said to the king , “ Look , what is the Lord says : What is the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	While Elisha was still saying this , the messenger arrived . And the king said , “ All this misery is from the Lord ! Why should I wait for the Lord any longer ? ”

ID:	1623
INPUT:	▁gaitz ▁go gorrez ▁joko ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁zuen ▁ondorengoak : ▁zauri ▁izu garriz , ▁zauri ▁latz ▁eta ▁iraunkor rez , ▁gaixotasun ▁gaizto ▁eta ▁senda ezin ez .
PRED:	The Lord will strike you with her , and your descendants will be forgiven , and your descendants will be filled with wickedness .
GOLD:	then the Lord will overwhelm you and your children with indescribable plagues . These plagues will be intense and without relief , making you miserable and unbearably sick .

ID:	1624
INPUT:	▁Gazte ▁grin atsu ▁batek ▁bere ▁neskatx arekin ▁ez ▁dela ▁ongi ▁jokatzen ▁ari ▁eta ▁ezkondu ▁egin ▁behar ▁duela ▁uste ▁badu , ▁bete ▁dezala ▁bere ▁asmoa , ▁eta ▁ezkon ▁daitezela ; ▁ez ▁du ▁bekaturik ▁egiten .
PRED:	And so that one of his family is well well well with the young men . If a woman is well well well well , let them be kind to death . ”
GOLD:	But if a man thinks that he 's treating his fiancée improperly and will inevitably give in to his passion , let him marry her as he wishes . It is not a sin .

ID:	1625
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuek herri ▁hez ik aitza ▁eta ▁des leiala ▁zarete ; nire gandik ▁urruti ▁joan ▁zarete .
PRED:	But you are faithful to those who hate me ; you are faithful to me .
GOLD:	But my people have stubborn and rebellious hearts.They have turned away and abandoned me .

ID:	1626
INPUT:	▁Nek ez ▁hilko ▁litzateke ▁norbait ▁pertsona ▁zuzen ▁baten ▁alde ; ▁agian ▁bai , ▁bad aiteke ▁norbait ▁pertsona ▁on ▁baten ▁alde ▁hiltzeko ▁prest ▁egotea .
PRED:	If you die , you will die with me , we can not be sure to kill you . If you are going to kill you , we can be sure to kill you .
GOLD:	Now , most people would not be willing to die for an upright person , though someone might perhaps be willing to die for a person who is especially good .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	▁Edo ▁d em agun ▁izurria ▁bidaltzen ▁dudala ▁herrialdearen ▁aurka ▁eta ▁heriotza ▁zabaltzen ▁dudala ▁neure ▁suminez , ▁gizakiak ▁eta ▁abereak ▁suntsi tuz ;
PRED:	If anyone tells you , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will destroy your livestock and livestock . '
GOLD:	“ Or suppose I were to pour out my fury by sending an epidemic into the land , and the disease killed people and animals alike .

ID:	1628
INPUT:	▁Guardiaburuak ▁Joseren ▁ardurapean ▁utzi ▁zituen . Den bora ldi ▁bat ▁preso ▁egon ▁ondoren ,
PRED:	The captain of Joseph left the guard his prison , while he was in the tomb .
GOLD:	They remained in prison for quite some time , and the captain of the guard assigned them to Joseph , who looked after them .

ID:	1629
INPUT:	▁Bas astoa
PRED:	The Lord 's Future Reign
GOLD:	The Lord 's Challenge Continues

ID:	1630
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁Jaunaren ▁hitza , ▁Jakoben ▁ondorengook , ▁Israelgo ▁leinu ▁guztiok .
PRED:	Listen to the Lord , all the tribes of Israel , and all the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Listen to the word of the Lord , people of Jacob — all you families of Israel !

ID:	1631
INPUT:	▁Irten ▁Babiloniatik , ihes ▁egin ▁babiloniarren ▁artetik ! Adierazi ▁mezua , ▁iragarri ▁poz - oihuz , hel arazi ▁lurraren ▁bazter retaraino :« Jaunak ▁askatu ▁du ▁Israel bere ▁zerbitzaria !»
PRED:	Now come from the Babylonians from the Babylonians , from the Babylonians ! The Lord has spoken to Israel , “ I will rescue Israel from the land of the Lord , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Yet even now , be free from your captivity ! Leave Babylon and the Babylonians.Sing out this message ! Shout it to the ends of the earth ! The Lord has redeemed his servants , the people of Israel .

ID:	1632
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hau ▁diotsut : ▁Bekatu ▁asko ▁ditu , ▁baina ▁hain besteko ▁maitasuna ▁ageri ▁badu , ▁Jainkoak ▁barkatu ▁dizkion ▁seinalea ▁da ; ▁gutxi ▁barkatzen ▁zaion ak ▁maitasun ▁gutxi ▁agertzen ▁du .
PRED:	“ If I am willing , I will show many children . But even though they love the Lord , he will punish those who love them .
GOLD:	“ I tell you , her sins — and they are many — have been forgiven , so she has shown me much love . But a person who is forgiven little shows only little love . ”

ID:	1633
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁bere ▁nagusi tasuna ▁azaldu ▁sinagogan
PRED:	Jesus Anointed in the synagogue
GOLD:	Jesus Preaches in Galilee

ID:	1634
INPUT:	▁Mih ia ▁ere ▁sua ▁da , ▁gaiztakeri azko ▁mundua : ▁gure ▁beste ▁gorputz - atal en ▁artean ▁jarri ta , ▁gorputz ▁osoa ▁kutsatzen ▁du ▁eta , ▁infern uko ▁suaz ▁pizturik , ▁sutan ▁jartzen ▁du ▁bizitzaren ▁gur pila .
PRED:	For the whole body is poured out from the earth , and the whole body of our bodies will be filled with fire . The fire will be filled with fire , and it will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	And among all the parts of the body , the tongue is a flame of fire . It is a whole world of wickedness , corrupting your entire body . It can set your whole life on fire , for it is set on fire by hell itself .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erantzun ▁zidaten : ▁« Er beste alditik ▁libre ▁gelditu ▁direnak ▁zoritxar ▁handian ▁eta ▁egoera ▁lotsagarri an ▁daude ▁Juda ▁eskualdean ; ▁Jerusalemgo ▁harresiak , ▁berriz , ▁zul oz ▁beteak ▁daude , ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁ateak ▁suak ▁kiskal iak ».
PRED:	Then they replied , “ The poor are left in Jerusalem , but those who attack the city are in Jerusalem . They are destroyed by the walls of Jerusalem . They are destroyed by the walls of Jerusalem , and the walls of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	They said to me , “ Things are not going well for those who returned to the province of Judah . They are in great trouble and disgrace . The wall of Jerusalem has been torn down , and the gates have been destroyed by fire . ”

ID:	1636
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diozue :« I tuna ▁egina ▁dugu ▁Herio arekin , tra tua ▁Hildakoen ▁Egoitz arekin : ez behar ▁suntsi garria ▁datorrenean , ez ▁gaitu ▁harrapatuko , gezurra ▁hartu ▁baitugu ▁babes , maltzur keria ▁gordeleku ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ We are like the grave ; we will not be disgraced ; we will not be disgraced ; no one will fall into the grave . ”
GOLD:	You boast , “ We have struck a bargain to cheat deathand have made a deal to dodge the grave.The coming destruction can never touch us , for we have built a strong refuge made of lies and deception . ”

ID:	1637
INPUT:	▁Josuek ▁agindu ▁bezala ▁egin ▁zuten ▁israeldarrek : ▁Jordan ▁erditik ▁hamabi ▁harri , ▁israeldar ▁leinuak ▁hainbat ▁harri , ▁hartu , ▁gaua ▁igaroko ▁zuten ▁lekura ▁eraman ▁eta ▁bertan ▁ezarri ▁zituzten , ▁Jaunak ▁Josueri ▁agindu ▁bezala .
PRED:	So Joshua commanded the Israelites to travel through the Jordan River , just as the Lord had commanded them . So they brought them out of the Jordan River , just as the Lord had commanded Joshua had commanded Joshua .
GOLD:	So the men did as Joshua had commanded them . They took twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan River , one for each tribe , just as the Lord had told Joshua . They carried them to the place where they camped for the night and constructed the memorial there .

ID:	1638
INPUT:	▁Jainkoari ▁eskerrak
PRED:	God 's Response to God
GOLD:	Encouragement to Be Faithful

ID:	1639
INPUT:	▁Zuretzat ▁ere ▁amaiera ▁da ▁orain : ▁neure ▁haserrea ▁isuriko ▁dut ▁zure ▁kontra , ▁zeure ▁jokabidearen ▁arabera ▁epaituko ▁zaitut ▁eta ▁egintza ▁higuingarri ▁guztien ▁kontu ▁eskatuko .
PRED:	“ But now your anger will pour out my anger on you , and I will judge you with your detestable sins .
GOLD:	No hope remains , for I will unleash my anger against you.I will call you to accountfor all your detestable sins .

ID:	1640
INPUT:	▁Barneko ▁a tariak ▁ere ▁bazuen ▁sarrera ▁bat ▁hegoaldera . ▁Bi ▁sarrer en ▁arteko ▁di s t antzia ▁neurtu ▁zuen ▁gizonak : ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metro .
PRED:	When he finished the inner courtyard , he measured the inner curtain to the inner courtyard . He measured the inner courtyard , he measured the two of the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	And here again , directly opposite the outer gateway , was another gateway that led into the inner courtyard . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	▁Hara ▁iris tear ▁zegoela , ▁Sarai ▁bere ▁emazteari ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Adizu , ▁badakit ▁emakume ▁ederra ▁zarela .
PRED:	When she saw her husband 's wife , she said to her , “ Here is a beautiful woman who is a beautiful woman . ”
GOLD:	As he was approaching the border of Egypt , Abram said to his wife , Sarai , “ Look , you are a very beautiful woman .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁arauak ▁nahi ▁ditut ▁gorde : ▁ez ▁nazazu ▁inoiz ▁eskutik ▁utz !
PRED:	I want your decrees ; do n't let me follow your decrees .
GOLD:	I will obey your decrees.Please do n't give up on me !

ID:	1643
INPUT:	▁Hortan , ▁mahaian ▁zeudelarik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁etorri ▁zitzaion ▁itzularazi ▁zuen ▁profeta ▁zaharrari ,
PRED:	But when he arrived at the table , he went home with him .
GOLD:	Then while they were sitting at the table , a command from the Lord came to the old prophet .

ID:	1644
INPUT:	▁Bidal ▁diezazula ▁laguntza ▁bere ▁santutegitik , eu tsi ▁zuri ▁Sion ▁menditik !
PRED:	The king of Babylon will give you victory over the mountains of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	May he remember all your giftsand look favorably on your burnt offerings.Interlude

ID:	1645
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁kopa ▁harturik , ▁esker ▁oneko ▁otoitza ▁egin ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Hartzazue ▁eta ▁eman ▁elkarri .
PRED:	Then he took a cup of wine and gave thanks to one piece .
GOLD:	Then he took a cup of wine and gave thanks to God for it . Then he said , “ Take this and share it among yourselves .

ID:	1646
INPUT:	▁Leku ▁hari ▁T abera ▁— hau ▁da , ▁« Su te »— ▁ezarri ▁zioten ▁izena , ▁Jaunaren ▁sua ▁israeldarren ▁aurka ▁bertan ▁lehertu ▁zelako .
PRED:	So they took the sheep from the field , which means “ This is the place of the Lord 's name , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	After that , the area was known as Taberah ( which means “ the place of burning ” ) , because fire from the Lord had burned among them there .

ID:	1647
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁egunez ▁lan ▁egingo ▁duzue , ▁baina ▁zazpigarrena ▁larunbata ▁da , ▁Jaunari ▁sagaraturiko ▁atseden - eguna . ▁Larun batez ▁lan ▁egiten ▁duenak ▁heriotza - zigorra ▁izango ▁du .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day the Sabbath day the Sabbath day of the Sabbath days , the Sabbath day must be put to death . Anyone who is put to death .
GOLD:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work , but the seventh day must be a Sabbath day of complete rest , a holy day dedicated to the Lord . Anyone who works on that day must be put to death .

ID:	1648
INPUT:	▁lege - maisu ▁izan ▁nahian , ▁esaten ▁eta ▁aho ▁betean ▁irakasten ▁dutena ▁ulertzen ▁ez ▁badute ▁ere .
PRED:	The teachers of religious law say to the teachers of religious law , “ They do n't understand what they do .
GOLD:	They want to be known as teachers of the law of Moses , but they do n't know what they are talking about , even though they speak so confidently .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	▁A kerrak ▁berekin ▁eramango ▁ditu ▁israeldarren ▁erru ▁guztiak ▁eremu ▁el kor rera . ▁A kerra ▁basamortura ▁bidali ▁ondoren ,
PRED:	He will bring them into the wilderness of the wilderness , and he sent them into the wilderness .
GOLD:	As the goat goes into the wilderness , it will carry all the people 's sins upon itself into a desolate land .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	▁Lurralde ak ▁beste ▁hauek ▁ere ▁hartzen ▁zituen : ▁K ata t , ▁Nah alal , ▁Xim ron , ▁I dala ▁eta ▁Belen ; ▁guztira ▁hamabi ▁hiri ▁ziren , ▁beren ▁herrixkekin .
PRED:	The following towns were given to the following towns : The total number of its surrounding villages , and their surrounding surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The towns in these areas included Kattath , Nahalal , Shimron , Idalah , and Bethlehem — twelve towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	▁Zuei , ▁guraso oi , ▁diotsuet : ▁Ezagutzen ▁duzue ▁hasieratik ▁zen ▁hura . Zuei , ▁gazte oi , ▁diotsuet : ▁Gar aitu ▁duzue ▁gaiztoa .
PRED:	I tell you the father of your ancestors , you are false from the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning .
GOLD:	I am writing to you who are mature in the faithbecause you know Christ , who existed from the beginning.I am writing to you who are young in the faithbecause you have won your battle with the evil one .

ID:	1652
INPUT:	▁Azkenean , ▁harlan du zko ▁hiru ▁lerro ko ▁eta ▁zedrozko ▁habe - lerro ▁bateko ▁horma ▁eraikiz , ▁barneko ▁ataria ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	The walls of the Temple was built by the walls of cedar , and it built an cedar cedar beams for its walls .
GOLD:	The walls of the inner courtyard were built so that there was one layer of cedar beams between every three layers of finished stone .

ID:	1653
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Sara ik ▁esan ▁zion ▁Abrami : ▁« Begira , ▁Jaunak ▁agor ▁egin ▁nau . ▁Elkar ▁zaitez , ▁bada , ▁nire ▁mirabe arekin . ▁Beharbada , ▁izango ▁dut ▁semerik ▁haren ▁bitartez ». Ab ram ek ▁onartu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Sar airen ▁proposamena ,
PRED:	Then Abram said to Abram , “ Look , and I am the Lord , and I will bless my servants and all the people of Abraham . Then I will make my own family . ”
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her. ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	▁galdezka :— Zein ▁aginpidez ▁jokatzen ▁duzu ▁horrela ? ▁Nork ▁eman ▁dizu ▁horretarako ▁aginpidea ?
PRED:	“ Who is you doing this ? ” he asked . “ Who gives you authority to you ? ”
GOLD:	They demanded , “ By what authority are you doing all these things ? Who gave you the right to do them ? ”

ID:	1655
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁gauza ▁hauek ▁esaten ▁zihardu ela , ▁emakume ▁batek ▁jendar tetik ▁deiadarka ▁esan ▁zion :— Zorionekoa ▁sabelean ▁eraman ▁zintuen ▁eta ▁bularra ▁eman ▁zizun ▁emakumea !
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he said to the woman , “ You are the one who was sitting on the seashore ! ”
GOLD:	As he was speaking , a woman in the crowd called out , “ God bless your mother — the womb from which you came , and the breasts that nursed you ! ”

ID:	1656
INPUT:	▁Ur ri ▁bitez ▁haren ▁egunak , ▁har ▁beza ▁beste ▁batek ▁haren ▁kargua .
PRED:	Let his days become a long time , and let his life succeed .
GOLD:	Let his years be few ; let someone else take his position .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁daki ▁beraren ▁gonbidatu ak ▁hilik ▁daudela , Hildakoen ▁Egoitzan ▁daudela ▁jadanik .
PRED:	For he does not go to the grave , for no one can go to the grave .
GOLD:	But little do they know that the dead are there.Her guests are in the depths of the grave .

ID:	1658
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁esku ▁utzi ▁ditu ▁Jaunak ▁Ore b ▁eta ▁Zeeb , ▁madiandarren ▁buruzagiak . ▁Egintza ▁horren ▁aldean , ▁nik ▁ez ▁dut ▁deus ▁ere ▁egin . Hau ▁es ateak ▁baretu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁efraim darrak .
PRED:	The Lord has abandoned you , and he handed you over to the Midianites . He said , “ This is what the Lord says : I am saying , ‘ This is what he has done . '
GOLD:	God gave you victory over Oreb and Zeeb , the commanders of the Midianite army . What have I accomplished compared to that ? ” When the men of Ephraim heard Gideon 's answer , their anger subsided .

ID:	1659
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁Judako ▁erregeek ▁Akazen ▁goi - gel aren ▁gainean ▁eraik iak ▁zituzten ▁aldareak ▁desegin ▁zituen ; ▁orobat ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁bi ▁atarietan ▁Manasesek ▁eraik iak ▁zituenak ▁ere . ▁Bertan ▁hautsi ▁eta ▁Zedron ▁errekara ▁jaurti ▁zituen ▁puskak .
PRED:	He also destroyed the kings of King Ahaz of Judah , the kings of King Ahaz , and he burned it on the Kidron Valley of the Lord 's Temple . He threw it down to the Kidron Valley and threw it into the Kidron Valley of the Lord .
GOLD:	Josiah tore down the altars that the kings of Judah had built on the palace roof above the upper room of Ahaz . The king destroyed the altars that Manasseh had built in the two courtyards of the Lord 's Temple . He smashed them to bits and scattered the pieces in the Kidron Valley .

ID:	1660
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁kutxa ▁Jerusalemera ▁eraman
PRED:	David Appears to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	1661
INPUT:	▁Gero ▁eta ▁ugaria goa ▁zen ▁fedearen ▁bidez ▁Jaunari ▁elkartzen ▁zitzaizki onen ▁taldea , ▁gizon ▁eta ▁emakume .
PRED:	Then the king of the entire land was given to the Lord , along with a woman who had been given to the Lord .
GOLD:	Yet more and more people believed and were brought to the Lord — crowds of both men and women .

ID:	1662
INPUT:	▁Joiakim ▁erregeari
PRED:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Jehoahaz

ID:	1663
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁izan ▁beldur ▁gaztea ▁zigortzeko , mak il aka da ▁batzu engatik ▁ez ▁da ▁hilko ▁eta ;
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the wicked , and they will die .
GOLD:	Do n't fail to discipline your children.The rod of punishment wo n't kill them .

ID:	1664
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁edom darrek ▁berriro ▁eraso tua ▁zuten ▁Juda , ▁eta ▁preso ▁asko ▁hartuak ▁zituzten .
PRED:	You destroyed all the nations , and many kings of Judah attacked them .
GOLD:	The armies of Edom had again invaded Judah and taken captives .

ID:	1665
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁diot : ▁« Hemen ▁nauzu ». Liburu an ▁agintzen ▁zait
PRED:	So I said , “ That is why I commanded you . ”
GOLD:	I take joy in doing your will , my God , for your instructions are written on my heart . ”

ID:	1666
INPUT:	▁Goraintziak ▁Ur ban ori , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁zerbitzuan ▁laguntzaile ▁izan ▁dugun ari , ▁eta ▁nire ▁Es tak is ▁maite ari .
PRED:	Greet the other believers who loved me , who loved me .
GOLD:	Greet Urbanus , our co-worker in Christ , and my dear friend Stachys .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen , ▁beraz , ▁Gad ▁Davidengana ▁eta ▁horren ▁berri ▁eman ▁zion , ▁esanez :— Zer ▁nahi ▁duzu : ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁gose aldia ▁zeure ▁lurraldean , ▁hiru ▁hilabe teko ▁ihes aldia ▁etsaia ▁ondoren ▁duzu larik , ▁ala ▁hiru ▁eguneko ▁izurritea ▁zeure ▁lurraldean ? ▁Hau s n ar ▁ezazu , ▁beraz , ▁ea ▁zer ▁erantzun ▁behar ▁diodan ▁bidali ▁nauen ari .
PRED:	So he went to David and told him , “ What do you mean ? ” he asked . “ Why do you go to the land of Moab ? ”
GOLD:	So Gad came to David and asked him , “ Will you choose three years of famine throughout your land , three months of fleeing from your enemies , or three days of severe plague throughout your land ? Think this over and decide what answer I should give the Lord who sent me . ”

ID:	1668
INPUT:	▁Jakob ▁nire ▁zerbitzariari ▁eman ▁nion ▁lurraldean ▁biziko ▁dira , ▁non ▁bizi ▁izan ▁baitziren ▁haien ▁gurasoak ▁ere . ▁Han ▁biziko ▁dira ▁beraiek ▁eta ▁beraien ▁ondorengoak ▁betiko , ▁eta ▁David ▁nire ▁zerbitzaria ▁izango ▁dute ▁buruzagi ▁betiko .
PRED:	I gave them to my servant Jacob , and they will live in the land where they lived . They will live among them , and they will live forever .
GOLD:	They will live in the land I gave my servant Jacob , the land where their ancestors lived . They and their children and their grandchildren after them will live there forever , generation after generation . And my servant David will be their prince forever .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	▁errudun ari ▁diru - tru ke arraz oi ▁ematen eta ▁errugabe ari ▁zuzenbide au katzen ▁diozuenok !
PRED:	If the poor people bring justice to the poor , do n't ignore the wicked .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	1670
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁Si oni , ▁geure ▁jai ako s patzen ▁ditugun eko ▁hiriari . Ikus ▁Jerusalem , ▁bizi toki ▁las aia , ego itza ▁fin koa , inork ▁ziri rik ▁aterako ▁ez ▁dion eta ▁sok arik ▁eten go ▁ez ▁dion oih al - etxolaren ▁pareko .
PRED:	O Jerusalem , we have heard my prayer in my days . They were trying to rebuild the city of Jerusalem . They will not be ashamed , and they will not stand at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Instead , you will see Zion as a place of holy festivals.You will see Jerusalem , a city quiet and secure.It will be like a tent whose ropes are tautand whose stakes are firmly fixed .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	▁Berriro ▁ere ▁haurdun ▁gelditu ▁eta ▁emazteak ▁beste ▁seme ▁bat ▁izan ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁On an ▁eman ▁zion ▁izen .
PRED:	Then she became pregnant and gave birth to a wife , and she gave birth to her son .
GOLD:	Then she became pregnant again and gave birth to another son , and she named him Onan .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁irakaspen az ▁txunditurik ▁zegoen ▁jende ▁guztia , ▁nagusi tasunez ▁irakasten ▁baitzien ▁eta ▁ez ▁lege - maisuek ▁bezala .
PRED:	The crowd were amazed at his teaching , and he taught the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	The people were amazed at his teaching , for he taught with real authority — quite unlike the teachers of religious law .

ID:	1673
INPUT:	▁Jeremias ▁eta ▁Hananias ▁profetak ▁aurrez ▁aurre
PRED:	Jeremiah and Hananiah
GOLD:	Jeremiah Condemns Hananiah

ID:	1674
INPUT:	▁Honela xe ▁dio ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁ere : ▁Gizaki ▁oro ▁belarraren ▁pareko ▁da , ▁haren ▁edertasuna ▁landako ▁lore arena ▁bezalakoa : ▁ihartzen ▁da ▁belarra , ▁erortzen ▁lorea ;
PRED:	The Scriptures say , “ The Scriptures are like grass , like grass are like grass , and trees trees are like grass .
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ People are like grass ; their beauty is like a flower in the field.The grass withers and the flower fades .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	▁zuzenbide ari ▁jarraitzen ▁diotenak ▁babesten ▁ditueta ▁berarekin ▁leial ▁direnak ▁zaintzen .
PRED:	Fear of justice , but those who love him with integrity .
GOLD:	He guards the paths of the justand protects those who are faithful to him .

ID:	1676
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁zazpi ▁egun ▁itxaron ▁eta ▁berriro ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁usoa ▁ontzitik .
PRED:	Then he sent seven days to find seven days .
GOLD:	After waiting another seven days , Noah released the dove again .

ID:	1677
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁bedi ▁handi etsia ▁zure ▁izena ▁beti ! ▁Esan ▁bezate : ▁“ Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa !” ▁Eta ▁iraun ▁beza ▁zure ▁aurrean , ▁morroi ▁duzun ▁David ▁honen ▁ondorengo tzak .
PRED:	May the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , ‘ May the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel . '
GOLD:	And may your name be honored forever so that everyone will say , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is God over Israel ! ' And may the house of your servant David continue before you forever .

ID:	1678
INPUT:	▁Gudal buruak ▁bidali ▁egin ▁zuen ▁mutila , ▁esanez :— Ez ▁esan ▁inori ▁honen ▁berri ▁eman ▁didazun ik .
PRED:	But the man sent him out and said to him , “ Do n't tell anyone about it . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't let anyone know you told me this , ” the commander warned the young man .

ID:	1679
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁egoitza ▁liho - hari ▁bihurrituz ▁eta ▁purpura ▁more , ▁gorri ▁eta ▁gorriminez ▁eginiko ▁hamar ▁zap iz , ▁eta ▁bordatu ▁horietan ▁apain ▁izaki ▁hegal dunak .
PRED:	“ Make the Tabernacle of finely woven linen and embroidered it with blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread . All the cherubim have made with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Make the Tabernacle from ten curtains of finely woven linen . Decorate the curtains with blue , purple , and scarlet thread and with skillfully embroidered cherubim .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁apostoluei ▁agertu ▁zitzaien ▁bere ▁heriotzaren ▁ondoren ▁eta ▁bizirik ▁zegoeneko ▁froga ▁asko ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁berrogei ▁egunez ▁bere ▁burua ▁ikustera ▁emanez ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁erregetzaz ▁hitz ▁eginez .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he said to his disciples , he was able to see many days . He gave them many days to see the Kingdom of God . He spoke to the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	During the forty days after he suffered and died , he appeared to the apostles from time to time , and he proved to them in many ways that he was actually alive . And he talked to them about the Kingdom of God .

ID:	1681
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemera , ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxera , ▁itzuli ▁ondoko ▁bigarren ▁urteko ▁bigarren ▁hilean ▁ekin ▁zioten ▁lanari ▁Xealtielen ▁seme ▁Zorob abelek ▁eta ▁Jotzadaken ▁seme ▁Josuek , ▁beren ▁apaiz - ah <unk> ekin , ▁lebitar rekin ▁eta ▁gatibu alditik ▁Jerusalemera ▁etorri ekin ; ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁lanen ▁arduradun ▁hogei ▁urtez ▁gorako ▁lebitarrak ▁jarri ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So Joshua son of Jehozadak returned to Jerusalem to Jerusalem at the second year of the second year of God 's reign , who had come to Jerusalem . Then Joshua son of Jehozadak , son of Jehozadak , who returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The construction of the Temple of God began in midspring , during the second year after they arrived in Jerusalem . The work force was made up of everyone who had returned from exile , including Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , Jeshua son of Jehozadak and his fellow priests , and all the Levites . The Levites who were twenty years old or older were put in charge of rebuilding the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	1682
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dut ▁neure ▁onginahia ▁harengandik ▁baztertuko , ▁Saulengandik ▁baztertu ▁nuen ▁bezala , ▁baztertu ▁egin ▁bainuen ▁neure ▁aurretik ▁bera .
PRED:	But I did not forget my unfailing love , just as I had abandoned me .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	1683
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ehuntariak ▁fede ▁gehiago ▁zuen ▁lem azain ▁eta ▁pat ro iaren gan ▁Pauloren ▁esan etan ▁baino .
PRED:	But the Roman officer was pleased with foolishness , and he spoke to Paul .
GOLD:	But the officer in charge of the prisoners listened more to the ship 's captain and the owner than to Paul .

ID:	1684
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁larruazal ▁hau ▁desegin ▁ondoren , gorputz ik ▁gabe , ▁Jainkoa ▁ikusiko ▁dut .
PRED:	I will destroy my bones ; I will see my God .
GOLD:	And after my body has decayed , yet in my body I will see God !

ID:	1685
INPUT:	▁Berehala ▁egingo ▁di ela ▁justizia ▁diotsuet . ▁Baina ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea ▁datorrenean , ▁aurkituko ▁ote ▁du ▁horrelako ▁sinesmen ik ▁munduan ?»
PRED:	Let them tell them what the Son of Man is dead , but the Son of Man will be healed ? ”
GOLD:	I tell you , he will grant justice to them quickly ! But when the Son of Man returns , how many will he find on the earth who have faith ? ”

ID:	1686
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁or riko ▁ate ▁batetik ▁sala ▁handi ra ▁sartzen ▁zen , ▁eta ▁beste ▁ate ▁batetik ▁toki ▁santu - santu ra .
PRED:	He measured the door to the door , and he repaired the doors of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	Both the sanctuary and the Most Holy Place had double doorways ,

ID:	1687
INPUT:	▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunarengatik ▁eta ▁Espirituak ▁ematen ▁digun ▁maitasunagatik , ▁eskabide ▁hau ▁egiten ▁dizuet , ▁senideok : ▁lagun ▁diez adazu ela ▁egin ahal ean , ▁Jainkoari ▁nire ▁alde ▁otoitz ▁eginez ,
PRED:	For the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ , who gives us this message to you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I urge you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to join in my struggle by praying to God for me . Do this because of your love for me , given to you by the Holy Spirit .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁joan ▁zen ▁zaldiz koa ▁gudari - talde arengana ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— Erregeak ▁bakez ▁zatoz ten ▁galdetzen ▁du . Jehuk , ▁orduan :— Zer ▁axola ▁dizu ▁bakeak ? ▁Zatoz ▁nire ▁atzetik . Z el atariak ▁esan ▁zuen :— Heldu ▁da ▁haiengana ▁mezularia , ▁baina ▁ez ▁dator ▁itzuli an .
PRED:	But when the messengers arrived , she said to her young men , “ What sorrow awaits you ? ” “ What is you ? ” “ What is your request ? ”
GOLD:	So a horseman went out to meet Jehu and said , “ The king wants to know if you are coming in peace. ” Jehu replied , “ What do you know about peace ? Fall in behind me ! ” The watchman called out to the king , “ The messenger has met them , but he 's not returning . ”

ID:	1689
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁egun ▁bat ▁edo ▁bi ▁bizirik ▁irauten ▁badu , ▁ez ▁dute ▁kondenatuko , ▁berea ▁baitzuen ▁esklaboa .
PRED:	But if you live , those who live in the field must be allowed to be circumcised .
GOLD:	But if the slave recovers within a day or two , then the owner shall not be punished , since the slave is his property .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	▁Adierazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Gog , ▁zure ▁kontra ▁nator , ▁Mexek ▁eta ▁Tubal go ▁buruzagi ▁nagusi ▁horren ▁kontra .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Sovereign Lord : I am the God of Heaven 's Armies , son of Meshech , and Tubal .
GOLD:	Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : Gog , I am your enemy !

ID:	1691
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁bata ▁barkamen - oparitzat ▁eta ▁bestea ▁erre - oparitzat ▁eskainiko ▁ditu . ▁Honela , ▁j ario dun aren ▁aldeko ▁garbikuntza - ohikunea ▁egingo ▁du ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	The priest will present a sin offering for the sin offering to purify the Lord , and he will purify the people with the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one bird for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the man before the Lord for his discharge .

ID:	1692
INPUT:	▁Amasa , ▁odoletan ▁blai , ▁bide aren ▁erdian ▁ze tzan . ▁Jende ▁guztia ▁gorpu aren ▁ondoan ▁gelditzen ▁zela ▁ikustean , ▁gudari ▁hark ▁bidetik ▁zelai ra ▁eraman ▁eta ▁oihal ez ▁estali ▁zuen ▁Amasa ; ▁bestela , ▁haren ▁ondora ▁heltzen ▁ziren ▁guztiak ▁gelditu ▁egiten ▁baitziren .
PRED:	So Amasa 's young men who had gathered in the field . He saw everything he had done . When he saw everything he had done , he had done . So he did n't go to the tent .
GOLD:	But Amasa lay in his blood in the middle of the road , and Joab 's man saw that everyone was stopping to stare at him . So he pulled him off the road into a field and threw a cloak over him .

ID:	1693
INPUT:	▁Hain ▁zen ▁izugarria ▁ikuskaria , ▁non ▁Moisesek ▁berak ▁ere ▁honela ▁baitzioen : ▁Beldur - ikaraz ▁nago .
PRED:	When Moses saw that Moses had been filled with his heart , he was deeply troubled .
GOLD:	Moses himself was so frightened at the sight that he said , “ I am terrified and trembling . ”

ID:	1694
INPUT:	▁Ber ea ▁du ▁itsasoa , ▁berak ▁egina , eta ▁lehorra , ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁mol datua .
PRED:	He has made the sea , and he made everything he had done .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Noeri ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeei ▁esan ▁zien , ▁gainera :
PRED:	So God gave them to Noah and his sons and his sons .
GOLD:	Then God told Noah and his sons ,

ID:	1696
INPUT:	▁Gizon ▁hark , ▁berriz , ▁hititen ▁lurraldera ▁joan ▁eta ▁hiri ▁bat ▁eraiki ▁zuen ; ▁Luz ▁izena ▁eman ▁zion ▁eta ▁hala ▁deritza ▁gaurdaino .
PRED:	Then he went to the land of Canaan , and he built a place where he had built .
GOLD:	Later the man moved to the land of the Hittites , where he built a town . He named it Luz , which is its name to this day .

ID:	1697
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁zazpi ▁ikas l eri ▁agertu
PRED:	Jesus Appears before the Council
GOLD:	Epilogue : Jesus Appears to Seven Disciples

ID:	1698
INPUT:	▁Urre ▁garbiz ▁urreztatu ▁zituen ▁barne ▁eta ▁kanpo alde ak , ▁eta ▁urrezko ▁hegala ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁inguru ▁guztian .
PRED:	He overlaid them with gold and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid it inside and outside with pure gold , and he ran a molding of gold all around it .

ID:	1699
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁jendetzari ▁jaten ▁eman
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand

ID:	1700
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁guztia ▁jakitean , ▁adoregabe turik , ▁arnasa ▁ere ▁galdu ta ▁gelditu ▁gara ▁zuen ▁aurrean . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jauna , ▁zuen ▁Jainkoa , ▁Jainko ▁da ▁goian ▁zeruan ▁eta ▁behean ▁lurrean .
PRED:	When we heard about this , we saw everything in the presence of the Lord your God , and our God is in heaven and on earth .
GOLD:	No wonder our hearts have melted in fear ! No one has the courage to fight after hearing such things . For the Lord your God is the supreme God of the heavens above and the earth below .

ID:	1701
INPUT:	▁Agur ▁bezate ▁ahuspezturik ▁errege ▁guztiek , jar ▁bek izki o ▁menpean ▁nazio ▁guztiak !
PRED:	Let us praise his bow before him , and let all the nations praise him .
GOLD:	All kings will bow before him , and all nations will serve him .

ID:	1702
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Josuerengana ▁eraman ▁zituzten . ▁Josuek ▁israeldar ▁guztiei ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁guduan ▁berarekin ▁ibili tako ▁gudalburu ei ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zien : ▁« Hurbil ▁zaitezte ▁eta ▁zapaldu ▁errege ▁hauei ▁lepoa ». ▁Halaxe ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then Joshua brought all the Israelite army to Joshua and the army of Israel . He said to Joshua , “ Take this message from the tribe of Israel . ”
GOLD:	When they brought them out , Joshua told the commanders of his army , “ Come and put your feet on the kings ' necks. ” And they did as they were told .

ID:	1703
INPUT:	▁Honela , ▁Horeb ▁menditik ▁aurrera , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁israeldarrek ▁festa - jantz irik ▁erabili .
PRED:	The people of Israel were camped at Mount Sinai at Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	So from the time they left Mount Sinai , the Israelites wore no more jewelry or fine clothes .

ID:	1704
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁h ek tar eako ▁mahastiak zah agi ▁erdi ▁bat ▁ardo ▁besterikez ▁du ▁emango ; h amar ▁anega ▁haz ik an ega ▁bat ▁ale ▁besterik ▁ez ».
PRED:	“ You have done three o'clock in the desert , ” says the Lord. “ He will give you five loaves of bread in five loaves of bread . ”
GOLD:	Ten acres of vineyard will not produce even six gallons of wine.Ten baskets of seed will yield only one basket of grain . ”

ID:	1705
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁areago , ▁zu ▁juduen ▁ohitura ▁eta ▁eztabaidak ▁ongi ▁ezagutzen ▁dituzuna ▁izanik . ▁Entzun ▁iezadazu , ▁beraz , ▁otoi , ▁eroa penez .
PRED:	Now you know that you are the Jewish leaders , you are trying to say to me , “ Listen to me ! Do you know me ! ”
GOLD:	for I know you are an expert on all Jewish customs and controversies . Now please listen to me patiently !

ID:	1706
INPUT:	▁Zul oa ▁dagi ena ▁bertan ▁da ▁eroriko , hor ma ▁botatzen ▁duenari suge ak ▁zizta ▁egingo .
PRED:	The proud will fall , and the sword will fall into a sword .
GOLD:	When you dig a well , you might fall in.When you demolish an old wall , you could be bitten by a snake .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	▁em aguzu ▁egunean ▁eguneko ▁ogia ,
PRED:	Let us eat food for seven days ,
GOLD:	Give us each day the food we need ,

ID:	1708
INPUT:	▁Man datu ▁bat ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jeremias ▁profetak ▁Neriasen ▁seme ▁eta ▁Mah <unk> iasen ▁biloba ▁Ser aiasi , ▁Judako ▁errege ▁Sedekiasen ▁laguntzaile ari , ▁erregearekin ▁batera ▁Babiloniara ▁joan ▁zenean . ▁Sedekiasen ▁erregealdiko ▁laugarren ▁urtea ▁zen .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah gave a message to Jeremiah , the prophet who had been sent by the son of Hilkiah , son of Hilkiah , son of Hilkiah , and he went to Babylon . He went to Babylon .
GOLD:	The prophet Jeremiah gave this message to Seraiah son of Neriah and grandson of Mahseiah , a staff officer , when Seraiah went to Babylon with King Zedekiah of Judah . This was during the fourth year of Zedekiah 's reign .

ID:	1709
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atxiki ▁zaion ▁atzerritarrak ez ▁dezala ▁inola ▁ere ▁esan :« Bere ▁herritik ▁baztertu egin ▁nau ▁Jaunak ». I ren duak ▁ere ▁ez ▁dezala ▁esan :« Zu haitz ▁ihartua ▁besterik ▁ez ▁naiz ».
PRED:	They said to the Lord , “ Do n't let the curse of the Lord has abandoned me , ” says the Lord . “ I have not abandoned you . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't let foreigners who commit themselves to the Lord say , ‘ The Lord will never let me be part of his people . 'And do n't let the eunuchs say , ‘ I 'm a dried-up tree with no children and no future . '

ID:	1710
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁dakizue ▁bide gabeek ▁ez ▁dutela ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinua ▁iritsiko ? ▁Ez ▁engaina ▁zeuen ▁buruak ! ▁L izun ek , ▁sasijainko zaleek , ▁adulteriogile ek , ▁em akeria - zaleek , ▁so do mi tek ,
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the Kingdom of God says , “ What sorrow awaits you ? Do n't you realize that you are saying , ‘ You know that God does not commit adultery . '
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that those who do wrong will not inherit the Kingdom of God ? Do n't fool yourselves . Those who indulge in sexual sin , or who worship idols , or commit adultery , or are male prostitutes , or practice homosexuality ,

ID:	1711
INPUT:	▁Barrabas ▁hau , ▁hirian ▁gertatu riko ▁m atxinada ▁eta ▁giza ▁hilketa ▁batengatik ▁kartzelan ▁sartua ▁zuten .
PRED:	So there was a man named Barabbas , a prisoner in the city .
GOLD:	( Barabbas was in prison for taking part in an insurrection in Jerusalem against the government , and for murder . )

ID:	1712
INPUT:	▁Niri ▁gorroto ▁didan ak , ▁gorroto ▁dio ▁nire ▁Aitari ▁ere .
PRED:	My Father hate me ; he hates me .
GOLD:	Anyone who hates me also hates my Father .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	▁ F es tarako ▁prestaketak ▁egiteko ▁eguna ▁zen ▁eta ▁larunbata ▁has tera ▁zihoan .
PRED:	So the Sabbath day the Sabbath went to the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	This was done late on Friday afternoon , the day of preparation , as the Sabbath was about to begin .

ID:	1714
INPUT:	▁G ezi ek ▁ez ▁diote ▁ihes ▁eragiten , h ab aila - h arriak ▁lasto ▁bihurtzen ▁zaizkio .
PRED:	They will not run away , but they are like straw .
GOLD:	Smoke streams from its nostrilslike steam from a pot heated over burning rushes .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	▁« Ep aileak ▁eta ▁funtzionarioak ▁ezarriko ▁dituzue ▁leinu etan , ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁emango ▁dizkizuen ▁hiri ▁bakoitzean , ▁herritarren ▁auziak ▁zuzenbidez ▁erabaki ▁ditzaten .
PRED:	“ Then you will destroy all the tribes of the tribes of the Lord your God , and you will judge those who do whatever the Lord says .
GOLD:	“ Appoint judges and officials for yourselves from each of your tribes in all the towns the Lord your God is giving you . They must judge the people fairly .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁beste ▁hau ▁diozue : ▁Norbaitek ▁aitari ▁edo ▁amari ▁esaten ▁badio ▁« Zuri ▁eman ▁behar ▁nizuke ena ▁“ Kor ban ” ▁da ▁ ( hau ▁da , ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁opari ) »,
PRED:	But you say to me , ‘ If you say to your father , you are willing to pay attention to me . '
GOLD:	But you say it is all right for people to say to their parents , ‘ Sorry , I ca n't help you . For I have vowed to give to God what I would have given to you . '

ID:	1717
INPUT:	▁Gogoan ▁har , ▁Jauna : ▁etsaiak ▁irain ▁egiten ▁dizu , herri ▁buru gabeak ▁zure ▁izenari ▁mespretxu .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O God , for your enemies are crushed .
GOLD:	See how these enemies insult you , Lord.A foolish nation has dishonored your name .

ID:	1718
INPUT:	▁benjamindarrak , ▁eta ▁inguratu , ▁pertsegitu ▁eta ▁Gib earen ▁eki al deraino ▁atsedenik ▁eman ▁gabe ▁oin pera tu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Benjamin chased them into the town of Benjamin , and they headed for their feet .
GOLD:	The Israelites surrounded the men of Benjamin and chased them relentlessly , finally overtaking them east of Gibeah .

ID:	1719
INPUT:	▁Natan ▁eta ▁Betsabe ▁Salomonen ▁alde
PRED:	Nathan and Nathan
GOLD:	David Makes Solomon King

ID:	1720
INPUT:	▁Liburu a ▁hartu ▁zuenean , ▁lau ▁izakiak ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁lau ▁zaharrak ▁Bildotsaren ▁aurrean ▁ahuspeztu ▁ziren . ▁Z itara ▁bana ▁zuten ▁eta ▁intsen tsuz ▁beteriko ▁urrezko ▁ontziak , ▁Jainkoarenak ▁direnen ▁otoi tzen ▁adieraz garri .
PRED:	When the Scriptures saw that the Scriptures had four cherubim had four gold , they worshiped God . They bowed down to the Ark of God and worshiped him .
GOLD:	And when he took the scroll , the four living beings and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb . Each one had a harp , and they held gold bowls filled with incense , which are the prayers of God 's people .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁kutsatua ▁zegoela ▁ikusi ▁nuen , ▁biak ▁bide ▁beretik ▁zebil tzala .
PRED:	When I saw that the man was ceremonially unclean , I saw that the same man is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	I saw the way she was going , defiling herself just like her older sister .

ID:	1722
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Learen ▁eskaria ▁aditu ▁zuen : ▁haurdun ▁gertatu ▁eta ▁bosgarren ▁semea ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jakobi .
PRED:	When she heard her , she became pregnant and gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	And God answered Leah 's prayers . She became pregnant again and gave birth to a fifth son for Jacob .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	▁Hitz aldi ▁honetatik ▁zortzi ren ▁bat ▁egunera , ▁Pedro , ▁Joan ▁eta ▁Santiago ▁berekin ▁hartu ▁eta ▁mendira ▁igo ▁zen ▁Jesus , ▁otoitz era .
PRED:	In this time , Peter and John went to the mountain of James and John , James , James , and John went to the mountain .
GOLD:	About eight days later Jesus took Peter , John , and James up on a mountain to pray .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁« Sartu ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁hauek ▁hemen ▁egiten ▁ari ▁diren ▁higuingarri tasun ▁izugarriak ».
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ All these detestable things are detestable to me . ”
GOLD:	“ Go in , ” he said , “ and see the wicked and detestable sins they are committing in there ! ”

ID:	1725
INPUT:	▁koin atak , ▁hurbilduz , ▁sandal ia ▁erantz iko ▁dio ▁eta ▁aurpegira ▁listua ▁botako ▁herri - arduradun en ▁aurrean , ▁esanez : ▁“ Hara ▁zer ▁egiten ▁zaion ▁bere ▁anaiari ▁familia ▁eman ▁nahi ▁ez ▁dion ▁gizonari ”.
PRED:	Then the man jumped up to his brother , and she is your servant . He said to her , ‘ Listen to the man who has shown him . '
GOLD:	the widow must walk over to him in the presence of the elders , pull his sandal from his foot , and spit in his face . Then she must declare , ‘ This is what happens to a man who refuses to provide his brother with children . '

ID:	1726
INPUT:	▁Bi ek ▁elkar ▁harturik , mendeb aldeko ▁filiste arre ia tzetik ▁erasoko ▁diete , sor taldeko ▁herri e iab eras tasunak ▁kenduko . Edom ▁eta ▁Moaben ▁jabe ▁egingo ▁dira , eta ▁amondarrak men peko ▁izango ▁dituzte .
PRED:	The five of the north will run to the west of the west of the west . The people will run away from the west of the Jordan River , and the people of Israel will run away from the land of Moab .
GOLD:	They will join forces to swoop down on Philistia to the west.Together they will attack and plunder the nations to the east.They will occupy the lands of Edom and Moab , and Ammon will obey them .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	▁argiz ▁inguratua ▁soineko z ▁bezala . O ih al - etxola ▁bezala ▁zabaltzen ▁duzu ▁zerua ,
PRED:	The heavens like a white cloak , like the heavens ; you covered the heavens .
GOLD:	You are dressed in a robe of light.You stretch out the starry curtain of the heavens ;

ID:	1728
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁bere ▁ama ▁eta ▁honen ▁ondoan ▁maite ▁zuen ▁ikaslea ▁ikusirik , ▁esan ▁zion ▁amari : ▁« Emakume , ▁horra ▁hor ▁zure ▁semea ».
PRED:	When Jesus saw his mother and mother , he loved her , she said to her , “ My mother is sick . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus saw his mother standing there beside the disciple he loved , he said to her , “ Dear woman , here is your son . ”

ID:	1729
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁Jakoben ▁senitarte aren ▁historia . Jose , ▁hamazazpi ▁urteko ▁gaztea ▁zelarik , ▁artzain tzan ▁zebilen ▁bere ▁anai ekin , ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁emazte ▁Bilha ▁eta ▁Zil paren ▁semeekin . ▁Josek ▁bere ▁anaien ▁gaiztakeriaren ▁berri ▁ematen ▁zion ▁aitari .
PRED:	This is the account of Jacob 's family — his sons and his sons — a shepherd named after their father 's sons . When Joseph heard his father , he gave his father and mother to his father , Joseph .
GOLD:	This is the account of Jacob and his family . When Joseph was seventeen years old , he often tended his father 's flocks . He worked for his half brothers , the sons of his father 's wives Bilhah and Zilpah . But Joseph reported to his father some of the bad things his brothers were doing .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemera ▁hurbildu ▁zirenean , ▁Oliamendi ▁inguruko ▁Bet fa ge ▁eta ▁Betan ia ▁herrixk etara ▁iritsirik , ▁bere ▁ikasleetako ▁bi ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁Jesusek ,
PRED:	When they arrived at Jerusalem , Jesus sent a message to the Mount of Olives , and he sent two of Olives to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	As Jesus and his disciples approached Jerusalem , they came to the towns of Bethphage and Bethany on the Mount of Olives . Jesus sent two of them on ahead .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁adierazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Egon ▁diren eko ▁nazioen ▁artetik ▁batuko ▁ditut ▁israeldarrak ; ▁alde ▁guztietatik ▁bildu ▁eta ▁beren ▁lurraldera ▁eramango ▁ditut .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Sovereign Lord : I am giving them to the people of Israel . I will bring them to the foreigners living among the nations .
GOLD:	And give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : I will gather the people of Israel from among the nations . I will bring them home to their own land from the places where they have been scattered .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna Sion ▁mendian , ▁Jerusalemen , errege ▁izango ▁denean , il argia ▁eta ▁eguzkia ezku tatu ▁egingo ▁dira ▁lotsaz , hain ▁azalduko ▁baita ▁ospetsu , bere ▁zerbitzari ez ▁inguraturik .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the king of Heaven 's Armies , will come down on Mount Zion , O Jerusalem , for they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the moon will wane , and the brightness of the sun will fade , for the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will rule on Mount Zion.He will rule in great glory in Jerusalem , in the sight of all the leaders of his people .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jesus ▁maltzurkeriaz ▁atxilo tzea ▁eta ▁hiltzea ▁erabaki ▁zuten .
PRED:	They arrested Jesus and arrested him .
GOLD:	plotting how to capture Jesus secretly and kill him .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	▁Etorri ▁den ▁bidetik ▁itzuliko ▁da ; ez ▁da ▁sartuko ▁hiri ▁honetan . Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	He will return to the way , ” says the Lord. “ I will return to this city . ”
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , says the Lord .

ID:	1735
INPUT:	▁ezkondua , ▁berriz , ▁munduko ▁gauzez , ▁bere ▁emazteari ▁atsegin ▁nola ▁emango ,
PRED:	He will give his wife to his wife , and he will give his wife to his wife .
GOLD:	But a married man has to think about his earthly responsibilities and how to please his wife .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	▁eta ▁lurralde ▁hartan ▁guztian ▁barrena ▁joan ▁ziren ; ▁eta ▁Jesus ▁non , ▁hara xe ▁eramaten ▁zizkioten ▁gaixoak ▁ohatil etan .
PRED:	So they went out to the land of the town and went down to the village . They came to the village of Jesus .
GOLD:	and they ran throughout the whole area , carrying sick people on mats to wherever they heard he was .

ID:	1737
INPUT:	▁edo ▁ehun ean , ▁larru an ▁nahiz ▁edozein ▁larru ki tan ▁mantxa ▁agertzen ▁bada ,
PRED:	If the mildew finds that the mildew has been contaminated , the contaminated area must pronounce the mildew , or the mildew ,
GOLD:	woolen or linen fabric , the hide of an animal , or anything made of leather .

ID:	1738
INPUT:	▁Ip arralde aren ▁aurk aluz atuko ▁du ▁eskua ▁Jaunak : Asiri a ▁erabat ▁galduko ▁dueta ▁Ninive ▁hondamendi ▁bihurtuko , bas amor tua ▁bezain ▁gorri .
PRED:	“ The Lord will strike his people ; he will destroy the nations .
GOLD:	And the Lord will strike the lands of the north with his fist , destroying the land of Assyria.He will make its great capital , Nineveh , a desolate wasteland , parched like a desert .

ID:	1739
INPUT:	▁Elimelek ▁eta ▁bere ▁familia ▁Moaben
PRED:	The family of Moab
GOLD:	Elimelech Moves His Family to Moab

ID:	1740
INPUT:	▁Ikusten ▁ari ▁gara ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁haserrea ▁agertzen ▁duela ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztien ▁gain ▁zerutik , ▁sinesgabe ▁eta ▁zuzen gabe ▁direlako , ▁eta ▁beren ▁zuzen gabekeriaz ▁egia ▁ito ▁egin ▁dutelako .
PRED:	For we see God 's anger , and we are filled with violence . They are filled with wickedness , and their hearts are filled with wickedness .
GOLD:	But God shows his anger from heaven against all sinful , wicked people who suppress the truth by their wickedness .

ID:	1741
INPUT:	▁Bat - batean , ▁lurrikara ▁gogorra ▁gertatu ▁zen : ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua ▁jaitsi ▁zen ▁zerutik ▁eta , ▁hurbildurik , ▁harria ▁bi ratu ▁zuen ▁eta ▁gainean ▁eseri .
PRED:	Suddenly , the angel of the Lord came down from heaven and went down to the throne of the Lord . He sat down and sat down on a stone and sat down on it .
GOLD:	Suddenly there was a great earthquake ! For an angel of the Lord came down from heaven , rolled aside the stone , and sat on it .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	▁Elik ▁Elkana ▁eta ▁beronen ▁emaztea ▁bedeinkatu ▁eta ▁esan ▁ohi ▁zuen : ▁« Eman ▁biez azu ▁Jaunak ▁seme - alabarik ▁emakume ▁honen gandik , ▁Jaunari ▁eskainitako aren ▁ordez ». Ondoren , ▁beren ▁herrira ▁itzuli ▁ohi ▁ziren .
PRED:	She blessed her and his wife , and she said to the Lord , “ May the Lord give her children to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Before they returned home , Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife and say , “ May the Lord give you other children to take the place of this one she gave to the Lord . ”

ID:	1743
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez : ▁ongia ▁gorroto eta ▁gaizkia ▁maite ▁duzue . L arru a ▁kentzen ▁diozue ▁jendeari , eta ▁hezur ▁huts etan ▁uzten ».
PRED:	But do n't turn away from evil , and do n't turn away from the wicked , and you are crushed . ”
GOLD:	but you are the very oneswho hate good and love evil.You skin my people aliveand tear the flesh from their bones .

ID:	1744
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Saulek ▁esan ▁zien ▁berekin ▁zituen ei :— Begi ratu ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁nor ▁joan ▁den ▁gure ▁artetik . Begi ratu ▁zuten , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁Jonatan ▁eta ▁ezkutaria ▁falta ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then Saul said to Saul , “ He is the man who had seen him ! ” So Saul went with him and saw him .
GOLD:	“ Call the roll and find out who 's missing , ” Saul ordered . And when they checked , they found that Jonathan and his armor bearer were gone .

ID:	1745
INPUT:	▁Jauna , zuk ▁sar rarazten ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁herria eta ▁zeure ▁mendian ▁lan datzen , zeure ▁ondar ean , zeure ▁egoitza ▁egin ▁duzun ▁lekuan , zeure ▁eskuz ▁eraiki ▁duzun santu tegian .
PRED:	O Lord your God , let your people go down to the mountain . You have built your sacred pillars , your sacred pillars , so you can build your sanctuary .
GOLD:	You will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain — the place , O Lord , reserved for your own dwelling , the sanctuary , O Lord , that your hands have established .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁kanpaleku ▁inguruan ▁nor ▁bere ▁tokian ▁zeudelarik , ▁kanpaleku koak ▁lasterka , ▁garrasika ▁eta ▁ihes ka ▁hasi ▁ziren .
PRED:	The people of Israel attacked their camp with their camp , and they fled to their camp .
GOLD:	Each man stood at his position around the camp and watched as all the Midianites rushed around in a panic , shouting as they ran to escape .

ID:	1747
INPUT:	▁Lan ▁egin ▁eta ▁ogia ▁irabazi
PRED:	Instructions for food and bread
GOLD:	An Exhortation to Proper Living

ID:	1748
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁zabalduko ▁dizkio ▁mutur reko ▁bi ▁ateak , h agin ▁beldur garriz ▁inguraturik ▁dituenak ?
PRED:	Who will be able to pour out the doors of the doors of its doors ?
GOLD:	Will merchants try to buy itto sell it in their shops ?

ID:	1749
INPUT:	▁Barukek ▁Jaunaren ▁mezuak ▁tenpluan ▁irakurri
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer for the Lord
GOLD:	Baruch Reads the Lord 's Messages

ID:	1750
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁bada , ▁ene ▁senideok , ▁zuek ▁ere ▁hil ▁zen ▁Kristoren ▁gorpu tzeko ▁eginak ▁izan ▁zaretenez ▁gero , ▁lege arentzat ▁hilda ▁zaudete , ▁eta ▁beste ▁bat enak ▁zarete ▁jadanik ▁— hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁zen arenak , ▁alegia —, ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁fruitu ▁onak ▁emateko .
PRED:	So my brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , you have died by the law of Christ . When you are dead , you are dead , you are dead , you are raised from the dead .
GOLD:	So , my dear brothers and sisters , this is the point : You died to the power of the law when you died with Christ . And now you are united with the one who was raised from the dead . As a result , we can produce a harvest of good deeds for God .

ID:	1751
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain ▁zer ? ▁Etsai ▁bihurtu ▁ote ▁natzaizue ▁egia ▁esan ▁dizu ed alako ?
PRED:	Why do you realize that I am the truth ? Do you accuse you of the truth ?
GOLD:	Have I now become your enemy because I am telling you the truth ?

ID:	1752
INPUT:	▁Emakume ari ▁esan ▁zion :« Haur dun ▁geldi tzean , oinaz eak ▁ugalduko ▁dizkizu teta ▁saminez ▁izango ▁dituzu ▁haurrak ; irri tsak ▁senarraren gan ab ultz atuko ▁zaitu , eta ▁hura ▁izango ▁duzu ▁nagusi ».
PRED:	Then she said to her , “ I will comfort you with you , my children , and your children will be clothed with her . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to the woman , “ I will sharpen the pain of your pregnancy , and in pain you will give birth.And you will desire to control your husband , but he will rule over you . ”

ID:	1753
INPUT:	▁Tx alu para ▁igo ▁zitzaien , ▁eta ▁haizea ▁baretu ▁egin ▁zen . ▁Are ▁harri tua go ▁gelditu ▁ziren ,
PRED:	When the disciples got up , the wind stopped , and the wind stopped .
GOLD:	Then he climbed into the boat , and the wind stopped . They were totally amazed ,

ID:	1754
INPUT:	▁Handik , ▁Atz mon dik ▁igaroz , ▁Egiptoko ▁errekara ▁heltzen ▁zen ▁eta ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoan ▁amaitzen . ▁Hau ▁zen ▁Judaren ▁leinuaren ▁hegoaldeko ▁muga .
PRED:	From the boundary of Egypt were camped at the Mediterranean Sea . It was the southern border of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	From there it passed to Azmon until it finally reached the Brook of Egypt , which it followed to the Mediterranean Sea . This was their southern boundary .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	▁Hegazti etako ▁bat ▁iturburuko ▁ura ▁daukan ▁buztinezko ▁ontzi ▁baten ▁gainean ▁hilaraziko ▁du .
PRED:	He will pour out the birds of the birds of a clay jar .
GOLD:	The priest will order that one bird be slaughtered over a clay pot filled with fresh water .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	▁Brontzezko ▁ateak ▁puskatu ▁zituen , b urdinazko ▁morroiloak ▁apurtu .
PRED:	He made the doors of bronze ; he installed its bolts and bronze .
GOLD:	For he broke down their prison gates of bronze ; he cut apart their bars of iron .

ID:	1757
INPUT:	▁Salomonek ▁bere ▁jauregia ▁ere ▁eraiki ▁zuen . ▁Ham ahiru ▁urte ▁behar ▁izan ▁zituen ▁erabat ▁bukatzeko .
PRED:	Solomon built an alliance for the palace . He built an end to his palace .
GOLD:	Solomon also built a palace for himself , and it took him thirteen years to complete the construction .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	▁Abram ▁Egiptora ▁heldu ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁egiptoarrek ▁oso ▁ederra ▁zela ▁haren ▁emaztea .
PRED:	When Abram reached Egypt , Abram saw that his wife had been as beautiful as beautiful as his wife .
GOLD:	And sure enough , when Abram arrived in Egypt , everyone noticed Sarai 's beauty .

ID:	1759
INPUT:	▁eta ▁hamaikagarren ▁urteko ▁Bul ▁hilean , ▁hots , ▁zortzigarren ▁hilabetean ▁bukatu ▁zuten ▁oso - osorik , ▁egi ta mu ▁guztien ▁arabera . ▁Beraz , ▁zazpi ▁urtetan ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁tenplua ▁Salomonek .
PRED:	On the seventh year of the reign of the first year of the new year , the new year of the Lord had built for seven years . So Solomon built seven years .
GOLD:	The entire building was completed in every detail by midautumn , in the month of Bul , during the eleventh year of his reign . So it took seven years to build the Temple .

ID:	1760
INPUT:	▁Jerikon ▁zegoen ▁profeta - taldea ▁Eliseoren gana ▁hurbildu ▁eta ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion :— Ba ▁al ▁dakizu ▁gaur ▁mai sua ▁airean ▁eramango ▁dizula ▁Jaunak ? Eliseok ▁erantzun :— Bai , ▁badakit , ▁baina ▁egon ▁isilik !
PRED:	When Elisha arrived , Elisha said to Elisha , “ Do you realize that the Lord said to Elisha , ‘ You know that the Lord is doing ? ” “ Yes , ” Elisha replied .
GOLD:	Then the group of prophets from Jericho came to Elisha and asked him , “ Did you know that the Lord is going to take your master away from you today ? ” “ Of course I know , ” Elisha answered . “ But be quiet about it . ”

ID:	1761
INPUT:	▁Morroiak ▁esan ▁zien :— Ez ▁nazazue ▁atzer arazi , ▁Jaunak ▁nire ▁bidaiari ▁bukaera ▁ona ▁eman ▁dion ez ▁gero . ▁Uz ta zue ▁neure ▁nagusiagana ▁itzultzen .
PRED:	“ Do n't let me go , ” the man said . “ Do n't let me go to my master , ” the Lord said .
GOLD:	But he said , “ Do n't delay me . The Lord has made my mission successful ; now send me back so I can return to my master . ”

ID:	1762
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁zoragarria ▁zure ▁maitasuna , ▁oi ▁Jainko ! Zure ▁hegal pera ▁biltzen ▁dira ▁gizakiak .
PRED:	O God , you are your unfailing love , O God !
GOLD:	You feed them from the abundance of your own house , letting them drink from your river of delights .

ID:	1763
INPUT:	▁Santutegi rako ▁olibondo - zurezko ▁hegaldun ▁izaki ▁bi ▁egin ▁zituen , ▁bos na ▁metro ▁luz ekoak .
PRED:	He made two quarts of olive oil ; he made two quarts of olive oil .
GOLD:	He made two cherubim of wild olive wood , each 15 feet tall , and placed them in the inner sanctuary .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁ez ▁du ▁onik ▁izango eta ▁ez ▁du ▁bere ▁bizia ▁luzatuko itz al ▁bat ▁adina , ez ▁baitio ▁begirunerik ▁Jainkoari ».
PRED:	The wicked will not find a life , and no one will save them . ”
GOLD:	The wicked will not prosper , for they do not fear God . Their days will never grow long like the evening shadows .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	▁Zintzoak ▁bizitza ▁pozgarria ▁espero ▁du , gaiztoaren ▁itxaropenak ▁porrot ▁egiten .
PRED:	The godly will sing for joy ; your life is sweet to the wicked .
GOLD:	The hopes of the godly result in happiness , but the expectations of the wicked come to nothing .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	▁I tsu ok ▁halakook ! ▁Zer ▁da ▁handiago : ▁oparia ▁ala ▁oparia ▁sagaratzen ▁duen ▁aldarea ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the burnt offering is a pleasing aroma to the altar ?
GOLD:	How blind ! For which is more important — the gift on the altar or the altar that makes the gift sacred ?

ID:	1767
INPUT:	▁An tzal daketa : ▁nekaldi ▁os teko ▁aintza ▁aurrez ▁agertu
PRED:	The Coming of God 's Power
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	1768
INPUT:	▁nahiago ▁izan ▁zuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁herriarekin ▁batera ▁tratu ▁txarrak ▁jasan , ▁bekatuaren ▁atsegin ▁iragan korrak ▁gozatu ▁baino .
PRED:	For he was very angry with the sins of God , for he has been offered to sin .
GOLD:	He chose to share the oppression of God 's people instead of enjoying the fleeting pleasures of sin .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁aingeruak ▁airean ▁isuri ▁zuen ▁bere ▁ontzia , ▁eta ▁zeruko ▁tenpluko ▁tronu tik ▁ahots ▁handia ▁atera ▁zen ▁esanez : ▁« Egin a ▁dago ».
PRED:	In the seventh day the angel poured out his throne from heaven and the throne of heaven . He said , “ This is a great throne ! ”
GOLD:	Then the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air . And a mighty shout came from the throne in the Temple , saying , “ It is finished ! ”

ID:	1770
INPUT:	▁zeure ▁etsaiak ▁oinazpian ▁jartzen ▁dizkizudan ▁bitartean ”.
PRED:	When you hide your feet in your feet , you must wash your feet in your feet .
GOLD:	until I humble your enemies , making them a footstool under your feet . '

ID:	1771
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Espiritu ▁Santua ▁jaitsi ▁zitzaion ▁gainera , ▁uso - tan keran ▁agertuz . ▁Eta ▁mintzo ▁hau ▁etorri ▁zen ▁zerutik : ▁« Zu ▁zaitut ▁neure ▁Semea , ▁neure ▁maitea , ▁zu ▁zaitut ▁atsegin ».
PRED:	The Holy Spirit came to the Holy Spirit , and he spoke to him . He said , “ I am the Son of heaven , the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	and the Holy Spirit , in bodily form , descended on him like a dove . And a voice from heaven said , “ You are my dearly loved Son , and you bring me great joy . ”

ID:	1772
INPUT:	▁Oso ▁zaharra ▁zen ▁Eli . ▁Jakin ▁zuen ▁bere ▁semeek ▁israeldar ▁guztiei ▁egin ▁ohi ▁zieten a , ▁baita ▁Jaunaren ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ▁zerbitzua ▁egiten ▁zuten ▁emakumeekin ▁etzan ▁ohi ▁zirela ▁ere ,
PRED:	When Saul realized that the older sons of Israel were still in the presence of the Lord , the sons of Israel stood at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Now Eli was very old , but he was aware of what his sons were doing to the people of Israel . He knew , for instance , that his sons were seducing the young women who assisted at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	▁Arro pa ▁sak ratuz ▁jantziko ▁duzu ▁Aaron ▁eta , ▁gainera ▁olioa ▁isuriz , ▁nire ▁apaiz - zerbitzurako ▁sagaratuko .
PRED:	Put your garments on Aaron 's head and put them on the head of Aaron .
GOLD:	Dress Aaron with the sacred garments and anoint him , consecrating him to serve me as a priest .

ID:	1774
INPUT:	▁Emaguzu ▁laguntza ▁etsaien ▁kontra , giza ▁laguntza ▁alferrik ▁baita .
PRED:	Give us victory to our enemies , for we are our God .
GOLD:	With God 's help we will do mighty things , for he will trample down our foes .

ID:	1775
INPUT:	▁bestela , ▁entzun ▁niri ; zu ▁isilik ▁egon , ▁eta ▁jakinduria ▁irakatsiko ▁dizut ».
PRED:	If you listen to me , I will answer you . ”
GOLD:	But if not , then listen to me.Keep silent and I will teach you wisdom ! ”

ID:	1776
INPUT:	▁Nahiz ▁argiaren ▁sor l ek urantz ▁hegal datu , nahiz ▁mendebaldeko ▁itsas ▁mugetan ▁kokatu ,
PRED:	“ When you make the light of the sea , do n't make it safe in the sea .
GOLD:	If I ride the wings of the morning , if I dwell by the farthest oceans ,

ID:	1777
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haiek ▁ere ▁joan ▁egin ▁ziren .« Atera ▁zen ▁berriro <unk> iak ▁aldera ▁eta ▁hirurak ▁aldera , ▁eta ▁gauza ▁bera ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	So they went to the gate , and he went to the other side of the Sea .
GOLD:	So they went to work in the vineyard . At noon and again at three o'clock he did the same thing .

ID:	1778
INPUT:	▁David ▁hiri - sarrerako ▁bi ▁ate en ▁artean ▁zegoen ▁eseria . ▁Ate ▁gaineko ▁solairu ra ▁igo a ▁zegoen ▁zaintzaileak ▁begiak ▁jaso ▁eta ▁gizon ▁bat ▁bakarrik ▁lasterka ▁zetorrela ▁ikusi ▁zuen ,
PRED:	David was sitting on the gate , one sitting on the gate . When David saw two men standing beside the gate , he ran to the gate .
GOLD:	While David was sitting between the inner and outer gates of the town , the watchman climbed to the roof of the gateway by the wall . As he looked , he saw a lone man running toward them .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Em aus ko ▁ikasleei ▁agertu
PRED:	Jesus Appears to Nazareth
GOLD:	The Resurrection

ID:	1780
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁jatorri ▁aukera tuz <unk> , ▁errege - apaiz go , ▁nazio ▁sagaratu , ▁Jainkoak ▁beretzat ▁irabazi tako ▁herri , ▁ilunp etatik ▁bere ▁argi ▁zoragarri ra ▁deitu ▁zaituzten ▁Jainkoaren ▁egintza ▁bikainak ▁iragar ▁ditzazuen .
PRED:	But you have been given to the kings of the priests , priests , priests , priests , priests , and priests who belong to God . In this way , you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	But you are not like that , for you are a chosen people . You are royal priests , a holy nation , God 's very own possession . As a result , you can show others the goodness of God , for he called you out of the darkness into his wonderful light .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	▁Honen ▁bitartez g ara ▁oinordeko ▁gu ▁ere , lehen dik ▁Mesiasen gan itxaro pen ▁genuen ok , gauza ▁guztiak ▁berak ▁nahi ▁bezala egiten ▁dituen ▁Jainkoak aur rez ▁aukeratu ▁baikaitu bere ▁asmo aren ▁arabera , bere ▁aintzaren ▁gorespen - kantu izan ▁gaitezen .
PRED:	This is what God has promised to us , so we can stand firm in the glorious presence of the Lord our God , who has chosen us . He will show us his glory to his name .
GOLD:	Furthermore , because we are united with Christ , we have received an inheritance from God , for he chose us in advance , and he makes everything work out according to his plan .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	▁Labanek ▁esan ▁zion :— Entzun , ▁mesedez . ▁Goi - argiz ▁jakin ▁dut ▁zuri ▁esker ▁bedeinkatu ▁nauela ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , ” Laban said . “ I have seen your unfailing love . ”
GOLD:	“ Please listen to me , ” Laban replied . “ I have become wealthy , for the Lord has blessed me because of you .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁apaiza ▁seiehun ▁gizon ▁armatu ▁haiekin ▁etxe - atarian ▁zegoen ▁bitartean , ▁lurraldea ▁iker tua ▁zuten ▁bost ▁gizon ▁haiek ▁etxean ▁sartu ▁eta ▁idoloa , ▁efoda , ▁etxe - jainkoen ▁irudiak ▁eta ▁metal ▁urtuzko ▁irudia ▁hartu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So the priest went to the town of the camp , where the land had been made in the house of the town . They took five loaves and placed them in the house of worship . They took a carved carved carved carved carved carved carved carved carved carved carved carved carved image and placed them with carved image .
GOLD:	the five scouts entered the shrine and removed the carved image , the sacred ephod , the household idols , and the cast idol . Meanwhile , the priest was standing at the gate with the 600 armed warriors .

ID:	1784
INPUT:	▁Lainoa ▁egoitzaren ▁gainean
PRED:	Instructions for the Tabernacle
GOLD:	The Fiery Cloud

ID:	1785
INPUT:	▁Ekialdetik ▁dei ▁egin ▁diot ▁gizon ▁bati , urrutiko ▁herrialdetik : hegazti ▁harrapari aren ▁antzera ▁etorri eta ▁nire ▁egitasmoa ▁beteko ▁du . Hala ▁esan ▁dut ▁eta ▁hala ▁ger taraziko , hala ▁erabaki ▁eta ▁hala ▁egingo .
PRED:	“ I will tell you , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will come to you , ” says the Lord. “ I will come to you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I will call a swift bird of prey from the east — a leader from a distant land to come and do my bidding.I have said what I would do , and I will do it .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁denbora ▁gutxiko ▁izan ▁del azure ▁herri ▁santua ▁lurraldearen ▁jabe ! Prof an atua ▁dute ▁etsaiek zure ▁santutegia .
PRED:	The whole earth has been stripped of your holy people , and your enemies have fallen beneath your sanctuary .
GOLD:	How briefly your holy people possessed your holy place , and now our enemies have destroyed it .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁erreinuan ▁bizirik ▁geldituak , lurrean ▁sustraiak ▁botatzen eta ▁adarretan ▁fruituak ematen ▁dituzten zuhaitz ▁izango ▁dira ▁berriro .
PRED:	Those who live in the city will live in the city of Judah , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	And you who are left in Judah , who have escaped the ravages of the siege , will put roots down in your own soiland grow up and flourish .

ID:	1788
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁behartsuak ▁beti ▁dituzue ▁zeuen ▁artean , ▁eta ▁nahi ▁duzuenean ▁egin ▁diezaiek ezue ▁on . ▁Baina ▁ni ▁ez ▁nauzue ▁betiko ▁zuekin .
PRED:	For you are poor among the poor , and you are doing what you have done . But you will never be able to follow me .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , and you can help them whenever you want to . But you will not always have me .

ID:	1789
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁baduzu ▁gauza ▁onik : ▁gure ▁lurraldean ▁zeuden ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁erre ▁eta ▁Jaunarengana ▁jotzen ▁saiatu ▁izana ».
PRED:	But if you do n't know what we have done to the Lord our God , we burned incense to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Even so , there is some good in you , for you have removed the Asherah poles throughout the land , and you have committed yourself to seeking God . ”

ID:	1790
INPUT:	▁Errege - alabak ▁dituzu ▁inguruan , zure ▁eskuinean ▁erregina , ▁urre ▁fin ez ▁apain durik .
PRED:	Your children are filled with gold , and your gold .
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	1791
INPUT:	▁Mah aia ▁eramateko ▁hagak ▁akazia - zurez ▁egin ▁zituen ▁eta ▁urreztatu .
PRED:	He overlaid them with gold and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He made these poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	▁Bak ezko ▁garaia
PRED:	A Call to Eliphaz
GOLD:	A Branch from David 's Line

ID:	1793
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁bada , ▁atera ▁zen ▁gudarostea ▁zelai ra , ▁israeldarrei ▁aurre ▁egitera . ▁Efraimgo ▁oih anean ▁ekin ▁zioten ▁guduari .
PRED:	So the army of Israel went out to the town of the land of Ephraim , in the middle of the hill country of Ephraim .
GOLD:	So the battle began in the forest of Ephraim ,

ID:	1794
INPUT:	▁Moisesen ▁legea ▁ezagutzen ▁ez ▁dutenekin , ▁legea ▁kontuan ▁hartu ▁gabe ▁bizi ▁izan ▁naiz , ▁legea ▁ezagutzen ▁ez ▁dutenak ▁irabazteko ; ▁ez , ▁noski , ▁Jainkoaren ▁legerik ▁onartzen ▁ez ▁dudalako , ▁nire ▁legea ▁Kristo ▁baita .
PRED:	For those who do n't know the law of Moses , for I have not been given to the law of God . I have not been given to the law of God .
GOLD:	When I am with the Gentiles who do not follow the Jewish law , I too live apart from that law so I can bring them to Christ . But I do not ignore the law of God ; I obey the law of Christ .

ID:	1795
INPUT:	▁ur ▁gainean ▁ibiltzen ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁eta , ▁mam ua ▁zelakoan , ▁oihuka ▁hasi ▁ziren ;
PRED:	When they saw the water , they cried out , “ You 're saying , ” they cried out .
GOLD:	but when they saw him walking on the water , they cried out in terror , thinking he was a ghost .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	▁honela , ▁Baal - P e orren ▁kultu etara ▁makurtu ▁zen ▁herria ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁haserre - sua ▁piztu ▁zen ▁Israelen ▁aurka .
PRED:	He bowed down to worship the worship of Baal and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	In this way , Israel joined in the worship of Baal of Peor , causing the Lord 's anger to blaze against his people .

ID:	1797
INPUT:	▁Gaizto aren ▁p atu ▁ikaragarria
PRED:	A Warning against the wicked
GOLD:	Bildad 's Second Response to Job

ID:	1798
INPUT:	▁David ▁Jerusalemdik ▁ihesi
PRED:	David 's Return to Jerusalem
GOLD:	David Escapes from Jerusalem

ID:	1799
INPUT:	▁Eliasek , ▁berriro , ▁Eliseori :— Gelditu ▁hemen ; ▁Jaunak ▁ni ▁Jordanera ▁bidaltzen ▁nau . Eliseok ▁erantzun :— Ala ▁Jauna , ▁ala ▁zu ! ▁Ez ▁zaitut ▁bakarrik ▁utziko . Eta ▁biak ▁joan ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Elijah , “ Stay here , ” Elijah replied . “ As surely as the Lord lives , the Lord lives of the Jordan River , ” the Lord replied . “ Do n't go out to the Jordan . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to Elisha , “ Stay here , for the Lord has told me to go to the Jordan River. ” But again Elisha replied , “ As surely as the Lord lives and you yourself live , I will never leave you. ” So they went on together .

ID:	1800
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁utzi ▁eta ▁jainko ▁arrotzak ▁zerbitzatzen ▁badituzue , ▁kontra ▁jarriko ▁zaizue ▁eta , ▁hainbeste ▁on ▁egin ▁ondoren , ▁gaizki ▁erabiliko ▁zaituzte ▁eta ▁suntsituko .
PRED:	If you serve other gods and worship other gods , you will be filled with good deeds , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If you abandon the Lord and serve other gods , he will turn against you and destroy you , even though he has been so good to you . ”

ID:	1801
INPUT:	▁Jainkoa ▁giz adi ▁osoaren ▁salbatzaile
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	Salvation Is for Everyone

ID:	1802
INPUT:	▁Aitzitik , ▁dei ▁egin ▁dizuen ▁Jainkoa ▁santu ▁den ▁bezala , ▁izan ▁zuek ▁ere ▁santu ▁zeuen ▁biziera ▁guztian .
PRED:	Instead , you are God , just as you are holy , just as you are holy .
GOLD:	But now you must be holy in everything you do , just as God who chose you is holy .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	▁Niniv et arrek ▁ere ▁auzi - egunean ▁gizaldi ▁honen ▁kontra ▁altxatu ▁eta ▁kondenatu ▁egingo ▁dute , ▁beraiek ▁bihozberri tu ▁egin ▁baitziren ▁Jon asen ▁predik u az , ▁eta ▁baduzue ▁hemen ▁Jonas ▁baino ▁handiagoa ▁den ▁bat .
PRED:	The people of Nineveh will stand against Nineveh and condemn the people of Nineveh . They did n't repent of their sins . But if you have repented of the sins of Jonah and turned away from the sins of Jonah .
GOLD:	The people of Nineveh will also stand up against this generation on judgment day and condemn it , for they repented of their sins at the preaching of Jonah . Now someone greater than Jonah is here — but you refuse to repent .

ID:	1804
INPUT:	▁« Zeure ▁senideak , Jakoben ▁ondorengoak , gogor ki ▁erabili ▁baitituzu ▁eta ▁hil , lots ak ▁estaliko ▁zaitu , behin ▁betiko ▁egingo ▁du ▁zureak .
PRED:	“ You are your relatives , your descendants , your descendants , your descendants , and your descendants will be cursed , and you will live forever .
GOLD:	“ Because of the violence you didto your close relatives in Israel , you will be filled with shameand destroyed forever .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	▁gari , ▁garagar , ▁mahasti , ▁pikondo , ▁grana don do , ▁olibondo ▁eta ▁ez tiz ▁hornitua ;
PRED:	olive trees , olive oil , olive oil , and olive oil for the olive trees .
GOLD:	It is a land of wheat and barley ; of grapevines , fig trees , and pomegranates ; of olive oil and honey .

ID:	1806
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Nabukodonosor ▁erregeak , ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspezturik , ▁ohore ▁eman ▁zion ▁Danieli , ▁eta ▁opariak ▁eta ▁intsentsua ▁eskaintzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon bowed down to the ground and worshiped him .
GOLD:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar threw himself down before Daniel and worshiped him , and he commanded his people to offer sacrifices and burn sweet incense before him .

ID:	1807
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hau ▁ere ▁esan ▁zidan ▁Jaunak :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1808
INPUT:	▁Alferrik ▁zigortu ▁ditu tzuen ▁seme - alabak , ez ▁baituzue ▁eskarmen turik ▁hartu . Zeuek ▁hil ▁dituzue ▁profetak ▁ezpataz , lehoi ▁amorratu ak ▁bezala .
PRED:	But you will bring your children to your children , and you will die before you . You are your prophets , just as you have died .
GOLD:	“ I have punished your children , but they did not respond to my discipline.You yourselves have killed your prophetsas a lion kills its prey .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ez ▁dizut , ▁bada , ▁esan , ▁sinesten ▁baduzu ▁Jainkoaren ▁aintza ▁ikusiko ▁duzula ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I do n't believe you , ” Jesus replied . “ If you see that you do n't know the glory of God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	1810
INPUT:	▁Jeremias ▁bere ▁herriarengatik ▁nahigabe tua
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer for the People
GOLD:	Jeremiah Weeps for His People

ID:	1811
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁israeldarren ▁artean ▁ez ▁da ▁ondare - zatirik ▁leinu ▁batetik ▁bestera ▁aldatuko ; ▁israeldarrek ▁nork ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁ondare ari ▁atxikirik ▁jarraituko ▁dute .
PRED:	So the people of Israel must not forget any allotment of land , or it will be given to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	None of the territorial land may pass from tribe to tribe , for all the land given to each tribe must remain within the tribe to which it was first allotted .

ID:	1812
INPUT:	▁Aur kitu ▁duzu ▁bere ▁burua ▁zuhur tzat ▁duen ▁norbait ? Ba , ▁gehiago ▁espero ▁daiteke ▁zentzugabe agandik .
PRED:	Do n't you think about a fool ? Can anyone find a fool ?
GOLD:	There is more hope for foolsthan for people who think they are wise .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁etsaiaren ▁hondamendi az ▁poztu , ezta ▁alai ▁jarri ▁ere ▁zoritx arrak ▁jo ▁duenean ;
PRED:	My heart is not glad ; I delight in trouble .
GOLD:	“ Have I ever rejoiced when disaster struck my enemies , or become excited when harm came their way ?

ID:	1814
INPUT:	▁Zeuk , ▁errege , ▁agindu ▁duzu , ▁turuta , ▁txirula , ▁zitara , ▁albo ka , ▁harpa ▁eta ▁beste ▁musika - tresnen ▁hotsa ▁entzun ▁orduko , ▁denek , ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztuz , ▁irudia ▁gurtzeko ,
PRED:	The king commanded you , ‘ You have heard the voice of the Lord , ' when they hear the face of the ground , they bowed down to the ground and worshiped the ground .
GOLD:	You issued a decree requiring all the people to bow down and worship the gold statue when they hear the sound of the horn , flute , zither , lyre , harp , pipes , and other musical instruments .

ID:	1815
INPUT:	▁ehiztari ▁apar ta ▁izan ▁zen , ▁eta ▁hortik ▁dator ▁esaera : ▁« N im ro d ▁adinako ▁ehiztari ▁apar ta ».
PRED:	When he was speaking , he said , “ It is a fool to be like a fool . ”
GOLD:	Since he was the greatest hunter in the world , his name became proverbial . People would say , “ This man is like Nimrod , the greatest hunter in the world . ”

ID:	1816
INPUT:	▁An tzal daketa : ▁nekaldi ▁ondoko ▁aintza ▁aurrez ▁agertu
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	1817
INPUT:	▁Lur rean , ▁ordea , beste ▁zentzugabekeria ▁hau gertatu ▁ohi ▁da : zen bait ▁gizaki ▁zuzen ek gaizkile ei ▁dagokien ▁zoria ▁dute , eta ▁zenbait ▁gizaki ▁gaizto kon gile ei ▁dagokiena . Nire ▁ustez , ▁hau guz tiz ▁zentzu gab ekoa ▁da .
PRED:	But when the king has heard this , he says , “ This is the one who gives birth to those who are wise , but you are wise .
GOLD:	And this is not all that is meaningless in our world . In this life , good people are often treated as though they were wicked , and wicked people are often treated as though they were good . This is so meaningless !

ID:	1818
INPUT:	▁« Hartzazu ▁zeure ▁ardurapean ▁eta ▁ez ▁egin ▁gaitzik ; ▁aitzitik , ▁egiozu ▁berak ▁esandako ▁guztia ».
PRED:	“ Take care of your firstborn sons and do whatever he has done . ”
GOLD:	“ See that he is n't hurt , ” he said . “ Look after him well , and give him anything he wants . ”

ID:	1819
INPUT:	▁Begiratu ▁zorrotz ▁eta ▁gal ▁itzazu mahas tia ▁moztu ▁eta ▁su ▁eman ▁diotenak .
PRED:	As surely as the Lord , I looked up and struck the fire on the fire .
GOLD:	Strengthen the man you love , the son of your choice .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	▁Ar baso ek ▁goresten ▁zintuzten eko gure ▁tenplu ▁santu ▁distiratsu as uak ▁kiskali ▁du . Maite en ▁gen u ena ▁hondaturik ▁dago !
PRED:	O Lord , you have made your holy Temple ; your unfailing love will be filled with unfailing love .
GOLD:	Your holy cities are destroyed.Zion is a wilderness ; yes , Jerusalem is a desolate ruin .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁hartu ▁zekorraren ▁odoletik , ▁eta ▁behatzez ▁aldare - ertzeko ▁adarrak ▁igurtziko ▁dituzu . ▁Gainerako ▁odola ▁aldare - oinean ▁isuriko ▁duzu .
PRED:	Then take some of the blood of the blood of the blood and put it on the horns of the altar . Then you will pour out the rest of the blood of the altar .
GOLD:	Put some of its blood on the horns of the altar with your finger , and pour out the rest at the base of the altar .

ID:	1822
INPUT:	▁« Norbait ▁emakumeekin ▁ohi ▁bezala ▁gizonezko arekin ▁oheratzen ▁bada , ▁higuingarri tasuna ▁egiten ▁dute ▁biek : ▁heriotza - zigorra ▁izango ▁dute . ▁Ber ena ▁izango ▁dute ▁heriotzaren ▁errua .
PRED:	“ If a man has sex with a young woman , they will be put to death . They will be put to death , they will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a man practices homosexuality , having sex with another man as with a woman , both men have committed a detestable act . They must both be put to death , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	1823
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁Samuelek ▁ol iontzia ▁eta ▁anaien ▁aurrean ▁gantzutu ▁zuen . ▁Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁David ▁egun ▁hartaz ▁geroztik . ▁Buka tzean , ▁Samuel ▁Ramara ▁itzuli ▁zen .
PRED:	So Samuel took the cup of olive oil and your sons and daughters before the Lord .
GOLD:	So as David stood there among his brothers , Samuel took the flask of olive oil he had brought and anointed David with the oil . And the Spirit of the Lord came powerfully upon David from that day on . Then Samuel returned to Ramah .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	▁beren ▁erruak ▁eta ▁guraso enak batean ▁ordainduko ▁dituzte . Mendi etan intsentsua ▁erretzen ▁baitzuten eta ▁muinoetan ▁niri ▁irain ▁egiten , orain ▁arteko ▁jokabide en kon tua ▁atera eta ▁ordain ▁bete - betea ▁emango ▁diet ». Jaunak ▁esan ▁du .
PRED:	They will be destroyed by their ancestors , and their ancestors must be burned on the mountain of the mountain . The Lord has spoken to me , for I have spoken ! ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	both for their own sinsand for those of their ancestors , ” says the Lord. “ For they also burned incense on the mountainsand insulted me on the hills.I will pay them back in full !

ID:	1825
INPUT:	▁Salba tzaile ▁indartsua ▁sortu ▁digu bere ▁zerbitzari ▁Daviden ondoren goen ▁artean .
PRED:	Your servants are like a mighty army , and your servant David .
GOLD:	He has sent us a mighty Saviorfrom the royal line of his servant David ,

ID:	1826
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Aaroni ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Hur bildu ▁aldarera ▁eta ▁eskaini ▁zeure ▁barkamen - oparia ▁eta ▁erre - oparia , ▁zeure ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁egiteko ; ▁eskaini ▁herriaren ▁oparia ▁ere , ▁beraren ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁egiteko , ▁Jaunak ▁agindu ▁bezala ».
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Bring them to the altar and offer sacrifices to the altar , and offer sacrifices to the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Come to the altar and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering to purify yourself and the people . Then present the offerings of the people to purify them , making them right with the Lord , just as he has commanded . ”

ID:	1827
INPUT:	▁Troa den ▁ontzia ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Sam o tra zi ara ▁joan ▁ginen ▁zuzenean . ▁Biharamunean ▁N ea pol is era ▁iritsi ▁ginen ,
PRED:	We went to the city of Gaza , and we went to the next day . We went to the next day we went to the next day .
GOLD:	We boarded a boat at Troas and sailed straight across to the island of Samothrace , and the next day we landed at Neapolis .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	▁Asaf ek ▁Josafat ; ▁Josafatek ▁Joram ; ▁Joramek ▁Oz ias ;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat was the father of Jehoshaphat .
GOLD:	Asa was the father of Jehoshaphat.Jehoshaphat was the father of Jehoram.Jehoram was the father of Uzziah .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hainbeste ▁mesede ▁zor ▁diogun ez ▁gero , ▁ez ▁zaigu ▁bidezkoa ▁iruditzen ▁erregeari ▁egiten ▁zaion ▁iraina ; ▁horregatik ▁bidaltzen ▁dizkiogu ▁erregeari ▁argibide ▁hauek ,
PRED:	That is why we are not faithful to the king 's servant , but it is not working for the king 's command .
GOLD:	“ Since we are your loyal subjects and do not want to see the king dishonored in this way , we have sent the king this information .

ID:	1830
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁esan : ▁« Goazen ▁Jaunaren ▁egoitz ara , ahuspez ▁gaitezen ▁haren ▁oin - aulki ▁aurrean !
PRED:	“ Let us go to the Tabernacle , ” he said , “ Let us go to the Ark of the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	Let us go to the sanctuary of the Lord ; let us worship at the footstool of his throne .

ID:	1831
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hauxe ▁diotsuet : ▁Bizi ▁zaitezte ▁Espiritu ari ▁dagokionez , ▁eta ▁ez ▁giza ▁grin ei ▁jarraituz .
PRED:	Yes , I tell you the Holy Spirit , and do n't believe the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	So I say , let the Holy Spirit guide your lives . Then you wo n't be doing what your sinful nature craves .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁aintza ▁hiriaren ▁erditik ▁altxatu ▁eta ▁ekialdera ▁dagoen ▁mendi ▁gainean ▁gelditu ▁zen .
PRED:	Then the glory of the Lord came to the mountain of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord went up from the city and stopped above the mountain to the east .

ID:	1833
INPUT:	▁Z atik etak ▁sortzen ▁dituztenak ▁dira ▁horiek , ▁giza ▁mai lan ▁bakarrik ▁bizi ▁den ▁jendea , ▁Espirituak ▁gidatu ▁gabea .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from these things , for they are not living in the Spirit .
GOLD:	These people are the ones who are creating divisions among you . They follow their natural instincts because they do not have God 's Spirit in them .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	▁Moises ▁bere ▁aitaginarreb ari ▁bidera ▁atera ▁zitzaion , ▁eta , ▁ahuspezturik , ▁besarkatu ▁egin ▁zuen ; ▁elkar ▁agurtu ▁ondoren , ▁oihal - etxolan ▁sartu ▁ziren .
PRED:	When Moses came to his father-in-law , Moses went out to meet him and bowed down to the camp . Then they went up to the tent and went to the camp .
GOLD:	So Moses went out to meet his father-in-law . He bowed low and kissed him . They asked about each other 's welfare and then went into Moses ' tent .

ID:	1835
INPUT:	▁« Beraz , ▁saiatu ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁agindu ▁dizuen ▁guztia ▁betetzen , ▁ezertan ▁ere ▁saihestu ▁gabe .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord your God says : Do not obey your commands .
GOLD:	So Moses told the people , “ You must be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord your God , following his instructions in every detail .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Orain ▁izango ▁duzue ▁froga ▁eta ▁jakingo ▁Jaunak ▁bidali ▁nauela ▁egiteko ▁hau ▁buru tzera , ▁eta ▁ez ▁naizela ▁neure ▁kabuz ▁ari .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ I will know that the Lord has sent this message to you , and I will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And Moses said , “ This is how you will know that the Lord has sent me to do all these things that I have done — for I have not done them on my own .

ID:	1837
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁mihiak ▁zure ▁salbamen - asmo ai ragarri ko ▁du ▁egun ▁osoan , lotsaz ▁eta ▁irainez ▁gelditu ▁baiti ran ire ▁zoritxarraren ▁bila ▁zebiltzanak .
PRED:	Your salvation will come to me , O God , and I will give justice to those who try to help me .
GOLD:	I will tell about your righteous deedsall day long , for everyone who tried to hurt mehas been shamed and humiliated .

ID:	1838
INPUT:	▁Bitartean , ▁han ▁ari ▁ziren ▁apaizburu ▁eta ▁lege - maisuak ▁salatu ▁eta ▁salatu .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and teachers of religious law , the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and the teachers of religious law stood there shouting their accusations .

ID:	1839
INPUT:	▁eta ▁israeldar ▁gudariek , ▁orduan , ▁aurre ▁egingo ▁zi etela ▁benjamindarrei . ▁Hauek , ▁ordurako , ▁hilak ▁zituzten ▁hogeita ▁hamarren ▁bat ▁gizon ▁israeldar ▁eta ▁pentsatzen ▁ari ▁ziren , ▁aurreko ▁gudu ka tze etan ▁bezala , ▁mendera tuak ▁zituztela ▁israeldarrak .
PRED:	So the people of Israel began to attack the men of Benjamin , and they were told them to attack the men of Benjamin . They were killed by the men of Israel and the men of Israel .
GOLD:	When the Israelites saw the smoke , they turned and attacked Benjamin 's warriors.By that time Benjamin 's warriors had killed about thirty Israelites , and they shouted , “ We 're defeating them as we did in the first battle ! ”

ID:	1840
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Hil ▁nadila ▁filiste arrekin ▁batera !» ▁Egin ▁zuen ▁bultza ▁indarrez , ▁eta ▁bertan ▁zeuden ▁buruzagi ▁eta ▁jendearen ▁gainera ▁etorri ▁zen ▁jauretx ea . ▁Horrela , ▁bere ▁bizitza ▁osoan ▁baino ▁jende ▁gehiago ▁hilez ▁hil ▁zen ▁Samson .
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ Let me go into the valley of Eden , ” So Samson went out to the temple of the temple of the Covenant . So Samson died in the temple of the city .
GOLD:	he prayed , “ Let me die with the Philistines. ” And the temple crashed down on the Philistine rulers and all the people . So he killed more people when he died than he had during his entire lifetime .

ID:	1841
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁hor ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁opari etatik ▁Aaroni ▁eta ▁beronen ▁ondorengoei ▁dagokien ▁partea , ▁Jaunaren ▁apaiz ▁izateko ▁izendatuko ▁dituzten ▁egunetik .
PRED:	That is why the priest must be brought to Aaron and his share of the sacred offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	This is their rightful share . The special gifts presented to the Lord have been reserved for Aaron and his descendants from the time they were set apart to serve the Lord as priests .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	▁eta ▁beste ▁egintzak , ▁lehenengotik ▁azkeneko ra , ▁« Israelgo ▁eta ▁Judako ▁Erregeen ▁Liburuan » ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in the beginning of the beginning to end of the Kings of Israel , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	from beginning to end — all are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah .

ID:	1843
INPUT:	▁Bizirik ▁eutsi ▁baitzi gun eta ▁gure ▁oin ei ▁erortzen ▁utzi ▁ez .
PRED:	Do n't let us go out to the grave , and let them fall out .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	1844
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁orain , ▁Jainkoak ▁etsaiak ▁oin - aulki tzat ▁noiz ▁jarriko ▁dizkion ▁itxaroten ▁dago .
PRED:	And now now , God is very strong , for he is very old when he is gone , there is no water for your feet .
GOLD:	There he waits until his enemies are humbled and made a footstool under his feet .

ID:	1845
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁hiru ▁urtez ▁gobernatu ▁zuen ▁Israel . ▁Hil ▁zenean , ▁Xam ir ren ▁ehortzi ▁zuten .
PRED:	When he died , he was buried in Israel for forty years .
GOLD:	He judged Israel for twenty-three years . When he died , he was buried in Shamir .

ID:	1846
INPUT:	▁ F elipe ▁lasterka ▁hurbildu ▁zitzaion ▁eta , ▁Isaias ▁profeta ▁irakurtzen ▁entzunik , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁iren ari :— Uler tzen ▁al ▁duzu ▁irakurtzen ▁ari ▁zarena ?
PRED:	Philip went to the prophet and asked him , “ What do you mean ? Do you understand ? ”
GOLD:	Philip ran over and heard the man reading from the prophet Isaiah . Philip asked , “ Do you understand what you are reading ? ”

ID:	1847
INPUT:	▁« Egun ▁hartan , ▁Jerusalemi ▁erasoka ▁etor ▁dak izkion ▁guztiak ▁hondatuko ▁ditut .
PRED:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ I will tell you what will happen . ”
GOLD:	For on that day I will begin to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	▁Aho ▁beretik ▁ateratzen ▁dira ▁bedeinkazioa ▁eta ▁madarikazioa . ▁Senideok , ▁horrek ▁ez ▁du ▁horrela ▁izan ▁behar .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , you must not be able to understand .
GOLD:	And so blessing and cursing come pouring out of the same mouth . Surely , my brothers and sisters , this is not right !

ID:	1849
INPUT:	▁ziotela : ▁« Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁zergatik ▁gertatu ▁da ▁hori ▁Israelen ? ▁Zergatik ▁galdu ▁da ▁leinu ▁bat ?»
PRED:	“ Where is the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel ? ” he asked . “ Why have you been taken from the tribes of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	“ O Lord , God of Israel , ” they cried out , “ why has this happened in Israel ? Now one of our tribes is missing from Israel ! ”

ID:	1850
INPUT:	▁harrikatu ▁egin ▁zituzten , ▁zer raz ▁ebaki , ▁ezpataz ▁hil ; ▁noraezean ▁ibili ▁ziren , ▁ahuntz - ▁nahiz ▁ardi - lar ruz ▁jantzirik , ▁premia ▁gorrian , ▁erasopean ▁eta ▁tratu ▁txarrak ▁hartuz .
PRED:	They killed a plague with a plague , and they killed a plague with fat , sheep , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , sheep , and goats .
GOLD:	Some died by stoning , some were sawed in half , and others were killed with the sword . Some went about wearing skins of sheep and goats , destitute and oppressed and mistreated .

ID:	1851
INPUT:	▁Itzul ▁belarria ▁niregana , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁entzun . ▁Zabaldu ▁begiak , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁ikusi . ▁Entzun ▁nolako ▁irainak ▁zuzendu ▁dizkizun ▁Senakeribek ▁zuri , ▁Jainko ▁bizi ▁horri .
PRED:	Come and listen to me , O Lord , Lord , where you see me , O Lord , you have seen what you have seen .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	▁An as ▁eta ▁Kaif as ▁ziren ▁apaiz ▁nagusi . ▁Garai ▁hartan , ▁Joanek , ▁Zakariasen ▁semeak , ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezua ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁basamortuan .
PRED:	Then the high priest began to be called the high priest , who had been called to Zechariah in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Annas and Caiaphas were the high priests . At this time a message from God came to John son of Zechariah , who was living in the wilderness .

ID:	1853
INPUT:	▁Ekin ▁sinesmenaren ▁borroka ▁jator rari ▁eta ▁eskuratu ▁betiko ▁bizia , ▁har tarako ▁deitu ▁baitzaitu ▁Jainkoak , ▁eta ▁fede - aitor men ▁bikaina ▁egin ▁baituzu , ▁testigu ▁askoren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	In this way , it is a strong place of honor and honor to God . For God is a great reward for you , a great reward for many people .
GOLD:	Fight the good fight for the true faith . Hold tightly to the eternal life to which God has called you , which you have declared so well before many witnesses .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	▁Xalum , ▁Israelgo ▁errege
PRED:	Shallum Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Shallum Rules in Israel

ID:	1855
INPUT:	▁« Guk ▁ere ▁berri ▁on ▁hau ▁iragartzen ▁dizuegu : ▁gure ▁arbasoei ▁egindako ▁agintzaria ,
PRED:	“ We have heard about our promise to our ancestors .
GOLD:	“ And now we are here to bring you this Good News . The promise was made to our ancestors ,

ID:	1856
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁niri ▁dagokidanez , ▁irrikaz ▁nago ▁zuei ▁ere , ▁erromatar ro i , ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egiteko .
PRED:	That is why I am going to go to you , for I am preaching to you .
GOLD:	So I am eager to come to you in Rome , too , to preach the Good News .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁etorkizunean ▁haiekin ▁egingo ▁dudan ▁ituna : ▁Biho tzean ▁ezarriko ▁dizkiet ▁neure ▁legeak , ▁buruan ▁idatziko . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will put my covenant with them . I will put my covenant on my behalf .
GOLD:	“ This is the new covenant I will makewith my people on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their hearts , and I will write them on their minds . ”

ID:	1858
INPUT:	▁Atal ondo aren ▁luzera ▁hamar ▁metrokoa ▁zen , ▁eta ▁zabalera ▁sei koa ; ▁hamar ▁harmaila ▁igo ▁behar ▁ziren ▁hara ▁iristeko . ▁A tearen ▁bi ▁alde etara ▁zutabe ▁bana ▁zegoen .
PRED:	The two blocks of the entry room was 71/2 feet wide , and the two blocks of the gateway to the inner courtyard . The two pillars was 71/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	The entry room was 35 feet wide and 21 feet deep . There were ten steps leading up to it , with a column on each side .

ID:	1859
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Non ▁da ? Tzibak ▁erregeari :— A mi elen ▁seme ▁Makirren ▁etxean , ▁Lo - D eb arren .
PRED:	“ Where is the king ? ” the king asked . “ Where is your son ? ”
GOLD:	“ Where is he ? ” the king asked. “ In Lo-debar , ” Ziba told him , “ at the home of Makir son of Ammiel . ”

ID:	1860
INPUT:	▁Bazter ▁itzazu ▁fedearen ▁kontrako ▁i puin ▁zentzugabeak , ▁eta ▁saia ▁zaitez ▁jainkozal etasun ean .
PRED:	Let them be filled with wickedness , for you are filled with good things .
GOLD:	Do not waste time arguing over godless ideas and old wives ' tales . Instead , train yourself to be godly .

ID:	1861
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁diezai etela ▁eska ▁lan - arduradunei ▁beren ▁esku ▁utz iriko ▁diruaren ▁kon turik , ▁zintzo ▁jokatzen ▁baitute .
PRED:	Do n't let them work on your own hands , and do n't use your hands on your own hands .
GOLD:	But do n't require the construction supervisors to keep account of the money they receive , for they are honest and trustworthy men . ”

ID:	1862
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁Danielen ▁kon tak izuna : ▁« Ikus kari ▁bat ▁izan ▁nuen ▁gauez : ▁Or tziko ▁lau ▁ertzetatik ▁haize ▁indartsu ▁batek ▁itsaso ▁handia ▁harrotzen ▁zuen .
PRED:	The walls were finished saying , “ If I had been found , I was found by the wall , it was a great sea , and its surrounding villages .
GOLD:	In my vision that night , I , Daniel , saw a great storm churning the surface of a great sea , with strong winds blowing from every direction .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	▁baina ▁herri ▁larrutu ▁eta ▁pi pil dua ▁da , denak ▁presonde gian ▁sartu eta ▁kartzelan ▁loturik ▁daude ; larru tu ▁egin ▁dituzte , eta ▁inork ▁askatzen ▁ez ; pi pil du , ▁eta ▁inork ▁ez haien ▁egoera ▁aldatzeko ▁ardurarik ».
PRED:	But if the people are caught in their land , they would not turn from their chains . They would not turn from their chains , and no one can turn from them . ”
GOLD:	But his own people have been robbed and plundered , enslaved , imprisoned , and trapped.They are fair game for anyoneand have no one to protect them , no one to take them back home .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	▁Erruki ▁gutaz , ▁Jauna , zuregan ▁baitugu ▁itxaropen ! Izan ▁gure ▁indar ▁egunero , gure ▁salbamen ▁estu aldian .
PRED:	Let us sing for us , O Lord , for we have mercy on our day .
GOLD:	But Lord , be merciful to us , for we have waited for you.Be our strong arm each dayand our salvation in times of trouble .

ID:	1865
INPUT:	▁Balaamek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Bal aki : ▁« Era iki ▁hemen ▁zazpi ▁aldare ▁eta ▁prestatu ▁zazpi ▁zekor ▁eta ▁zazpi ▁ahari ».
PRED:	Balaam said to Balaam , “ Get up to the altar and prepare seven rams and prepare seven rams for seven rams and seven rams . ”
GOLD:	Then Balaam said to King Balak , “ Build me seven altars here , and prepare seven young bulls and seven rams for me to sacrifice . ”

ID:	1866
INPUT:	▁eta ▁arkume ▁bakoitzeko ▁lau ▁kilo .
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .
GOLD:	and two quarts of choice flour with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	1867
INPUT:	▁Begiak ▁jaso ▁eta ▁bi ▁emakume ▁ikusi ▁nituen , ▁airean ▁hegaz . ▁He goak ▁zi ko inaren ▁gis akoak ▁zituzten . ▁On tzia ▁hartu ▁eta ▁zerurantz ▁jaso ▁zuten .
PRED:	When I saw two women , I looked up and saw two women , they saw that he had been covered with gold , and he sat down to heaven .
GOLD:	Then I looked up and saw two women flying toward us , gliding on the wind . They had wings like a stork , and they picked up the basket and flew into the sky .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	▁Im erren ▁seme ▁Paxhur ▁apaizak , ▁tenpluko ▁arduradun ▁nagusiak , ▁Jeremiasen ▁hitzok ▁entzutean ,
PRED:	When the priests heard this message , the priest said to Jeremiah ,
GOLD:	Now Pashhur son of Immer , the priest in charge of the Temple of the Lord , heard what Jeremiah was prophesying .

ID:	1869
INPUT:	▁Orduan , Jerusalemen ▁aurka ▁borrokan ari ▁diren ▁nazio ▁guztiak , s et iatzen ▁duten ▁gudari - talde eta ▁eraso - tres na ▁guztiak , am etsa ▁bezala , gau eko ▁irudi pena ▁bezala des ager tuko ▁dira .
PRED:	Then they will fight against the nations ; their armies will be like an army .
GOLD:	All the nations fighting against Jerusalemwill vanish like a dream ! Those who are attacking her wallswill vanish like a vision in the night .

ID:	1870
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁zuregandik ▁urrun ▁doazenak ▁galduak ▁dira , des leial ▁zaizkizun ak ▁suntsitu ▁egingo ▁dituzu .
PRED:	O Lord , you are crushed by your enemies ; your enemies will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Those who desert him will perish , for you destroy those who abandon you .

ID:	1871
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁salbamen - indarrez ▁jantziko ▁dituteta ▁fededun ek ▁poz - oihuka ▁ekingo ▁diote .
PRED:	Then the priests will wear out of your salvation , and they will sing to joy .
GOLD:	I will clothe its priests with godliness ; its faithful servants will sing for joy .

ID:	1872
INPUT:	▁A darrak ▁jotzen ▁zituzten ▁apaizen ▁aurrean ▁gizon ▁arm atuak ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁eta ▁kutxaren ▁atzean ▁gainerako ▁gudariak . ▁Adar - hots era ▁zihoazen ▁denak ▁aurrera .
PRED:	The priests stood in front of the priests and the priests stood before the Ark . They stood in front of the front of the battle .
GOLD:	Some of the armed men marched in front of the priests with the horns and some behind the Ark , with the priests continually blowing the horns .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁ezpata ▁eskuan ▁bide ▁erdian ▁zegoen ▁aingerua ▁eman ▁zion ▁ikustera ▁Jaunak ▁Balaami . ▁Lur reraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁zen ▁Balaam ,
PRED:	Then the angel was sitting on the road to Balaam , the Lord gave Balaam to Balaam . When he bowed down to the ground , he bowed down to Balaam .
GOLD:	Then the Lord opened Balaam 's eyes , and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the roadway with a drawn sword in his hand . Balaam bowed his head and fell face down on the ground before him .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	▁itzul ▁niregana , ▁erruki ▁zakizkit , eman ▁indar ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁honi , salba ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁ap ala .
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , to me , for your servant have mercy on us .
GOLD:	Look down and have mercy on me.Give your strength to your servant ; save me , the son of your servant .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	▁Hark , ▁ordea , ▁erantzun :— Goazen ▁beste ▁nora bait , ▁inguruko ▁auzo etara , ▁horietan ▁ere ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egitera , ▁horretarako ▁atera ▁bainaiz .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ Let us go to the villages , and let us go to the villages . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ We must go on to other towns as well , and I will preach to them , too . That is why I came . ”

ID:	1876
INPUT:	▁Kendu ▁zizkizuten ▁seme - alabek hur bildu ▁eta ▁esango ▁dizute :“ Es tu egia ▁dugu ▁toki ▁hau : em aguzu ▁lekua ▁bizitzeko ”.
PRED:	They will ask you , ‘ Come , you will ask , ‘ Let us go down to the mountains ! '
GOLD:	The generations born in exile will return and say , ‘ We need more room ! It 's crowded here ! '

ID:	1877
INPUT:	▁Zigor tzea ▁erabaki ▁dut : herriak ▁haien ▁aurka ▁bilduko ▁dira , behin ▁eta ▁berriz ko ▁bekatuen ordaina ▁emateko .
PRED:	But I will bring justice to those who have been punished , but they will be punished .
GOLD:	Now whenever it fits my plan , I will attack you , too.I will call out the armies of the nationsto punish you for your multiplied sins .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	▁Hauek ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Beraz , ▁Mesias ▁ez ▁bazara , ▁ez ▁Elias , ▁ezta ▁etortzekoa ▁den ▁profeta ▁ere , ▁nola ▁ari ▁zara ▁bataiatzen ?
PRED:	These are the Messiah ? ” they asked , “ if Elijah is n't looking for the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	asked him , “ If you are n't the Messiah or Elijah or the Prophet , what right do you have to baptize ? ”

ID:	1879
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁egia ▁ote , ▁Jainkoa ▁lurrean ▁biziko ▁dela ▁gizon - emakume ekin ? ▁Zeru ▁eta ▁ortziaren ▁zabalak ▁ezin ▁zaitu ▁eduki , ▁eta ▁nik ▁eraiki ▁dizudan ▁tenplu ▁honek ▁eduki ▁ote ▁zaitzak e , ▁bada ?
PRED:	“ But do you live in the heavens , O God , how can I live on earth ? For I have built a Temple for you ? I have built a Temple for you ? ”
GOLD:	“ But will God really live on earth among people ? Why , even the highest heavens can not contain you . How much less this Temple I have built !

ID:	1880
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁etorri ▁ziren ▁berriro ▁ere ▁gizon ▁haiek ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁ondo ▁dakizu , ▁medi arren ▁eta ▁pertsi arren ▁legeen ▁arabera , ▁erregeak ▁sin aturiko <unk> eku ak ▁nahiz ▁aginduak ▁alda ezinak ▁direla .
PRED:	But the king came again again and said to the king , “ You know the king of the Jews and the Jews are recorded in the Book of the law of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	So at last the king gave orders for Daniel to be arrested and thrown into the den of lions . The king said to him , “ May your God , whom you serve so faithfully , rescue you . ”

ID:	1881
INPUT:	▁Eraso - tresnaz ▁joko ▁dituzte zure ▁harresiak eta ▁p iko tx ez ▁eraitsiko ▁dorreak .
PRED:	They will look at your walls , and the walls will be broken down .
GOLD:	He will pound your walls with battering rams and demolish your towers with sledgehammers .

ID:	1882
INPUT:	▁Jaso ▁begiak ▁gorantz ▁eta ▁ikus : Nork ▁egin ▁zuen ▁hori ▁guztia ? Ban an - banan ▁ater arazten ▁dituz er uko ▁astro ak , b akoitzari ▁bere ▁izenez ▁deitzen ▁dio ; hain ▁baita ▁ahaltsu , hain ▁biziki ▁indartsu , ba tek ▁ere ▁ez ▁dio haren ▁dei ari ▁huts ▁egiten .
PRED:	“ Who is the one who created the earth ? ” he asked . “ Who is the greatest to come from the greatest ? Who is the greatest ? ”
GOLD:	Look up into the heavens.Who created all the stars ? He brings them out like an army , one after another , calling each by its name.Because of his great power and incomparable strength , not a single one is missing .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁« Bedeinkatua ▁Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁bete ▁baitu ▁gure ▁aita ▁Davidi ▁hitzeman ikoa :
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , has promised to David .
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who has kept the promise he made to my father , David . For he told my father ,

ID:	1884
INPUT:	▁Mariak ▁Elisabet i ▁ikus tal dia
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Mary Visits Elizabeth

ID:	1885
INPUT:	▁Egiptoko ▁Neko ▁erregeak ▁Jerusalemgo ▁errege ▁izatea ▁Joak azi ▁kendu ▁eta ▁zerga ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁herriari : ▁hiru ▁mila ▁kilo ▁zilar ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁hamabost ▁kilo ▁urre ▁ordaindu ▁behar ▁zuten .
PRED:	King Josiah appointed this message to King Josiah , king of Egypt , and he appointed the people to pay for six pounds of silver .
GOLD:	Then he was deposed by the king of Egypt , who demanded that Judah pay 7,500 pounds of silver and 75 pounds of gold as tribute .

ID:	1886
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁guk ▁ezagutu ▁dugu ▁eta ▁sinetsi ▁Jainkoak ▁digun ▁maitasuna . ▁Jainkoa ▁maitasuna ▁da , ▁eta ▁maitasunean ▁dirau ena ▁Jainkoarekin ▁bat ▁eginik ▁dago ▁eta ▁Jainkoa ▁harekin .
PRED:	And we believe God 's love and believe him , and we love God and love him . He is God 's love and love .
GOLD:	We know how much God loves us , and we have put our trust in his love.God is love , and all who live in love live in God , and God lives in them .

ID:	1887
INPUT:	▁Mah ala tek ▁hiru ▁seme ▁ekarri ▁zizkion : ▁J eu x , ▁Xem arias ▁eta ▁Zah am .
PRED:	After the birth of Bilhah , he gave birth to his son :
GOLD:	Mahalath had three sons — Jeush , Shemariah , and Zaham .

ID:	1888
INPUT:	▁G aldera ▁egiten ▁dut : ▁Jainkoak ▁baztertu ▁egin ▁ote ▁du ▁bere ▁herria ? ▁Inola ▁ere ▁ez ! ▁Neu ▁ere ▁israeldar ra ▁naiz , ▁Abrahamen ▁jatorrikoa , ▁Benjaminen ▁leinukoa .
PRED:	But I am the God of Israel , the God of Israel , who abandoned the people of Israel . I am not the God of the tribe of Levi . I am the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	I ask , then , has God rejected his own people , the nation of Israel ? Of course not ! I myself am an Israelite , a descendant of Abraham and a member of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁ahuntz - ilezko ▁beste ▁hamaika ▁zapi , ▁egoitza ▁estaliko ▁duen ▁oihal - etxola ▁era tzeko .
PRED:	“ Make your hair with fine goatskin leather ; it is covered with fine linen .
GOLD:	“ Make eleven curtains of goat-hair cloth to serve as a tent covering for the Tabernacle .

ID:	1890
INPUT:	▁Zor o ▁hori , ▁zuk ▁erein dakoa ▁ez ▁da ▁ernetzen ▁aurrez ▁hiltzen ▁ez ▁bada .
PRED:	“ When you die , you wo n't plant your crops . ”
GOLD:	What a foolish question ! When you put a seed into the ground , it does n't grow into a plant unless it dies first .

ID:	1891
INPUT:	▁ezez agunak ▁dituzuen ▁jainko ▁arrotzen ▁atzetik ▁joan ▁eta ▁gurtzeko ▁eska tzea . ▁Ira garri takoa ▁egiaz ▁gertatuko ▁balitz ▁ere ,
PRED:	When you ask , you will ask , ‘ If you want to ask you to ask , ‘ What will you ask ? '
GOLD:	do not listen to them . The Lord your God is testing you to see if you truly love him with all your heart and soul .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	▁Josiasen ▁erregealdia
PRED:	Josiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Josiah Rules in Judah

ID:	1893
INPUT:	▁X aron ▁zelai ko ▁lore ▁naiz ▁ni , ib arre tako ▁lili .
PRED:	The cherubim of the valley were terrified , and the trees of the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	I am the spring crocus blooming on the Sharon Plain , the lily of the valley .

ID:	1894
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Amon darrek gaiztakeriarik ▁asko ▁egin ▁dute , zein ▁baino ▁zein ▁handiago . Eta ▁beraz , ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁ditut ! G ala ade ko ▁emakume ▁haurdun ei sab ela ▁urratu ▁baitzieten , beren ▁lurraldeaz abaldu ▁ahal ▁izateko ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned , says : I will not turn away from the rivers of grapes , but I will bring them into the desert .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! When they attacked Gilead to extend their borders , they ripped open pregnant women with their swords .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	▁Seigarren ▁izurria : ▁zauriak
PRED:	A Plague of Blood
GOLD:	A Plague of Festering Boils

ID:	1896
INPUT:	▁L il ura tu ▁egin ▁nauzu , ▁Jauna , eta ▁ni ▁zure ▁lilura pean ▁erori ; bor txatu ▁egin ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁menderatu . B arre garri ▁gertatu ▁naiz ▁egun ▁osoan , bur l aka ▁ari ▁zaizkit ▁denak .
PRED:	My heart is filled with me , O Lord , and I am sending you out of my mouth . I will send you out of the earth , and I am sending you out .
GOLD:	O Lord , you misled me , and I allowed myself to be misled.You are stronger than I am , and you overpowered me.Now I am mocked every day ; everyone laughs at me .

ID:	1897
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁zituen ▁gero ▁buztan eko ▁gantza , ▁heste ▁gain ekoa ▁eta ▁gibela ▁estaltzen ▁zuena , ▁giltzurrunak ▁berauen ▁gantzarekin ▁eta ▁eskuineko ▁izterra .
PRED:	He took the following instructions to the Lord . He took the fat of the internal organs , the internal organs , the internal organs , and the two kidneys and the internal organs , with the fat .
GOLD:	Next Moses took the fat , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , along with the right thigh .

ID:	1898
INPUT:	▁Bota ▁biezaio ▁berari ▁Jaunak ▁hilketa ▁horien ▁errua , ▁bera ▁baino ▁hobeak ▁ziren ▁bi ▁gizon ▁jator ▁eta ▁zuzen ▁hil ▁baitzituen ▁ezpataz , ▁David ▁gure ▁aitak ▁jakin ▁gabe : ▁Ner - en ▁seme ▁Abner , ▁Israelgo ▁gudaroste en ▁buruzagia , ▁eta ▁J et er - en ▁seme ▁Amasa , ▁Judako aren ▁buruzagia .
PRED:	The Lord gave him this message to him : “ This is what the Lord has done to David and his father , David , his father , David , and Abner son of Ner , and Abner son of Ner .
GOLD:	The Lord will repay him for the murders of two men who were more righteous and better than he . For my father knew nothing about the deaths of Abner son of Ner , commander of the army of Israel , and of Amasa son of Jether , commander of the army of Judah .

ID:	1899
INPUT:	▁Goi tik ▁eskua ▁luzatuz ▁hartu ▁ninduen eta ▁uholde tik ▁atera .
PRED:	He led me out from the Most Holy Place ; he rescued me from the Most High .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	▁itzul erarik ▁gabe ▁joan ▁aurretik ilun pe ▁eta ▁herio - itz alen ▁herrialdera ,
PRED:	Let us return to the end of the darkness , from the end of the earth .
GOLD:	before I leave — never to return — for the land of darkness and utter gloom .

ID:	1901
INPUT:	▁Rubenen ▁ondorengoek ▁Hexbon , ▁El ale , ▁Kiri ataim , ▁Nebo , ▁Baal - M eon ▁eta ▁Sib ma ▁berreraiki ▁zituzten , ▁eta ▁berreraiki tako ▁hiriei ▁izena ▁aldatu ▁zieten .
PRED:	The descendants of Reuben 's descendants were Dibon , Dibon , and Jahaz , and Jahaz ,
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuben built the towns of Heshbon , Elealeh , Kiriathaim ,

ID:	1902
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁eta ▁aingeruen ganako ▁begirune agatik , ▁emakumeak ▁mende tasunaren ▁ezaugarria ▁eraman ▁behar ▁du ▁buruan .
PRED:	Therefore , the woman who fear him will be brought to the woman from the dead .
GOLD:	For this reason , and because the angels are watching , a woman should wear a covering on her head to show she is under authority .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	▁baita ▁erregeen ▁eta ▁agintea ▁duten ▁guztien ▁alde ▁ere , ▁bizitza ▁bare ▁eta ▁bak ets uan ▁bizi ▁gaitezen , ▁jainkozal etasunez ▁eta ▁giz abi dez .
PRED:	For all the kings of the kings and kings of the kings , and we can live there . We can live forever and live forever .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	▁Ea ▁salbatzen ▁zaituen zeure ▁idolo - multz oak , zuk ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁deiadar ▁egitean ! H aiz eak ▁eramango ▁ditu ▁denak , putz aldi ▁batek ▁desagerraraziko . Nire gan ▁babesten ▁denak , ▁ordea , lurraldea ▁eskuratuko ▁du , nire ▁mendi ▁santu ahar tuko ▁jabetzan ».
PRED:	“ Come , let the Sovereign Lord give you victory over your people , O God , ” says the Lord. “ I will bring you out of the holy mountain , but they will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Let 's see if your idols can save youwhen you cry to them for help.Why , a puff of wind can knock them down ! If you just breathe on them , they fall over ! But whoever trusts in me will inherit the landand possess my holy mountain . ”

ID:	1905
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dago , ▁ordea , ▁beste ▁berri ▁onik ; ▁baina ▁badabiltza ▁hor ▁norbai tzuk ▁zuek ▁nahasten ▁eta ▁Kristoren ▁berri ▁ona ▁goitik ▁behera ▁irauli ▁nahian .
PRED:	But do n't be afraid , but you know the Good News . But you know the Good News about Christ . But you know the Good News about Christ .
GOLD:	but is not the Good News at all . You are being fooled by those who deliberately twist the truth concerning Christ .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	▁Betea ▁dute ▁ahoa ▁madarikazio z ▁eta ▁min gos tasunez .
PRED:	My mouth is covered with wickedness , and your bones are covered with knowledge .
GOLD:	“ Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness . ”

ID:	1907
INPUT:	▁Profeta ▁guztiek ▁testigantza ▁hau ▁egiten ▁dute ▁hartaz : ▁harengan ▁sinets ▁dezaten ▁guztiek ▁bekatuen ▁barkamena ▁hartuko ▁dutela ▁beraren ▁bitartez ».
PRED:	All who believe in him will believe that everyone will believe in him . All who believe in him will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	He is the one all the prophets testified about , saying that everyone who believes in him will have their sins forgiven through his name . ”

ID:	1908
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁haize - bola da ▁batek eraman go ▁ditu , eta ▁lotsa ▁izango ▁dira beren ▁sakrifizio ez .
PRED:	But a storm will flee from a grapevine ; they will never be mocked .
GOLD:	So a mighty wind will sweep them away.Their sacrifices to idols will bring them shame .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	▁Ikusi ▁izan ▁ditut morro iak ▁zaldi ▁gainean eta ▁nagusiak ▁oinez , ▁morroi ▁bailiran .
PRED:	I have seen your horses and horses , chariots , and horses are as weak as lions .
GOLD:	I have even seen servants riding horseback like princes — and princes walking like servants !

ID:	1910
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁seme - alaben ▁ama ▁bera ▁ere aki tua ▁dago , ▁arnasa ▁ezin ▁harturik , lotsaz ▁eta ▁desohorez ▁betea ; egun - argia ▁ilunpe ▁bihurtu ▁zaio . Eta ▁gelditzen ▁zaizkion ▁semeak etsaien ▁ezpataz ▁hilko ▁dira . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	He has seven sons and daughters , and he sees everything he does . He does n't be ashamed , and their heads will be ashamed , and they will die in their hands . ”
GOLD:	The mother of seven grows faint and gasps for breath ; her sun has gone down while it is still day.She sits childless now , disgraced and humiliated.And I will hand over those who are leftto be killed by the enemy.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1911
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁barkamen - opariko ▁zez ena ▁hartu ▁eta ▁erre ▁egingo ▁duzu ▁horretarako ▁ezarritako ▁lekuan , ▁santutegitik ▁kanpo .
PRED:	Then you may eat it as a sin offering to the Lord . He must take place place place place where he chooses .
GOLD:	Then take the young bull for the sin offering and burn it at the appointed place outside the Temple area .

ID:	1912
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁semeek ▁gizakien ▁alab ekin ▁batu ▁eta ▁haurrak ▁izan ▁zituztenean , ▁baita ▁geroago ▁ere , ▁baziren ▁erraldo iak ▁munduan : ▁antzinako ▁h ero iak ▁dira ▁hauek , ▁izen ▁handikoak .
PRED:	When the children of God had sexual relations with them , the children of the church were given to the church , including the first of the earth .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	1913
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁eduki ▁zor rik ▁in orekin , ▁elkar ▁maita tzekoa ▁baizik , ▁zeren ▁lagun ▁hurkoa ▁maite ▁duenak ▁betea ▁baitu ▁legea .
PRED:	Do not have sexual relations with each other , but those who love each other .
GOLD:	Owe nothing to anyone — except for your obligation to love one another . If you love your neighbor , you will fulfill the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuk , ▁Jeremias , ▁ez ▁eskatu ▁herri ▁honen ▁alde , ▁ez ▁egin ▁erregu rik , ▁ez ▁otoitz ik , ▁ez ▁baitizu t ▁entzungo ▁zoritx arrean ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁dei ▁egitean ».
PRED:	But listen to Jeremiah , do n't listen to what you ask . Do n't listen to you , for you do n't listen to what you do . ”
GOLD:	“ Pray no more for these people , Jeremiah . Do not weep or pray for them , for I will not listen to them when they cry out to me in distress .

ID:	1915
INPUT:	▁Apaizak , ▁errituzko ▁k einua ▁eginez ▁aurkeztuko ▁dio ▁Jaunari , ▁atseginez ▁onar ▁dezan . ▁Larun bat ▁biharamunean ▁aurkeztuko ▁du .
PRED:	The priests must present this offering to the Lord , and it will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the day after the Sabbath , the priest will lift it up before the Lord so it may be accepted on your behalf .

ID:	1916
INPUT:	▁Saulek ▁semeari :— Zigor ▁nazala ▁Jaunak ▁gogor , ▁hil arazten ▁ez ▁bazaitu t , ▁Jonatan .
PRED:	Then Saul said , “ May the Lord kill me , and I will not kill you . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , Jonathan , ” Saul said , “ you must die ! May God strike me and even kill me if you do not die for this . ”

ID:	1917
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁urtez ▁egon ▁ziren ▁in u dea ▁eta ▁biak ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁gorderik , ▁Atalia ▁lurralde ▁hartan ▁erregina ▁izan ▁zen ▁bitartean .
PRED:	There were forty years old when the Lord remained in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of the Lord for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	1918
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁ustez , ▁hirur otan ▁zeinek ▁jokatu ▁zuen ▁lagun ▁hurko ▁bezala ▁lapur ren ▁esku ▁eroritako ▁gizon arekin ?
PRED:	“ Do you realize that your son ? ” he asked . “ Are you a man with you ? ”
GOLD:	“ Now which of these three would you say was a neighbor to the man who was attacked by bandits ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁dira , ▁Labanek ▁bere ▁alaba ▁Le ari ▁eman ▁zion ▁Zil pa ▁neskameak ▁Jakobi ▁sortu ▁zizkion ▁semeak ; ▁hamasei ▁guztira , ▁seme ▁eta ▁bilob en ▁artean .
PRED:	These were the daughter of Laban , Laban , and she gave her to Jacob .
GOLD:	These were the sons of Zilpah , the servant given to Leah by her father , Laban . The number of Jacob 's descendants through Zilpah was sixteen .

ID:	1920
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁konfiantza ▁Jaunarengan ▁eta ▁egin ▁on ▁dena , zeure ▁herrialdean ▁bizi eta ▁bertako ▁aberastasun az ▁gozatzeko .
PRED:	For the Lord has done good to all the good things you have lived in the land .
GOLD:	Trust in the Lord and do good.Then you will live safely in the land and prosper .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	▁Madiango ▁bi ▁erregeek , ▁Zebah ek ▁eta ▁Tzalm unak , ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten ; ▁baina ▁Gedeonek ▁pertsegitu ▁eta ▁harrapatu ▁egin ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁izu tua ▁utzi ▁zuen ▁gudaroste ▁osoa .
PRED:	The kings of Midian were killed , and Gideon chased them away and chased them away . But Gideon chased them away and chased them away .
GOLD:	Zebah and Zalmunna , the two Midianite kings , fled , but Gideon chased them down and captured all their warriors .

ID:	1922
INPUT:	▁Esku - antzeko ▁zerbait ▁luzatu ▁eta ▁il etik ▁heldu ▁zidan ; ▁Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁airean ▁altxatu ▁ninduen ▁eta , ▁Jainkoarengan diko ▁ikuskari tan , ▁Jerusalemgo ▁tenplura ▁eraman , ▁iparraldera ▁jotzen ▁duen ▁barneko ▁atearen ▁ondora ; ▁bertan ▁zegoen ▁Jaunari ▁irain garri ▁eta ▁jasan ezin ▁zitzaion ▁idoloa .
PRED:	Then the Spirit came to me , and the Spirit of the Lord appeared to me , and the Spirit of the Lord appeared to me from Jerusalem . The Temple was placed in front of the Temple .
GOLD:	He reached out what seemed to be a hand and took me by the hair . Then the Spirit lifted me up into the sky and transported me to Jerusalem in a vision from God . I was taken to the north gate of the inner courtyard of the Temple , where there is a large idol that has made the Lord very jealous .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	▁Lasterka ▁datoz ▁mezulariak bata ▁bestearen ▁ondo - ondotik , Babiloniako ▁erregeari berri ▁ematera :“ Ets aiek ▁alderik ▁alde kon kis tatu ▁dute ▁hiria ”,
PRED:	When the young men come to the king , the king of Babylon will be given to the king of Babylon , ‘ The king of Babylon is coming ! '
GOLD:	The news is passed from one runner to the nextas the messengers hurry to tell the kingthat his city has been captured .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	▁Hauek ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Davidi :— Gaur ▁bete ▁da ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zizun ▁hura : ▁« Zure ▁esku ▁uzten ▁dut ▁zure ▁etsaia ; ▁egiozu ▁egokien ▁iruditzen ▁zaizuna ». Jaiki ▁zen ▁David ▁eta , ▁isil - is ilik , ▁Saulen ▁soingaineko aren ▁ertza ▁ebaki ▁zuen .
PRED:	They said to David , “ This is what the Lord says : I have you done to you , ” David said . “ All right with you ! ” So David told David .
GOLD:	But then David 's conscience began bothering him because he had cut Saul 's robe .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁eskuz ▁lurraldea ▁neurtu ▁dueta ▁bakoitzari ▁bere ▁sai la ▁izendatu . Betiko ▁izango ▁dira ▁haren ▁jabe , men derik ▁mende ▁biziko ▁bertan .
PRED:	The land will be measured by his own own own kingdom , and it will live forever .
GOLD:	He has surveyed and divided the landand deeded it over to those creatures.They will possess it forever , from generation to generation .

ID:	1926
INPUT:	▁Erdain tzera ▁behartzen ▁zaituzteten ▁horiek ▁besteen ▁aurrean ▁ongi ▁geldi tzearren ▁bultzatzen ▁zaituztete ▁horretara , ▁eta ▁Kristoren ▁gurutzea ▁dela - eta ▁inork ▁pertsegi ▁ez ▁ditzan .
PRED:	If you are guilty of those who are right before you , you will be sure to live in the presence of Christ . If no one comes from the cross the cross of Christ , you will be with you .
GOLD:	Those who are trying to force you to be circumcised want to look good to others . They do n't want to be persecuted for teaching that the cross of Christ alone can save .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	▁Nahiz ▁hazia ▁kanpora ▁isuri ▁nahiz ▁barruan ▁geratu , ▁sexu - jarioa ▁beti ▁da ▁kuts agarria , ▁eta ▁gizona ▁kutsatu ▁bihurtzen ▁du .
PRED:	But if the seed falls on the ground , it is ceremonially unclean for the man who is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	This defilement is caused by his discharge , whether the discharge continues or stops . In either case the man is unclean .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	▁hau ▁Jes erena , ▁hau ▁Job edena , ▁hau ▁Booz ena , ▁hau ▁Sal arena , ▁hau ▁Na as on ena ,
PRED:	Jesse was the father of Jesse , who was the father of Esau .
GOLD:	David was the son of Jesse.Jesse was the son of Obed.Obed was the son of Boaz.Boaz was the son of Salmon.Salmon was the son of Nahshon .

ID:	1929
INPUT:	▁Hai etarik ▁hirurogeita ▁hamar ▁mila ▁zamak etari ▁izendatu ▁zituen , ▁laurogei ▁mila ▁har gin ▁mendian ▁eta ▁hiru ▁mila ▁eta ▁seiehun ▁lan - arduradun , ▁jendeari ▁lan ▁era gi teko .
PRED:	He made ten of silver for the Lord , and he appointed them to work on Mount Zion . He also built a Temple to the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Solomon took a census of all foreigners in the land of Israel , like the census his father had taken , and he counted 153,600 .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , nik ▁ere ▁zi gorrez ▁jotzen ▁zaitut , zure ▁bekatuengatik ▁hondatu ▁egiten .
PRED:	That is why I have no compassion on your sins .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will wound you ! I will bring you to ruin for all your sins .

ID:	1931
INPUT:	▁Zer bait ▁daki elakoan ▁dagoenak ▁, ▁oraindik ▁ez ▁du ▁behar ▁bezalako ▁ezagu tzarik ;
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , but knowledge is more than knowledge .
GOLD:	Anyone who claims to know all the answers does n't really know very much .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	▁eta ▁egiptoar ▁gudarosteari , ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁guda - gurdi ei , ▁egindakoa : ▁nola , ▁zuei ▁erasoka ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri an ▁sartu ▁zirelarik , ▁urak ▁haien ▁gainera ▁amildu ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁betiko ▁galdu ▁zituen .
PRED:	So the army of the army of chariots and chariots were filled with chariots and chariots . When the Lord saw them , he threw them into the Red Sea and scattered them into the Red Sea .
GOLD:	They did n't see what the Lord did to the armies of Egypt and to their horses and chariots — how he drowned them in the Red Sea as they were chasing you . He destroyed them , and they have not recovered to this very day !

ID:	1933
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jauna ▁dut ▁laguntzaile : horregatik ▁ez ▁didate irain ek ▁etsi arazten ; horregatik ▁gogortu ▁dut ▁aurpegia harkaitza ▁bezala , bai ▁baitakit ▁ez ▁did alau s teak ▁huts ▁egingo .
PRED:	But I am the Lord ; my enemies surround me ; my face are so heavy . I would not know my face , and my face will not be covered with me .
GOLD:	Because the Sovereign Lord helps me , I will not be disgraced.Therefore , I have set my face like a stone , determined to do his will.And I know that I will not be put to shame .

ID:	1934
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erregeak :— Ba , ▁nik ▁lau ▁gizon ▁ikusten ▁ditut , ▁suaren ▁erdian ▁libre ▁dabil tzala ; ▁ez ▁die ▁suak ▁kalterik ▁egin , ▁eta ▁laugarren ak ▁aingerua ▁dirudi .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the king said , “ I see four men who are like a fire . They are like a lion , like a lion . ”
GOLD:	“ Look ! ” Nebuchadnezzar shouted . “ I see four men , unbound , walking around in the fire unharmed ! And the fourth looks like a god ! ”

ID:	1935
INPUT:	▁Basamortuan ▁harkaitza ▁zulatu ▁zuen , lur peko ▁uretatik ▁edan arazteko .
PRED:	He dug a rock for the water of water , so he drank the water of water .
GOLD:	He split open the rocks in the wildernessto give them water , as from a gushing spring .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁bete ▁ezazu ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁Davidi , ▁gure ▁aitari , ▁hitzeman ▁zenion ▁beste ▁hau ▁ere : ▁“ Ez ▁zaizu ▁faltako ▁nire ▁laguntzaz ▁Israelgo ▁errege - aulkian ▁eseriko ▁den ▁ondorengorik , ▁baldin ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeak ▁nire ▁aurrean ▁bide ▁zuzenean ▁ibiltzen ▁badira , ▁zu ▁ibili ▁zaren ▁bezala ”.
PRED:	“ Therefore , O Lord , God of Israel , please your servant David , your servant David , have promised to your servant David , ‘ You are my servant David . '
GOLD:	“ And now , O Lord , God of Israel , carry out the additional promise you made to your servant David , my father . For you said to him , ‘ If your descendants guard their behavior and faithfully follow me as you have done , one of them will always sit on the throne of Israel . '

ID:	1937
INPUT:	▁Judakoen ▁biltzar ▁osoa ▁guztiz ▁alai ▁zegoen , ▁baita ▁apaizak ▁eta ▁lebitarrak ▁ere , ▁eta ▁orobat ▁Israeldik ▁etorritako ▁jende ▁guztia , ▁nahiz ▁p el eg rina j ean ▁etorriak ▁nahiz ▁Judan ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁zirenak .
PRED:	In this way , the priests and Levites , including the Levites , and all the people of Judah . In this way , there was a descendant of Judah and the people of Judah .
GOLD:	The entire assembly of Judah rejoiced , including the priests , the Levites , all who came from the land of Israel , the foreigners who came to the festival , and all those who lived in Judah .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	▁Jakizue , ▁lizun , ▁zikin ▁eta ▁gutiz i atsu ▁bakar ▁batek ▁ere ▁— halako a ▁sasijainko zalea ▁baita — ▁ez ▁duela ▁Kristoren ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuko ▁ondar ean ▁parterik ▁izango .
PRED:	These are false prophets who are detestable to idols — those who are detestable to the gods of God , who is detestable to the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	You can be sure that no immoral , impure , or greedy person will inherit the Kingdom of Christ and of God . For a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	1939
INPUT:	▁ura ▁hodei etan ▁pilatu eta ▁hodeiak ▁ez ▁dira ▁pisu az ▁leher tzen ;
PRED:	The water of the sky will never fill the clouds .
GOLD:	He wraps the rain in his thick clouds , and the clouds do n't burst with the weight .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁bedi ▁gizon ▁hori Jaunak ▁gupi dag abe ▁erraustu ▁zituen hiri en ▁antzeko ! Entzun ▁bitza ▁goizean ▁garrasi ▁larriak , egu erdian ▁gerra - irrintziak !
PRED:	May the Lord be like a nation of Israel , O Lord , let them fall down in the morning .
GOLD:	Let him be destroyed like the cities of oldthat the Lord overthrew without mercy.Terrify him all day long with battle shouts ,

ID:	1941
INPUT:	▁Zenbat ▁aldiz ▁altxatu ▁zitzaizkion ▁kontra ▁basamortuan , zenbat ▁aldiz ▁atsekabetu ▁zuten ▁bakar leku an !
PRED:	When they saw him in the wilderness , they shouted out out in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Oh , how often they rebelled against him in the wildernessand grieved his heart in that dry wasteland .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁emakumea , ▁hurbildurik , ▁ahuspez ▁jarri ▁zitzaion , ▁esanez :— Lagun ▁nazazu , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	But the woman stood before him and worshiped him . “ Lord , ” she said , “ I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But she came and worshiped him , pleading again , “ Lord , help me ! ”

ID:	1943
INPUT:	▁Ere in ▁goizean ▁zeure ▁hazia , eta ▁arratsaldean ▁ere ▁ez ▁egin ▁op or , ez ▁baitak izu ▁erein aldi ▁bietan zein ▁izanen ▁duzun ▁hoberena , ezta ▁bata ▁bestea ▁bezain ▁on aizango ▁den ▁ere .
PRED:	In the morning you must be caught in the evening , and you must not plant any of the crop . No one will be planted in the morning , too , will be as much as much as you do .
GOLD:	Plant your seed in the morning and keep busy all afternoon , for you do n't know if profit will come from one activity or another — or maybe both .

ID:	1944
INPUT:	▁Emadazu , ▁bada , ▁Jaunak ▁egun ▁hartan ▁hitzemandako ▁mendialde ▁hori . ▁Zeuk ▁ere ▁orduan ▁jakin ▁zenuen ▁Anak ▁erraldoiaren ▁ondorengoak ▁bizi ▁direla ▁bertan ▁eta ▁hiri ▁handi ▁eta ▁gotor tuak ▁dituztela . ▁Jauna ▁nirekin ▁izatea ▁espero ▁dut ▁eta ▁horiek ▁beren ▁lurraldetik ▁botatzea , ▁Jaunak ▁hitzeman ▁bezala ».
PRED:	Let us be sure that the Lord has made me all the people of the hill country , and the descendants of the tribe of Levi had promised , ‘ The Lord has promised me . ' ”
GOLD:	So give me the hill country that the Lord promised me . You will remember that as scouts we found the descendants of Anak living there in great , walled towns . But if the Lord is with me , I will drive them out of the land , just as the Lord said . ”

ID:	1945
INPUT:	▁izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁ituna ▁ez ▁zuten ▁gorde , ez ▁zioten ▁haren ▁legeari ▁jarraitu ▁nahi ▁izan ;
PRED:	So they did not forget the covenant of God 's covenant .
GOLD:	They did not keep God 's covenantand refused to live by his instructions .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	▁Horretarako ▁hil ▁eta ▁piztu ▁zen ▁Kristo : ▁hildakoen ▁eta ▁bizien ▁Jauna ▁izateko .
PRED:	And Christ died and died in the dead , the Lord Jesus was raised to the dead .
GOLD:	Christ died and rose again for this very purpose — to be Lord both of the living and of the dead .

ID:	1947
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁den , ▁egin ▁guztia ▁duin tasunez ▁eta ▁or den az .
PRED:	So now , the Lord has made everything , and he has set up .
GOLD:	But be sure that everything is done properly and in order .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	▁Ezku tuko ▁opariak ▁sumina ▁baretzen ▁du , isil kako ▁erregaluak ▁haser rerik ▁bizi ena .
PRED:	You will make your pagan shrines with your burnt offerings .
GOLD:	A secret gift calms anger ; a bribe under the table pacifies fury .

ID:	1949
INPUT:	▁Hirugarren ▁izurria : ▁el txoak
PRED:	A Plague of Locusts
GOLD:	A Plague of Frogs

ID:	1950
INPUT:	▁Il berri - egunetan ▁zezen ▁bat , ▁sei ▁arkume ▁eta ▁ahari ▁bat , ▁denak ▁akats ▁gabeak , ▁eskainiko ▁dizkit .
PRED:	You must celebrate the festival with six quarts of bulls and a young bull , a young bull , a ram , and no defects .
GOLD:	At the new moon celebrations , he will bring one young bull , six lambs , and one ram , all with no defects .

ID:	1951
INPUT:	▁Erruki ▁nitaz , ▁Jauna : ▁zuri ▁deika ▁ari ▁naiz ▁egun ▁osoan .
PRED:	O Lord , have mercy on me , so I can praise you .
GOLD:	Be merciful to me , O Lord , for I am calling on you constantly .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁da , ▁bada , ▁ar otza , ▁Mariaren ▁semea ▁eta ▁Santiago , ▁Jose , ▁Judas ▁eta ▁Simonen ▁anaia ? ▁Eta ▁honen ▁arrebak ▁ere ▁ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁hemen ▁gure ▁artean ▁bizi ?» Eta ▁honengatik , ▁ezin ▁zuten ▁sinetsi ▁harengan .
PRED:	Do n't you realize that his brother , James , James , James , James , James , James , James , James , James , and his brother , and John .
GOLD:	Then they scoffed , “ He 's just a carpenter , the son of Mary and the brother of James , Joseph , Judas , and Simon . And his sisters live right here among us. ” They were deeply offended and refused to believe in him .

ID:	1953
INPUT:	▁ar lo tea ▁bezala ▁iritsiko ▁zaizu ▁gab ezia , esk alea ▁bezala ▁etorriko ▁miseria .
PRED:	He will send you away like a lion , like a lion .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	1954
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zien : ▁« Nire , ▁zuen ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mintzoa ▁arretaz ▁entzuten ▁baduzue , ▁eta ▁niri ▁atsegin ▁zaidana ▁egiten , ▁nire ▁aginduak ▁aditzen ▁badituzue ▁eta ▁nire ▁arauak ▁betetzen , ▁ez ▁dizuet ▁zuei ▁egiptoarrei ▁bidali ▁nien ▁gaitzik ▁igor riko , ▁ni , ▁Jaun ▁hau , ▁sendag ile ▁bainau zue ».
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : If you listen to me and listen to me , I will show you what I have done . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ If you will listen carefully to the voice of the Lord your God and do what is right in his sight , obeying his commands and keeping all his decrees , then I will not make you suffer any of the diseases I sent on the Egyptians ; for I am the Lord who heals you . ”

ID:	1955
INPUT:	▁Axer ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeok : ▁Im na , ▁Ix ba , ▁Ix bi , ▁Ber ia ▁eta ▁hauen ▁arreba ▁S erah . ▁Ber iaren ▁semeak ▁Heber ▁eta ▁Mal ki el ▁izan ▁ziren .
PRED:	These were the sons of Kohath were the clans of the clans of the clans of Kohath . The sons of Gershon , named after their sister , named after the ancestor of Shelah .
GOLD:	The sons of Asher were Imnah , Ishvah , Ishvi , and Beriah . Their sister was Serah . Beriah 's sons were Heber and Malkiel .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁jantzi az , ▁zertan ▁kezkatu ? ▁Begira ▁nola ▁hazten ▁diren ▁loreak ▁zelaietan : ▁ez ▁dira ▁lanean ▁pena tzen , ▁ez ▁dute ▁iru ten ;
PRED:	“ Why are you dressed in the fields ? Why are you eating ? Why do n't they work in the fields ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	“ And why worry about your clothing ? Look at the lilies of the field and how they grow . They do n't work or make their clothing ,

ID:	1957
INPUT:	▁Aurrera tu ▁zen ▁talentu ▁bakarra ▁hartu ▁zuena ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁“ B anekien ▁gizon ▁zorrotza ▁zarena , ▁erein ▁ez ▁duzun ▁tokian ▁hartzen ▁eta ▁zabaldu ▁ez ▁duzun ▁tokian ▁biltzen ▁duzuna ;
PRED:	He took the money to the servant , and he said , ‘ You know where you do n't know where you do n't understand . Do n't realize that you do n't understand what you do . '
GOLD:	“ Then the servant with the one bag of silver came and said , ‘ Master , I knew you were a harsh man , harvesting crops you did n't plant and gathering crops you did n't cultivate .

ID:	1958
INPUT:	▁Zebah ▁eta ▁Tzalmuna ▁Kar kor ▁hirian ▁ziren ▁beren ▁gudarostearekin . ▁Hamab ost ▁mila ▁gizon ▁besterik ▁ez ▁zuten ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁ekialdeko ▁jendearen ▁gudarosteko ▁ehun ▁eta ▁hogei ▁mila ▁gudari ▁galduak ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then Joshua and our armies were camped at the town of Ophel . They were not a thousand men from the tribe of Benjamin and Benjamin .
GOLD:	By this time Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with about 15,000 warriors — all that remained of the allied armies of the east , for 120,000 had already been killed .

ID:	1959
INPUT:	▁Eliren ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Eli
GOLD:	The Death of Eli

ID:	1960
INPUT:	▁Igo arazi ▁nituen ▁Judako ▁buruzagiak ▁harresiaren ▁gainera ▁eta ▁bi ▁abes talde ▁egin ▁nituen . ▁Lehenengo ▁abes taldea ▁eskuinera ▁joan ▁zen ▁harresi ▁gainean , ▁Zabor tegiko ▁ate ▁aldera .
PRED:	I took the wall to the wall of the city , and I went on to the top of the other side of the Arnon River .
GOLD:	I led the leaders of Judah to the top of the wall and organized two large choirs to give thanks . One of the choirs proceeded southward along the top of the wall to the Dung Gate .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	▁Itzul tzean , ▁erre karen ▁alde ▁bietan ▁zuhaitz ▁asko ▁zegoela ▁ohartu ▁nintzen .
PRED:	When I looked at the garden , I saw many trees in the garden .
GOLD:	When I returned , I was surprised by the sight of many trees growing on both sides of the river .

ID:	1962
INPUT:	▁Beren ▁lurraldean ▁landatuko ▁ditut , eta ▁nik ▁eman ▁lurretik ez ▁dituzte ▁inoiz ▁aterako ». Zure ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁du .
PRED:	I will live in the land of the land , and you will never forget your God . ”
GOLD:	I will firmly plant them therein their own land.They will never again be uprootedfrom the land I have given them , ” says the Lord your God .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	▁Bere ako ▁juduek , ▁Tesalonik akoak ▁baino ▁jatorra goak ▁izaki ▁eta , ▁gogo ▁biziz ▁hartu ▁zuten ▁mezua ; ▁egunero ▁aztertu ▁ohi ▁zituzten ▁Liburu ▁Santuak , ▁gauzak ▁hala ▁ote ▁ziren ▁ikusteko .
PRED:	Some of the Jews who lived in Thessalonica , preaching the message of the law . When the word of God 's message , they said to him , “ What sorrow awaits you ? ”
GOLD:	And the people of Berea were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica , and they listened eagerly to Paul 's message . They searched the Scriptures day after day to see if Paul and Silas were teaching the truth .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	▁S emen ▁ondorengoak ▁Abrahamen ganaino
PRED:	The Birth of Abraham
GOLD:	The Line of Descent from Shem to Abram

ID:	1965
INPUT:	▁baizik ▁eta ▁lurrera ▁isuriko ▁duzue , ▁ura ▁bezala .
PRED:	You will pour out the ground on the ground , like water .
GOLD:	Instead , pour out the blood on the ground like water .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁egintzak ▁israeldarren ▁begi - bistan
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	The Blessings of Obedience

ID:	1967
INPUT:	▁Biho tza ▁uki tuko ▁diet ▁israeldar ▁guztiei , ▁beren ▁idoloen gatik ▁niregandik ▁urrundu ▁diren ▁horiei .
PRED:	I will destroy all the people of Israel , and I will turn them from their hands .
GOLD:	I will do this to capture the minds and hearts of all my people who have turned from me to worship their detestable idols . '

ID:	1968
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁hogeita ▁hamarren ▁bat ▁urte ▁zituen ▁bere ▁egiteko ari ▁ekin ▁zionean , ▁eta ▁jendearen ▁ustetan ▁Joseren ▁semea ▁zen ; ▁Jose , ▁berriz , ▁Eli rena ,
PRED:	When the rest of Joseph , he was leader in the land of Joseph . But Joseph was the oldest son of Joseph .
GOLD:	Jesus was about thirty years old when he began his public ministry.Jesus was known as the son of Joseph.Joseph was the son of Heli .

ID:	1969
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dago ▁batere ▁ongi ▁egin ▁duzuna . ▁Ala ▁Jainkoa ! ▁Heriotza ▁merezi ▁duzue ▁denok , ▁zeuen ▁nagusia , ▁Jaunaren ▁gantzutua , ▁zaindu ▁ez ▁duzuelako . ▁Begira ▁non ▁dauden ▁erregeak ▁bere ▁ondoan ▁zituen ▁lantza ▁eta ▁ur - an tox ina .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your master ! Do n't be afraid of you ! Do n't be afraid of the Lord your God ! Do n't be afraid of you ! ”
GOLD:	This is n't good at all ! I swear by the Lord that you and your men deserve to die , because you failed to protect your master , the Lord 's anointed ! Look around ! Where are the king 's spear and the jug of water that were beside his head ? ”

ID:	1970
INPUT:	▁Lehoi ▁gazte ▁bihurturik , lehoi ▁artean ▁ibiltzen ▁zen ; harrapakin a ▁sarraski tzen ▁ikasi eta ▁gizakiak ▁irensten ▁zituen ;
PRED:	“ If you think you are like a young man , he destroyed them .
GOLD:	He prowled among the other lionsand stood out among them in his strength.He learned to hunt and devour prey , and he , too , became a man-eater .

ID:	1971
INPUT:	▁Sar rer aren ▁kanpoaldetik ▁atalondo aren ▁barne al deraino , ▁guztira , ▁hogeita ▁bost ▁metro ▁zeuden .
PRED:	The capitals on the north side of the inner courtyard was 15 feet long .
GOLD:	The full length of the gateway passage was 871/2 feet from one end to the other .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁guztiei ▁agertu ▁ondoren , ▁neuri ▁ere ▁agertu ▁zitzaidan , ▁gar aiz ▁kanpo ▁jaiotako ▁haurra ▁bezalakoa ▁naizen ▁honi ;
PRED:	When I had seen this , I was in the womb , as though I was in the womb .
GOLD:	Last of all , as though I had been born at the wrong time , I also saw him .

ID:	1973
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁dolu ▁egingo ▁du ▁lurrak , il undu ▁egingo ▁goian ▁ortzia , har tua ▁baitut ▁erabakia ; ez ▁naiz ▁damutuko , ▁ez ▁atzera ▁egingo ».
PRED:	That is why the earth will disappear , and the earth will know that the Lord has spoken . I will change his mind , and he will change his mind . ”
GOLD:	The earth will mournand the heavens will be draped in blackbecause of my decree against my people.I have made up my mind and will not change it . ”

ID:	1974
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁esan ▁zioten :— Jauna , ▁baditugu ▁hemen ▁bi ▁ezpata . Baina ▁Jesusek ▁erantzun :— Aski ▁da !
PRED:	They replied , “ Lord , ” they replied . “ No , ” they replied .
GOLD:	“ Look , Lord , ” they replied , “ we have two swords among us. ” “ That 's enough , ” he said .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	▁Denak ▁Gaten ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁bizitzen , ▁Aki xen ▁inguruan : ▁Daviden ▁gizonak ▁nor ▁bere ▁famili arekin ▁eta ▁David ▁bera ▁bere ▁bi ▁emazte ekin , ▁Izreelgo ▁Ahino am ekin ▁eta ▁Karmel go ▁Nabalen ▁emazte ▁izana ▁zen ▁Abigail ekin .
PRED:	All the men of Judah had lived in Carmel , including David and his wives . He was Ahinoam from Carmel and Abigail .
GOLD:	David and his men and their families settled there with Achish at Gath . David brought his two wives along with him — Ahinoam from Jezreel and Abigail , Nabal 's widow from Carmel .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	▁Salomonek , ▁bere ▁emazte etarik ▁bat , ▁faraoiaren ▁alaba , ▁Daviden ▁Hiritik ▁berarentzat ▁eraikitako ▁jauregira ▁igoarazi ▁zuen , ▁bere ▁baitan ▁esanez : ▁« Nire ▁emazte ▁honek ▁ez ▁du ▁zilegi ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Daviden ▁jauregian ▁bizitzea , ▁santuak ▁baitira ▁Jaunaren ▁kutxa ▁egon ▁deneko ▁toki ak ».
PRED:	Solomon 's wife were given to his wife , and she was allowed to marry her . He said , “ He is the Ark of the Lord , the God of Israel , who is in the City of David . ”
GOLD:	Solomon moved his wife , Pharaoh 's daughter , from the City of David to the new palace he had built for her . He said , “ My wife must not live in King David 's palace , for the Ark of the Lord has been there , and it is holy ground . ”

ID:	1977
INPUT:	▁bizia ▁ematen ▁duen ▁mezuari ▁tinko ▁eutsiz . ▁Horixe ▁izango ▁dut ▁nik ▁harrotzeko ▁bide ▁Kristo ▁agertuko ▁den ▁egunean , ▁nire ▁lehia ▁eta ▁nekeak ▁ez ▁baititut ▁alferrik ▁emanak ▁izango .
PRED:	For we have given us the word of our ancestors , so we will know that I am writing to the very day of Christ .
GOLD:	Hold firmly to the word of life ; then , on the day of Christ 's return , I will be proud that I did not run the race in vain and that my work was not useless .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Boozek ▁herriko ▁nagusi ei ▁eta ▁han ▁zeuden ▁guztiei ▁esan ▁zien :— Gaur ▁lekuko ▁zaituztet , ▁nola ▁erosten ▁diodan ▁Noemiri ▁Elimelek ena ▁eta ▁Kil ion ▁eta ▁Mah lon ena ▁zen ▁guztia .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to all the people of Israel , “ I am sending you back to your family . I am sending you out of your servant . ”
GOLD:	Then Boaz said to the elders and to the crowd standing around , “ You are witnesses that today I have bought from Naomi all the property of Elimelech , Kilion , and Mahlon .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— O gi - puska ▁bus tia ▁emango ▁diodana , ▁huraxe ▁da . Eta ▁ogi - puska ▁bat ▁b ustiz , ▁Simon ▁Iskari o teren ▁seme ▁Jud asi ▁eman ▁zion .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If you have plenty of bread , I will give you a little harvest , and it will give you a little harvest . ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ It is the one to whom I give the bread I dip in the bowl. ” And when he had dipped it , he gave it to Judas , son of Simon Iscariot .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	▁« Men diak , ▁ohartu ▁gabe , ▁lekuz ▁aldatzen ▁ditu ▁berak , ira uli ▁egiten ▁ditu ▁bere ▁haserre an ;
PRED:	“ If you heard this , he will change his neck , he destroys its foolishness .
GOLD:	“ Without warning , he moves the mountains , overturning them in his anger .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁seme ▁izan ▁zituen : ▁Sem , ▁Kam ▁eta ▁Jaf et .
PRED:	The total number of Shem was the father of Shem , Shem , and Japheth .
GOLD:	Noah was the father of three sons : Shem , Ham , and Japheth .

ID:	1982
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁zedro - zura , ▁isipua , ▁purpura ▁gorrimina ▁eta ▁hegazti ▁bizia ▁harturik , ▁hegazti ▁hilaren ▁odoletan ▁eta ▁iturburuko ▁uretan ▁bus tiko ▁ditu , ▁eta ▁zazpi ▁bider ▁zipriztinduko ▁du ▁etxea .
PRED:	Then he will make a piece of blue cloth , a piece of blue cloth , purple , and birds , and birds , and sprinkle it with water .
GOLD:	He will take the cedar stick , the hyssop branch , the scarlet yarn , and the live bird , and dip them into the blood of the slaughtered bird and into the fresh water . Then he will sprinkle the house seven times .

ID:	1983
INPUT:	▁Akazia - zurezko ▁intsentsu - aldarea ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁karratua : ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁luze - zabal ▁eta ▁metro ▁bat ▁gora . ▁Aldare - ertzeko ▁adarrek ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egiten ▁zuten ▁aldare arekin .
PRED:	Then Bezalel made the altar of acacia wood , 71/2 feet wide , 71/2 feet wide , and 27 inches wide .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the incense altar of acacia wood . It was 18 inches square and 36 inches high , with horns at the corners carved from the same piece of wood as the altar itself .

ID:	1984
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁heriotzara ▁kondenatua
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Crucifixion

ID:	1985
INPUT:	▁Ezer tarako ▁ez ▁nituen ▁haien ▁besoak , z eharo ▁ahul duak ▁baitzeuden .
PRED:	I was not sorry for their hands , and I were terrified .
GOLD:	A lot of good they are to me — those worn-out wretches !

ID:	1986
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁faraoiak ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁esan ▁zien :— Erre gu tu ▁Jaunari ▁igelak ▁niri ▁eta ▁nire ▁herriari ▁kentzeko , ▁eta ▁utziko ▁diot ▁zuen ▁herriari ▁Jaunari ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzera ▁joaten .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and Aaron , and he said to Moses , “ Come , and let your people go to the Lord your God , and let your people go to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Frogs will jump on you , your people , and all your officials . ' ”

ID:	1987
INPUT:	▁Hamateko ▁errege ▁T oi - k ▁jakin ▁zuen ▁hondatua ▁zuela ▁Davidek ▁Hadadezerren ▁gudaroste ▁osoa .
PRED:	King David heard about the Babylonian army , and David learned that David had ruled over Philistia .
GOLD:	When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had destroyed the entire army of Hadadezer ,

ID:	1988
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁makila ▁kenduko ▁li d ake ▁gainetik eta ▁haren ganako ▁izuak ▁ez ▁ninduke ▁ikar atuko .
PRED:	Then I will turn away from heaven ; no one will fear him .
GOLD:	The mediator could make God stop beating me , and I would no longer live in terror of his punishment .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁beso - el b arri ari ▁esan ▁zion :— Jaiki ▁eta ▁zatoz ▁hona ▁erdira .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to her , “ Stand up , and come to see ! Come and tell him , ‘ Stand up ! '
GOLD:	Jesus said to the man with the deformed hand , “ Come and stand in front of everyone . ”

ID:	1990
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁etorri ▁zitzaiz uen ▁Joan ▁Bataiatzailea ▁Jainkoaren ▁nahi ari ▁dagokion ▁jokabidea ▁azalduz , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zenioten ▁sinetsi ; ▁zergal ariek ▁eta ▁emagaldu ek , ▁ordea , ▁sinetsi ▁zioten . ▁Eta ▁zuek , ▁hori ▁ikus ita ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁aldatu : ▁oraindik ▁ez ▁diozue ▁sinetsi .
PRED:	For you know John the Baptist , the Baptist came to you . But if you believe it , you do n't believe it . But you believe it , you believe it . But you did n't believe it .
GOLD:	For John the Baptist came and showed you the right way to live , but you did n't believe him , while tax collectors and prostitutes did . And even when you saw this happening , you refused to believe him and repent of your sins .

ID:	1991
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak
PRED:	The Most Holy Place
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	1992
INPUT:	▁Ezekias ▁eta ▁jende ▁guztia ▁pozik ▁zegoen , ▁Jainkoak ▁herri ▁osoari ▁horrela ▁eragin ▁ziolako ; ▁dena ▁bat - batean ▁era tua ▁baitzuten .
PRED:	When Hezekiah heard all the people , he saw everything God had done .
GOLD:	And Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of what God had done for the people , for everything had been accomplished so quickly .

ID:	1993
INPUT:	▁Tx alo ▁eta ▁tx istu ▁jotzen ▁diote ▁bere ▁etxetik ▁alde ▁egitean ».
PRED:	They will look at their feet , and they will die in his house . ”
GOLD:	But everyone jeers at themand mocks them .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	▁Isakarren ▁leinuko ▁senitarteak : ▁T ol arengandik <unk> atarrak , ▁P ub arengandik ▁pu bat arrak ,
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of the clans of the tribe of Issachar :
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Issachar : The Tolaite clan , named after their ancestor Tola.The Puite clan , named after their ancestor Puah .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	▁Senideok , ▁ez ▁ibili ▁bata ▁beste arengatik ▁gaizki - esaka . ▁Bere ▁senide az ▁gaizki ▁esaten ▁edo ▁hura ▁epaitzen ▁duenak ▁Jainkoaren ▁lege az ▁esaten ▁du ▁gaizki ▁eta ▁legea ▁epaitzen ▁du . ▁Eta ▁legea ▁epaitzen ▁baduzu , ▁ez ▁zara ▁legearen ▁bete tzaile , ▁epaile ▁baizik .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't understand the law of God 's law . But if you say , ‘ If you do n't believe the law of God 's law , you do not obey the law of God . '
GOLD:	Do n't speak evil against each other , dear brothers and sisters . If you criticize and judge each other , then you are criticizing and judging God 's law . But your job is to obey the law , not to judge whether it applies to you .

ID:	1996
INPUT:	▁Saulek ▁Davidi :— Bedeinkatua ▁zu , ▁ene ▁seme ▁David ! ▁Han diak ▁eginen ▁dituzu ▁eta ▁garaile ▁izango ▁egintza ▁guztietan ! David ▁bere ▁bidetik ▁joan ▁zen , ▁eta ▁Saul ▁etxera ▁itzuli .
PRED:	Then Saul said to David , “ Praise my son David , and he will rule over all the way to David . He will be with David and all Israel . ”
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed. ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	▁Israelen ▁argi ▁den ▁Jainko asu ▁bihurtuko ▁da , Israelen ▁Santua ▁sugar , eta ▁bat - batean ▁erreko ▁ditu , sas ia ▁eta ▁lah arra ▁bailiran .
PRED:	“ This is what the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel , and he will burn them with fire .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak :« Hara , ▁bad atoz ▁egunak : lur rera ▁gosea ▁bidaliko ▁dut ; ez ▁ogi - gosea , ▁eta ▁ez ▁ur - eg arria , Jaunaren ▁hitza ▁entzuteko gose - eg arria ▁baizik .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I am saying , ‘ I will send you into the fields , but I will send you hungry . '
GOLD:	“ The time is surely coming , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ when I will send a famine on the land — not a famine of bread or waterbut of hearing the words of the Lord .

ID:	1999
INPUT:	▁Era ik in - multzo ▁hark , ▁iparraldetik , ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metroko ▁luzera ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁bosteko ▁zabalera .
PRED:	He measured the north side of the north side of the north , and it was 150 feet long .
GOLD:	This structure , whose entrance opened toward the north , was 175 feet long and 871/2 feet wide .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	▁Jubileu ▁Urte aren ▁ondoren ▁sagaratzen ▁bada , ▁berriz , ▁apaizak ▁aterako ▁du ▁prez ioaren ▁kontua , ▁hurrengo ▁Jubileu ▁Urtea ▁arte ▁falta ▁diren ▁urte ei ▁dagokiena ▁prez io ▁oro kor retik ▁kenduz .
PRED:	In the Year of Jubilee the Year of Jubilee , the priest will be given to every year of its surrounding crops . In the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	But if the field is dedicated after the Year of Jubilee , the priest will assess the land 's value in proportion to the number of years left until the next Year of Jubilee . Its assessed value is reduced each year .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	▁Gabaon ▁hiriko ▁bizilagun ▁hibi arrek , ▁ordea , ▁Josuek ▁Jeriko ▁eta ▁Ai ▁hiriei ▁egina ▁jakitean ,
PRED:	But Joshua and the people of Israel heard what the Lord had done .
GOLD:	But when the people of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai ,

ID:	2002
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxerako ▁behar ▁izanen ▁duzun ▁guztia , ▁erregearen ▁altxor tegi tik ▁emango ▁dizute .
PRED:	“ All the Temple of God will come to the king of Heaven 's Armies , ” says the king .
GOLD:	If you need anything else for your God 's Temple or for any similar needs , you may take it from the royal treasury .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁ez ▁diet ▁errukirik ▁izango , ▁ezta ▁barkatuko ▁ere . ▁Beren ▁jokabidearen ▁ordaina ▁emango ▁diet ».
PRED:	So I will never show mercy to them , for I will punish them . ”
GOLD:	So I will not spare them or have any pity on them . I will fully repay them for all they have done . ”

ID:	2004
INPUT:	▁Barukek ▁liburuan ▁idatzitako ▁Jeremiasen ▁mezua ▁irakurri ▁zuen ▁herri ▁guztiaren ▁aurrean . ▁Xafanen ▁seme ▁Gem arias ▁gor teko ▁idazkariaren ▁gelan ▁kokatu ▁zen ▁horretarako , ▁Ate ▁Berri aren ▁sarreran ▁zegoen ▁goiko ▁atarian .
PRED:	When Jeremiah read the scroll , Jeremiah read the words of the scroll , he wrote down to the gate to the gate . When he was sitting on the gate , he was sitting on the gate .
GOLD:	Baruch read Jeremiah 's words on the scroll to all the people . He stood in front of the Temple room of Gemariah , son of Shaphan the secretary . This room was just off the upper courtyard of the Temple , near the New Gate entrance .

ID:	2005
INPUT:	▁B akoitzari ▁aldatzeko ▁jantziak ▁eman ▁zizkion . ▁Benjamin i , ▁gainera , ▁bost ▁jantzi ▁eta ▁zilarrezko ▁hirurehun ▁txanpon .
PRED:	He gave his clothes to the father of Benjamin , along with five pieces of silver and silver .
GOLD:	And he gave each of them new clothes — but to Benjamin he gave five changes of clothes and 300 pieces of silver .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	▁giltzurrunak ▁gaineko ▁gantzarekin , ▁saihets ei ▁itsatsia ▁dagoen ▁gantza ▁eta ▁gibela ▁estaltzen ▁duena ; ▁hori ▁guztia ▁kendurik ,
PRED:	along with the two kidneys and the two kidneys , the kidneys , the internal organs , and the internal organs , and the internal organs , the internal organs , and the internal organs ,
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	2007
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁zuzentasun ari ▁atzera ▁egin ▁gabe ▁eutsiko ▁diot ! Ez ▁dut ▁damu rik ▁bizitzako ▁egun ▁bakar ▁batez ▁ere .
PRED:	For I have refused to turn away from your unfailing love , and I will not forget those who trust in God .
GOLD:	I will maintain my innocence without wavering.My conscience is clear for as long as I live .

ID:	2008
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jehuk ▁Israel ▁osora ▁zabal arazi ▁zuen . ▁Baalen ▁adora tzaile ▁guztiak ▁etorri ▁ziren , ▁ez ▁zen ▁bat ▁ere ▁gelditu ▁etorri ▁gabe . ▁Sartu ▁zirenean , ▁Baalen ▁jauretx ea ▁erabat ▁bete ▁zen .
PRED:	So Jehu went out to the temple of Baal , and all the people of Israel came to worship Baal . They did n't come to worship the temple of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	2009
INPUT:	▁halere , ▁egia ▁diotsuet : ▁Hobe ▁da ▁zuentzat ▁ni ▁joatea ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁joaten ▁ez ▁banaiz , ▁ez ▁zaizue ▁etorriko ▁Lagun tzailea ; ▁joaten ▁banaiz , ▁ordea , ▁bidali ▁egingo ▁dizuet .
PRED:	But if I tell you , I am willing to go to you . But if I am willing , I will go to you . But if I am willing to go , I will go to you . ”
GOLD:	But in fact , it is best for you that I go away , because if I do n't , the Advocate wo n't come . If I do go away , then I will send him to you .

ID:	2010
INPUT:	▁Iparraldeko ▁sarreraren ▁aurrez ▁aurre , ▁barneko ▁atari rako ▁sarrera ▁zegoen , ▁ekialdetik ▁bezalaxe ; ▁sarrera ▁batetik ▁bes terako ▁tar tea ▁neurtu ▁zuen ▁gizonak : ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metro .
PRED:	The east gateway to the north side of the north gateway to the inner courtyard . He measured the inner gateway to the east side of the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	Here on the north side , just as on the east , there was another gateway leading to the Temple 's inner courtyard directly opposite this outer gateway . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	2011
INPUT:	▁« Adiskide tu , ▁beraz , ▁eta ▁egin ▁bakeak ▁Jainkoarekin ; horrela ▁itzuliko ▁zaizu ▁zoriona .
PRED:	“ May God bless you , ” he said .
GOLD:	“ Submit to God , and you will have peace ; then things will go well for you .

ID:	2012
INPUT:	▁Hurbildu ▁zitzaien ▁Jesus , ▁ukitu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Zu ti ▁zaitezte . ▁Ez ▁beldurtu !»
PRED:	Then Jesus came to them and told them , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus came over and touched them . “ Get up , ” he said . “ Do n't be afraid . ”

ID:	2013
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁denek ▁esan ▁zuten :— Zu ▁zara , ▁beraz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea ? Hark ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Zeuek ▁diozue , ▁neu ▁naiz .
PRED:	Then they said to him , “ You are the Son of God ? ” “ Yes , I am the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	They all shouted , “ So , are you claiming to be the Son of God ? ” And he replied , “ You say that I am . ”

ID:	2014
INPUT:	▁Herri ▁batean ▁pertsegitzen ▁bazaituztete , ▁egin ▁ihes ▁beste ▁batera . ▁Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea ▁etorri ▁aurretik , ▁ez ▁dituzue ▁Israelgo ▁herri ▁guztiak ▁igaroko .
PRED:	When you flee , you will flee , you will flee from the beginning of the Son of Man , you will come to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	When you are persecuted in one town , flee to the next . I tell you the truth , the Son of Man will return before you have reached all the towns of Israel .

ID:	2015
INPUT:	▁giltzurrunak ▁gaineko ▁gantzarekin , ▁saihets ei ▁itsatsia ▁dagoen ▁gantza ▁eta ▁gibela ▁estaltzen ▁duena ; ▁hori ▁guztia ▁kendurik ,
PRED:	along with the two kidneys and the two kidneys , the kidneys , the internal organs , and the internal organs , and the internal organs , the internal organs , and the internal organs ,
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	2016
INPUT:	▁Artem as ▁nahiz ▁T ikiko ▁zuregana ▁bidaliko ▁ditudanean , ▁zatozkit ▁lehenbailehen <unk> pol is era , ▁negua ▁bertan ▁igarotzeko ▁asmoa ▁baitut .
PRED:	I will send you back to you , and I will send you out to you , so I could send you into the past .
GOLD:	I am planning to send either Artemas or Tychicus to you . As soon as one of them arrives , do your best to meet me at Nicopolis , for I have decided to stay there for the winter .

ID:	2017
INPUT:	▁Profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzo ▁direnei ▁dagokienez , ▁mintza ▁daitezela ▁bi ▁edo ▁hiru , ▁eta ▁gainerakoek ▁eman ▁dezatela ▁beren ▁iritzia .
PRED:	If you listen to what the Lord says : If you are doing this , you must take some of them and take them away from them .
GOLD:	Let two or three people prophesy , and let the others evaluate what is said .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁bere ▁laguntzaile ▁nagusi ▁hura ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁hiri - sar rera ▁zain tzera ; ▁baina ▁jendeak ▁zanpatu ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen ▁bertan , ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizonak , ▁erregea ▁etortzean , ▁esan ▁bezala .
PRED:	So the king sent him back to his palace , but he sent him back to the town of God . But the people who had killed him , just as the king had said .
GOLD:	The king appointed his officer to control the traffic at the gate , but he was knocked down and trampled to death as the people rushed out.So everything happened exactly as the man of God had predicted when the king came to his house .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	▁nire ▁zerbitzariek poz - oihu ▁egingo ▁dute bihotza ▁bete ▁zorion ez ; zuek , ▁berriz , garrasi ▁egingo ▁bihotzeko ▁nahi gabez , aien e ▁barruko ▁saminez .
PRED:	Let them sing for joy , and they will sing for joy , but you will cry out to my ears .
GOLD:	My servants will sing for joy , but you will cry in sorrow and despair .

ID:	2020
INPUT:	▁Apaiz ▁berria ▁eta ▁itun ▁berria
PRED:	Jesus Is Greater Than God
GOLD:	A Call to Persevere

ID:	2021
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendea , moztu ▁ilea , ▁so ildu ▁buru ah ain ▁maite ▁dituzun zeure ▁seme - alab engatik ; so ildu ▁ezazu ▁kas koa ▁sai arena ▁bezala , erbestera tu ▁egingo ▁baitituzte zure gandik ▁urruti .
PRED:	They will wear your hair on your head , and your hair will wear your hair on your head .
GOLD:	Oh , people of Judah , shave your heads in sorrow , for the children you love will be snatched away.Make yourselves as bald as a vulture , for your little ones will be exiled to distant lands .

ID:	2022
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esandako aren ▁aurrean , ▁iritzi ▁kontra j arriak ▁zeuden ▁jendearen ▁artean .
PRED:	Then Jesus told them what he had happened .
GOLD:	When he said these things , the people were again divided in their opinions about him .

ID:	2023
INPUT:	▁Lebitar rok , ▁bedeinkatu ▁Jauna ! Jaunari ▁begirune ▁diozuenok , ▁bedeinkatu ▁Jauna !
PRED:	“ O Lord , listen to the Lord ! May the Lord bless you !
GOLD:	O Levites , praise the Lord ! All you who fear the Lord , praise the Lord !

ID:	2024
INPUT:	▁Askok ▁egingo ▁dute ▁bertan ▁estropezu , ▁erori ▁eta ▁hil ▁egingo ▁dira ; ▁sarean ▁bilduak ▁eta ▁harrapatu ak ▁geldituko ▁dira ».
PRED:	The people will fall into the grave , and they will die in the grave . ”
GOLD:	Many will stumble and fall , never to rise again.They will be snared and captured . ”

ID:	2025
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen ▁gizona , ▁eta ▁agintari ei ▁adierazi ▁zien ▁Jesus ▁zela ▁sendatu ▁zuena .
PRED:	He told the man , “ John the man , the man who was healed . ”
GOLD:	Then the man went and told the Jewish leaders that it was Jesus who had healed him .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hauen ▁ordez , ▁Roboam ▁erregeak ▁brontzezko ▁babeskiak ▁egin ▁eta ▁jauregiko ▁sarrera ▁zaintzen ▁zuen ▁talde aren ▁buru ▁zirenei ▁utzi ▁zizkien .
PRED:	When Rehoboam had finished giving thanks to Rehoboam , he took the shields of the guard and placed them in the palace of the guard .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam later replaced them with bronze shields as substitutes , and he entrusted them to the care of the commanders of the guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	▁Davidena . Es kerrak ▁ematen ▁dizkizut , ▁Jauna , ▁bihotz - bihotzez , beste ▁jainkoen ▁aurrean ▁zu ▁kantuz ▁ospatzen .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O Lord , for I will praise you with joy .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	▁Eskatu ▁niri , ▁eta ▁nazioak ▁emango ▁dizkizut ▁ondare , lur ▁osoaren ▁jabe ▁egingo ▁zaitut .
PRED:	Yes , I will give you the land of the nations , and I will give you the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	Only ask , and I will give you the nations as your inheritance , the whole earth as your possession .

ID:	2029
INPUT:	▁Ez ari - ez arian ▁botako ▁ditut ▁zuen ▁aurretik , ▁lurralde ▁hartaz ▁jabetzeko ▁adina ▁zuek ▁ugaldu ▁arte .
PRED:	I will drive them out before you , and I will bring them out before you .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	2030
INPUT:	▁Mikak , ▁orduan :— Geldi ▁zaitez ▁nirekin ; ▁kontseilari tzat ▁hartuko ▁zaitut , ▁nire ▁apaiz ▁izanen ▁zara . ▁Ordain ez , ▁urtean ▁zilarrezko ▁hamar ▁txanpon , ▁jantzi - multz oa ▁eta ▁jatekoa ▁emango ▁dizkizut .
PRED:	“ Get up , ” Micah said , “ I will give you silver to my priests . I will give you silver , silver , silver , silver , silver , and silver , and silver . ”
GOLD:	“ Stay here with me , ” Micah said , “ and you can be a father and priest to me . I will give you ten pieces of silver a year , plus a change of clothes and your food . ”

ID:	2031
INPUT:	▁Bihotz - erori ta ▁daude ▁nekaz ariak , garras ika ▁mahastiz ainak ; galdu ak ▁baitira ▁garia ▁eta ▁garagarra , hon datua ▁soro etako ▁uzta .
PRED:	My lover is glad , the wheat , and the five five five wheat , barley , barley , and barley .
GOLD:	Despair , all you farmers ! Wail , all you vine growers ! Weep , because the wheat and barley — all the crops of the field — are ruined .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	▁A <unk> ▁asko ▁aurpegira tuko ▁dizue , ezku tuan ▁alderdikeriaz ▁jokatzen ▁baduzue .
PRED:	Do n't forget your thoughts , and you will obey your commandments .
GOLD:	No , you will be in trouble with himif you secretly slant your testimony in his favor .

ID:	2033
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Noe ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeak ▁bedeinkatu ▁zituen , ▁esanez : ▁« S ortu ▁umeak , ▁ugaldu ▁eta ▁bete ▁lurra .
PRED:	Noah blessed Noah and his sons and blessed them , saying , “ May the earth be filled with joy and multiply .
GOLD:	Then God blessed Noah and his sons and told them , “ Be fruitful and multiply . Fill the earth .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	▁Harro tu ▁nahi ▁duena , harro ▁bedi ▁honetaz : ni ▁ezagutzeko ▁aski ▁argi ▁izateaz , ni , ▁Jauna , soli dari ta tea , ▁justizia ▁eta ▁zuzenbide amun duan ▁ezartzen ▁dituena . Horiek ▁ditut ▁atsegin . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who oppose me , saying , ‘ Let me be sure that I am the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't let the wise boast in their wisdom , or the powerful boast in their power , or the rich boast in their riches .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen ▁handik ▁Elias ▁eta ▁Xaf aten ▁seme ▁Eliseo ▁aurkitu ▁zuen ▁go ldean ; ▁hamabi ▁idi - par e ▁zituen ▁aurretik , ▁Eliseok ▁hamabigarren a ▁zeram alarik . ▁Ondo tik ▁igarotzean , ▁Eliasek ▁bere ▁soingainekoa ▁bota ▁zion ▁Eliseori ▁gainera .
PRED:	Then Elisha got up and found him , and he found the three armies of the three oxen . When he saw him , he was going down to the top of the town . Then Elijah took him down to the ground .
GOLD:	So Elijah went and found Elisha son of Shaphat plowing a field . There were twelve teams of oxen in the field , and Elisha was plowing with the twelfth team . Elijah went over to him and threw his cloak across his shoulders and then walked away .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	▁« Izan ▁gogoan ▁zeuek ▁ere ▁esklabo ▁izan ▁zinetela ▁Egipton ; ▁horregatik ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁xedapen ▁horiek ▁betetzeko .
PRED:	“ That is why I have been slaves in Egypt . That is why I commanded you to obey your commands .
GOLD:	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt . That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	2037
INPUT:	▁Izu a ▁eta ▁zuloa ▁eta ▁ze p oa ▁zuretzat , lurralde an ▁bizi ▁zaren ▁horren tzat .
PRED:	“ Go and hide your face , and you have lived in your land .
GOLD:	Terror and traps and snares will be your lot , you people of the earth .

ID:	2038
INPUT:	▁Daviden ▁eta ▁Bets aberen ▁s em etx oa ▁hil
PRED:	David 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	David Confesses His Guilt

ID:	2039
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁heste ▁gaineko ▁gantza , ▁gibela ▁estaltzen ▁zuena ▁eta ▁giltzurrunak ▁berauen ▁gantzarekin ▁harturik , ▁aldarean ▁erre ▁zituen .
PRED:	Then he took the internal organs , the internal organs , and the fat on the altar .
GOLD:	Then Moses took all the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , and he burned it all on the altar .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	▁Mahas tia ▁eta ▁pikondo ahon datu ▁egingo ▁dizkiot , hai etaz ▁baitzioen :“ Mai ta leek ▁emandako ▁sari ▁ditut ”. Sas traka ▁bihurtuko ▁dituteta ▁basapiztiek ▁jango ▁dituzte .
PRED:	I will make my covenant with my people , and I will give them this message : ‘ I will give my name to my ancestors . '
GOLD:	“ But then I will win her back once again.I will lead her into the desertand speak tenderly to her there .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁landare ▁bat ▁haz arazi ▁zuen , ▁Jonas ▁baino ▁handiagoa , ▁buruan ▁itzala ▁eman ▁ziezai on ▁eta ▁bere ▁suk arretik ▁libra ▁zezan . ▁Jonas ▁bizi ro ▁poztu ▁zen ▁landare arekin .
PRED:	Then the Sovereign Lord God poured out the water before the Lord , and he asked him to show him more than he could save you from the power of Jonah .
GOLD:	And the Lord God arranged for a leafy plant to grow there , and soon it spread its broad leaves over Jonah 's head , shading him from the sun . This eased his discomfort , and Jonah was very grateful for the plant .

ID:	2042
INPUT:	▁Aiko ▁gudua
PRED:	The famine in Bethel
GOLD:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed

ID:	2043
INPUT:	▁munduko ▁azken ▁mutur reraino ▁bota ▁bazin tuzten ▁ere , ▁bertara ▁joan ▁eta ▁bildu ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ;
PRED:	You will turn away from the world , and you will trample you away from the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Even though you are banished to the ends of the earth , the Lord your God will gather you from there and bring you back again .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Kanaan dar ▁honek , ▁ordea , p is u ▁faltsua ▁darabil , en gain ua ▁du ▁maite .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel are divided into the field , but a different person who loves you .
GOLD:	Israel boasts , “ I am rich ! I 've made a fortune all by myself ! No one has caught me cheating ! My record is spotless ! ”

ID:	2045
INPUT:	▁« N olan ah iko ▁aber eren ▁baten ▁odola ▁jaten ▁duenari ▁— israeldar ra ▁nahiz ▁israeldarren ▁artean ▁bizi ▁den ▁etorkina ▁izan — ▁aurpegi ▁emango ▁dio ▁Jaunak ▁eta ▁herritik ▁botako .
PRED:	“ If a person becomes a person who is detestable to the blood of the people of Israel , you must live among the foreigners living among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ And if any native Israelite or foreigner living among you eats or drinks blood in any form , I will turn against that person and cut him off from the community of your people ,

ID:	2046
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁promesak ▁Jaunari , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari , ▁eta ▁bete ; haren ▁inguruan ▁bildu ok , ekarri ▁emaitzak ▁Jainko ▁beldurgarri ari ,
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord your God , the God , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	For he breaks the pride of princes , and the kings of the earth fear him .

ID:	2047
INPUT:	▁Ar men ▁indarkeria - zale ▁zarete , ▁egintza ▁higuingarriak ▁egin ▁eta ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ▁emaztea ▁desohoratzen ▁duzue . ▁Nola ▁nahi ▁duzue , ▁bada , ▁lurralde ▁honen ▁jabetza ▁izan ?
PRED:	You have done evil in the land of the Lord 's heart , so why are you angry with your wife ? What is your wife ?
GOLD:	Murderers ! Idolaters ! Adulterers ! Should the land belong to you ? '

ID:	2048
INPUT:	▁P urpura ▁more , ▁gorri ▁eta ▁gorriminez ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁santutegiko ▁liturgi ▁zerbitzurako ▁jantziak . ▁Aaronen ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak ▁ere ▁egin ▁zituzten , ▁Jaunak ▁Moisesi ▁agindu ▁bezala .
PRED:	Then they made the curtain for the Tabernacle and placed it on the sanctuary of Aaron , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The craftsmen made beautiful sacred garments of blue , purple , and scarlet cloth — clothing for Aaron to wear while ministering in the Holy Place , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Gerar ko ▁artzainek ▁ses ioa ▁izan ▁zuten ▁Isaaken ▁artzain ekin . ▁Esaten ▁zuten : ▁« Geure a ▁diagu ▁ura !» Es ek ▁— hau ▁da , ▁« L is kar »— ▁izena ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁Isaakek ▁putzu ▁hari , ▁beronen gatik ▁liskar tu ▁zirelako .
PRED:	But there was a relative of Gerar with Isaac and his shepherd . They said , “ This is the one of us ! ” ( which means “ It is the father of Isaac . )
GOLD:	But then the shepherds from Gerar came and claimed the spring . “ This is our water , ” they said , and they argued over it with Isaac 's herdsmen . So Isaac named the well Esek ( which means “ argument ” ) .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁sinetsi ▁du ▁gure ▁mezua ? Nori ▁agertu ▁dio ▁Jaunakbere ▁ahalmena ?
PRED:	Who gives us this message ? Who is the power of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ?

ID:	2051
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Paulok ▁guardi ei ▁esan ▁zien :— Gu , ▁Erromako ▁hiritar ▁izanik , ▁epaitu ▁gabe ▁denen ▁aurrean ▁zigor katu ▁eta ▁kartzelan ▁sartu ▁gaituzte , ▁eta ▁orain ▁ezkutuan ▁nahi ▁gaituzte la ▁atera ? ▁Ez ▁horixe ! ▁D atoz ela ▁beraiek ▁gu ▁ateratzera !
PRED:	But Paul said to the city , “ We want to bring him to the city , so many of the city , so we can stop him . ”
GOLD:	But Paul replied , “ They have publicly beaten us without a trial and put us in prison — and we are Roman citizens . So now they want us to leave secretly ? Certainly not ! Let them come themselves to release us ! ”

ID:	2052
INPUT:	▁« H irur ogei ▁urtetik ▁gor akoa ▁bada , ▁gizonezko arentzat ▁hamabost ▁txanpon , ▁eta ▁emakume arentzat ▁hamar .
PRED:	“ If the older woman was thirty years old , the woman who was thirty years old .
GOLD:	A man older than sixty is valued at fifteen shekels of silver ; a woman of that age is valued at ten shekels of silver .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	▁Zoaz ▁orain ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁bere ▁luze - zabal ean ▁zehar ka tzera , ▁zeuri ▁emango ▁baitizu t ».
PRED:	Now go out to the land of the land of Canaan , and you will give you this land . ”
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	2054
INPUT:	▁Gizaki arentzat ▁hoberena j atea , ▁eda tea eta ▁bere ▁lanaren ▁fruitu az ▁goza tzea . Nik ▁uste ▁dut , ▁hau ▁ere Jainkoaren ▁eskutik ▁datorrela ;
PRED:	Yes , I am overwhelmed by the good things of God , and I am in Christ .
GOLD:	So I decided there is nothing better than to enjoy food and drink and to find satisfaction in work . Then I realized that these pleasures are from the hand of God .

ID:	2055
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁garbikuntza - ohikunea ▁amaitu ta , ▁hartu ▁akats ▁gabeko ▁zezen ▁bat ▁eta ▁ahari ▁bat
PRED:	After seven days , the priest must purify themselves with no defects , and no defects .
GOLD:	When you have finished the cleansing ceremony , offer another young bull that has no defects and a perfect ram from the flock .

ID:	2056
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Egiptoko ▁errege ▁faraoiaren ▁kontra ▁nator . ▁Bi ▁besoak ▁hautsiko ▁dizkiot , ▁ongi ▁duena ▁eta ▁jadanik ▁hautsia ▁duena , ▁eta ▁ezpata ▁eroraraziko ▁diot ▁eskutik .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the king of Egypt , the king of Egypt , and I will send them into a sword .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the enemy of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt ! I will break both of his arms — the good arm along with the broken one — and I will make his sword clatter to the ground .

ID:	2057
INPUT:	▁Ezkon du ei ▁agintzen ▁diet ▁— ez ▁nik , ▁Jaunak ▁baizik — ▁emaztea ▁ez ▁dadila ▁banandu ▁senarraren gandik ;
PRED:	And I have commanded you to be circumcised , but the Lord must not be allowed to marry her .
GOLD:	But for those who are married , I have a command that comes not from me , but from the Lord . A wife must not leave her husband .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Zuei ▁eman ▁zaizue ▁Jainkoaren ▁erregetzaren ▁misterio ak ▁ezagutzea ; ▁horiei , ▁ordea , ▁ez .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You are permitted to understand the Kingdom of God . But do n't understand it . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	▁Az ok atik ▁etxera tzean ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dute ▁jaten ▁garbikuntza ▁egin ▁gabe ; ▁eta ▁badute ▁beste ▁hamaika ▁ohitu raz ko ▁bete behar : ▁hala ▁nola ▁edal ontzi , ▁pitxer ▁eta ▁su il en ▁garb iketa .
PRED:	When they go home to the house , they must not eat the wine of wheat and drink .
GOLD:	Similarly , they do n't eat anything from the market until they immerse their hands in water . This is but one of many traditions they have clung to — such as their ceremonial washing of cups , pitchers , and kettles . )

ID:	2060
INPUT:	▁Garras i ▁l atzak ▁izango ▁dira ▁Egipto ▁osoan , ▁inoiz ▁ere ▁izan ▁ez ▁diren ▁eta ▁berriro ▁izango ▁ez ▁diren ▁bezalakoak .
PRED:	Yes , all the Egyptians will be ashamed of Egypt , and there will never be no more .
GOLD:	Then a loud wail will rise throughout the land of Egypt , a wail like no one has heard before or will ever hear again .

ID:	2061
INPUT:	▁sor oak ▁erein , ▁mahastiak ▁landatu ▁eta ▁uzta ▁opar oak ▁biltzen .
PRED:	They plant plant crops and planted it , and they harvest it .
GOLD:	They sow their fields , plant their vineyards , and harvest their bumper crops .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	▁Egoitz ako ▁ataria
PRED:	Plans for the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Building the Washbasin

ID:	2063
INPUT:	▁Jarri , ▁gero , ▁erre - oparien ▁aldarea ▁elkarketa - etxolako ▁egoitzaren ▁sarreran .
PRED:	Then he set the altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Place the altar of burnt offering in front of the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	▁« Gar au tegiak ▁gainezka ▁beteko ▁dizkizue ▁eta ▁eginkizun ▁guztietan ▁arrakasta ▁emango ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak : ▁bedeinkatu ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ▁berak ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	“ When you pray for joy , you will bless you and bless you , for the Lord your God will bless you and bless you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will guarantee a blessing on everything you do and will fill your storehouses with grain . The Lord your God will bless you in the land he is giving you .

ID:	2065
INPUT:	▁Uler tarazi ▁zeure ▁legea , ▁eta ▁gordeko ▁dut , bihotz - bihotzez ▁beteko .
PRED:	My heart is good to me ; I will obey your commandments .
GOLD:	Give me understanding and I will obey your instructions ; I will put them into practice with all my heart .

ID:	2066
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁gaztaroko ▁urteak ▁lab urtu ▁eta ▁lotsa ▁gorriz ▁bete ▁duzu .
PRED:	Your father is filled with fine goatskin leather ; your father is filled with fine goatskin leather .
GOLD:	O Lord , how long will this go on ? Will you hide yourself forever ? How long will your anger burn like fire ?

ID:	2067
INPUT:	▁baina ▁gure ▁apaizburu ▁eta ▁agintariek ▁heriotzara ▁kondenatu ▁dute ▁eta ▁gurutziltzatu .
PRED:	But the leading priests and teachers of religious law are called to death .
GOLD:	But our leading priests and other religious leaders handed him over to be condemned to death , and they crucified him .

ID:	2068
INPUT:	▁Behinola , ▁Eliseo ▁Damaskora ▁joan ▁zen . ▁Siriako ▁errege ▁Ben - Hadad ▁gaixo ▁zegoen . ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizona ▁etorria ▁zela ▁jakinarazi ▁ziotenean ,
PRED:	When Elisha went to Damascus , he went to Damascus and went to the man of God . When he was sick , he came to the man of God .
GOLD:	Elisha went to Damascus , the capital of Aram , where King Ben-hadad lay sick . When someone told the king that the man of God had come ,

ID:	2069
INPUT:	▁Obad iasek ▁joan ▁eta ▁dena ▁jakinarazi ▁zion ▁Akabi . ▁Orduan , ▁Akab ▁Eliasen gana ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	Then Ahab told him everything he had happened . Then Ahab got up and went to Ahab and went to Ahab .
GOLD:	So Obadiah went to tell Ahab that Elijah had come , and Ahab went out to meet Elijah .

ID:	2070
INPUT:	▁U har tean ▁gobernatzen ▁zuen ▁Ser gi o ▁Paulo ▁kontsul orde aren ▁inguru koa ▁zen . ▁Kon tsul ordea ▁zentz uzko ▁gizona ▁zen , ▁eta ▁Bern aberi ▁eta ▁Saul ori ▁deitu ▁zien , ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezua ▁entzun ▁nahirik .
PRED:	When he was named him , he went to the court secretary , and he called the man to the man of God . He knew what he had happened to him .
GOLD:	He had attached himself to the governor , Sergius Paulus , who was an intelligent man . The governor invited Barnabas and Saul to visit him , for he wanted to hear the word of God .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bainauzu ▁Herio ▁Leizera ▁botako , zure ▁fededun a ▁ez ▁duzu ▁hilobian ▁galtzen ▁utziko .
PRED:	Do not be afraid of your holy people , for you will not enter your grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your holy one to rot in the grave .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	▁Lebitarrak ▁erantzun :— Honela ▁eta ▁honela ▁hartu ▁nau ▁Mikak ; ▁ordaindu ▁egiten ▁dit , ▁beraren ▁apaiz ▁izateko .
PRED:	The Levites replied , “ This is what the priest says : The priest has been married to me . ”
GOLD:	He told them about his agreement with Micah and that he had been hired as Micah 's personal priest .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	▁Arro tzari , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁diote ▁jarraituko ; ▁aitzitik , ▁ihes ▁egingo ▁diote , ▁arro tzaren ▁ahotsa ▁ezaguna ▁ez ▁dutelako ».
PRED:	But they will not let them go to the grave , and they will flee . ”
GOLD:	They wo n't follow a stranger ; they will run from him because they do n't know his voice . ”

ID:	2074
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁beraren ▁aita ▁Amatziasek ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as his father .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his father , Amaziah , had done .

ID:	2075
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« J akizu ▁zure ▁ondorengoak ▁atzerritar ▁gisa ▁biziko ▁direla ▁berena ▁ez ▁duten ▁lurraldean . ▁Esklabo ▁bihurtuko ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁zapaldu rik ▁edukiko ▁laurehun ▁urtez .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ If you live among your descendants , they will live among you .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Abram , “ You can be sure that your descendants will be strangers in a foreign land , where they will be oppressed as slaves for 400 years .

ID:	2076
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁nire ▁tronuaren ▁lekua ▁da ▁hau , ▁oinak ▁jartzen ▁ditudan ▁lekua ; ▁hemen ▁biziko ▁naiz ▁israeldarren ▁erdian ▁betiko . ▁Ez ▁herriak , ▁ez ▁erregeek , ▁ez ▁dute ▁berriro ▁nire ▁izena ▁desohoratuko , ▁idolatria ▁eginez ▁edo ▁beren ▁erregeen ▁gorpuak ▁hemen ▁hilobira tuz .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , my feet will live in the mountains , and I will live there . I will live in the streets , and I will never live in my name .
GOLD:	The Lord said to me , “ Son of man , this is the place of my throne and the place where I will rest my feet . I will live here forever among the people of Israel . They and their kings will not defile my holy name any longer by their adulterous worship of other gods or by honoring the relics of their kings who have died .

ID:	2077
INPUT:	▁Bestela , ▁lehoiak ▁bezala ▁harrapatu eta ▁zati - zati ▁egingo ▁naute , eta ▁ezin ▁izango ▁nau ▁inork ▁libratu .
PRED:	If you think of me , I will bring me back to the lion , no one will save me .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	2078
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁sumin aren ▁suminez ▁zin ▁dagit ▁lurrikara ▁handia ▁izango ▁dela ▁Israelen .
PRED:	My anger is an object of fury ; it will be a solemn oath .
GOLD:	In my jealousy and blazing anger , I promise a mighty shaking in the land of Israel on that day .

ID:	2079
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁zoaz , ▁bada , ▁orain ▁Egiptora , N iloko ▁urak ▁edatera ? Zergatik ▁Asiriara , Eufrates ko ▁urak ▁edatera ?
PRED:	Why do you go to Egypt ? Why do you turn to Egypt ? Why will you drink ? What will you drink ? ”
GOLD:	“ What have you gained by your alliances with Egyptand your covenants with Assyria ? What good to you are the streams of the Nileor the waters of the Euphrates River ?

ID:	2080
INPUT:	▁« Bel x atzar ▁erregearen ▁hirugarren ▁urtean , ▁nik , ▁Danielek , ▁beste ▁ikuskari ▁bat ▁izan ▁nuen , ▁lehen ▁izandako az ▁gainera .
PRED:	When I heard the words of the king 's reign , I learned that I was in the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar .
GOLD:	During the third year of King Belshazzar 's reign , I , Daniel , saw another vision , following the one that had already appeared to me .

ID:	2081
INPUT:	▁Eliz ▁elkarteko ▁arduradunak
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Titus 's Work in Crete

ID:	2082
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁gizaseme , ▁egin ▁erbesteratu arena : ▁hartu ▁behar - beh arrez koa ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁erbestera ▁egun - argiz ▁beraien ▁aurrean . ▁Z au den ▁lekutik ▁beste ▁bat erantz ▁joango ▁zara ▁beraien ▁aurrean . ▁Agian , ▁orduan ▁ohar tuko ▁dira ▁herri ▁errebeldea ▁dela .
PRED:	“ Son of man , turn away from this city , and go down to captivity , and go down to Jerusalem . When you go to a place , you will be a place of ruins . Then you will return to your people .
GOLD:	“ So now , son of man , pretend you are being sent into exile . Pack the few items an exile could carry , and leave your home to go somewhere else . Do this right in front of the people so they can see you . For perhaps they will pay attention to this , even though they are such rebels .

ID:	2083
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁senide ▁maiteok , ▁irrika ▁biziz ▁nago ▁zuek ▁ikusteko . ▁Zuek , ▁maiteok , ▁ene ▁poz ▁eta ▁koroa ▁zaretenok , ▁iraun ▁ezazue ▁Jaunari ▁tinko ▁atxikiak .
PRED:	Dear friends , my dear brothers and sisters , I am sending you to the Lord .
GOLD:	Therefore , my dear brothers and sisters , stay true to the Lord . I love you and long to see you , dear friends , for you are my joy and the crown I receive for my work .

ID:	2084
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁gaude ▁orain ▁gari - uz tar oan ? ▁Dei ▁eginen ▁diot ▁Jaunari , ▁eta ▁berak ▁trumoiak ▁eta ▁euria ▁bidaliko ▁dizkigu . ▁Horrela ▁ikusi ▁eta ▁jakingo ▁duzue ▁zein ▁gaiztakeria ▁handia ▁egin ▁duzuen ▁Jaunaren ▁aitzinean , ▁zeuentzat ▁erregea ▁eskatuz .
PRED:	Why do n't we come to the land of Egypt ? I will send you down to the Lord , and he will send you rain to the Lord , and you will know that you have seen the king of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	You know that it does not rain at this time of the year during the wheat harvest . I will ask the Lord to send thunder and rain today . Then you will realize how wicked you have been in asking the Lord for a king ! ”

ID:	2085
INPUT:	▁Hamabi ei ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁b in aka ▁bidaltzen ▁hasi ▁zen , ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoak ▁botatzeko ▁ahalmena ▁ematen ▁ziela .
PRED:	He called out to the twelve disciples , and he began to send them into the power of the devil .
GOLD:	And he called his twelve disciples together and began sending them out two by two , giving them authority to cast out evil spirits .

ID:	2086
INPUT:	▁Ekarri ▁gogora , ▁Jauna , ▁zeure ▁errukia ▁eta ▁maitasuna : beti dan iko ak ▁dituzu .
PRED:	Lord , listen to me , O Lord , and he is my love .
GOLD:	Remember , O Lord , your compassion and unfailing love , which you have shown from long ages past .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁horra , ▁santutegiko ▁oihala ▁erdiz ▁erdi ▁urratu ▁zen , ▁goitik ▁beh eraino ; ▁lurrikara ▁izan ▁zen ▁eta ▁hark aitzak ▁zar tatu ▁egin ▁ziren ;
PRED:	Then the curtain was covered by the sanctuary , and there was a great place . It was a great earthquake , and there was a great earthquake .
GOLD:	At that moment the curtain in the sanctuary of the Temple was torn in two , from top to bottom . The earth shook , rocks split apart ,

ID:	2088
INPUT:	▁Ger tu ▁dago , ▁begirune ▁diotenak ▁salbatzeko ; bai , ▁haren ▁ospea ▁gure ▁lurraldean ▁kokatuko ▁da .
PRED:	For he is faithful to us , and he is his glory .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and truth have met together.Righteousness and peace have kissed !

ID:	2089
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hau ▁agindu ▁zion ▁mezulari ari : ▁« Gu du ari ▁buruzko ▁berri ▁guztiak ▁eman ▁ondoren ,
PRED:	Then Jephthah gave this message to Jephthah : “ Here is the Messiah .
GOLD:	He told his messenger , “ Report all the news of the battle to the king .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	▁Beh eko ▁solairu a ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdi ▁zabal ▁zen , ▁erdikoa ▁hiru ▁metro ▁eta ▁hirugarrena ▁hiru ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdi . ▁S ol <unk> ▁bakoitzean ▁tenpluko ▁horma ▁kanpoaldetik ▁m eh ea goa ▁zen , ▁maila ▁moduko ▁batzuk ▁eginez , ▁eta ▁maila ▁hauen ▁gainean ▁ezarri ▁zituzten ▁habeak , ▁tenpluko ▁hormak ▁zulatu ▁beharrik ▁gabe .
PRED:	The two blocks of rooms were 30 feet wide , 30 feet wide , and 45 feet wide . The entry room was 71/2 feet wide , and the walls of the Temple 's Temple was 101/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	The complex was three stories high , the bottom floor being 71/2 feet wide , the second floor 9 feet wide , and the top floor 101/2 feet wide . The rooms were connected to the walls of the Temple by beams resting on ledges built out from the wall . So the beams were not inserted into the walls themselves .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁zuen ▁askatzaileak , Israelen ▁Jainko ▁santuak :« Zuen ▁onerako , gu daros tea ▁bidaliko ▁dut ▁Babiloniara eta ▁denak ▁ihesi ▁aterako ▁dira , ihesi ▁babiloniarrak , beren ▁ontzi etan ▁babes turik .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I am the Holy One of Israel , the Lord , the God of Israel , says : “ I will send them to Babylon .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel : “ For your sakes I will send an army against Babylon , forcing the Babylonians to flee in those ships they are so proud of .

ID:	2092
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁haserreak ▁akiturik ▁gauz ka , ▁zure ▁suminak ▁ikara ▁bizian .
PRED:	Do n't let us stop telling us about your word .
GOLD:	We wither beneath your anger ; we are overwhelmed by your fury .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁salbamen - indar ▁hau ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ganako ▁sinesmenaren ▁bidez ▁heltzen ▁da , ▁fededun ▁guztien gana ▁heldu ▁ere . ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁bereizkeriarik ▁egiten ,
PRED:	God is a strong hand for us , and he is God through God 's holy people . He is not pleased with God , for God 's sake .
GOLD:	We are made right with God by placing our faith in Jesus Christ . And this is true for everyone who believes , no matter who we are .

ID:	2094
INPUT:	▁Herri ▁osoak ▁negarrari ▁eman ▁zion ▁legearen ▁hitzak ▁entzutean . ▁Orduan , ▁Nehem ias ▁gobernariak , ▁Esdras ▁lege - maisuak ▁eta ▁irakasten ▁ari ▁ziren ▁lebitarrek ▁esan ▁zioten ▁herriari : ▁« Gaur ko ▁eguna ▁Jaunari , ▁gure ▁Jainkoari , ▁sagaratua ▁dugu . ▁Beraz , ▁ez ▁egon ▁triste , ▁ez ▁egin ▁negarrik ».
PRED:	When all the people returned to the Law of Nehemiah , the leaders of the Law of Nehemiah , the people of religious law said to the Lord , “ We have come to the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	Then Nehemiah the governor , Ezra the priest and scribe , and the Levites who were interpreting for the people said to them , “ Do n't mourn or weep on such a day as this ! For today is a sacred day before the Lord your God. ” For the people had all been weeping as they listened to the words of the Law .

ID:	2095
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁zerutik ▁begira , ▁gizaki ▁guztiak ▁ikusten ▁ditu ;
PRED:	For the Lord is coming from heaven , and he sees everything he sees .
GOLD:	The Lord looks down from heavenand sees the whole human race .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁era sor ako ▁seinalea Babiloniako ▁harres ien ▁aurka ; sendo tu ▁guardia - pos tuak , ugari tu ▁zaintzaileak , jarri ▁gudariak ▁zelatan . Izan ▁ere , ▁Jaunak ▁badu ▁asmo ▁bat , Babiloniako ▁bizilagunen ▁aurk ai ra garria , eta ▁burutu ▁egingo ▁du ▁orain .
PRED:	When the Lord hears his plans against us , he will attack them . He will attack the people of the city , the Lord will attack the people of Israel , and he will destroy them .
GOLD:	Raise the battle flag against Babylon ! Reinforce the guard and station the watchmen.Prepare an ambush , for the Lord will fulfill all his plans against Babylon .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁gauza ▁bera ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Hau ▁eta ▁hau ▁egingo ▁diote ▁hori ▁hilko ▁duenari .
PRED:	The people replied , “ This is what the man says , ‘ This is what the man says . '
GOLD:	And these men gave David the same reply . They said , “ Yes , that is the reward for killing him . ”

ID:	2098
INPUT:	▁Ahots ▁honen ▁oihu az , ▁tenpluko ▁ate - or po ek ▁dar - dar ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁eta ▁tenplua ▁kez ▁bete ▁zen .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord heard about the Temple ; the voice of the Temple was filled with the Temple .
GOLD:	Their voices shook the Temple to its foundations , and the entire building was filled with smoke .

ID:	2099
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁denboraldi ▁batera , ▁juduek ▁Saulo ▁hiltzea ▁erabaki ▁zuten ;
PRED:	When Saul arrived at the time , they went home to death .
GOLD:	After a while some of the Jews plotted together to kill him .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	▁Ezku tatu ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁David ▁landan . ▁Il berri - jaia ▁heltzean , ▁jarri ▁zen ▁erregea ▁otor durako , ▁bazkal tzeko .
PRED:	When David arrived in the field , David went to the field . When David arrived in the field , he found a banquet for the king .
GOLD:	So David hid himself in the field , and when the new moon festival began , the king sat down to eat .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	▁“ Aita ” ▁deitzen ▁diot ▁ho bi an ▁usteldu tako ari ,“ ama , ▁arreba ” ▁jango ▁nauten ▁har rei .
PRED:	‘ ‘ Father , ' I say , ‘ This is the truth who is true , ' and my sister will eat it .
GOLD:	What if I call the grave my father , and the maggot my mother or my sister ?

ID:	2102
INPUT:	▁Mundu ▁honetako ▁agintari etatik ▁batek ▁ere ▁ez ▁du ▁jakinduria ▁hori ▁ezagutu , ▁zeren , ▁ezagutu ▁izan ▁balute , ▁ez ▁baitzu keten <unk> atuko ▁Jainkoaren ▁aintza ▁berekin ▁zuen ▁Jauna .
PRED:	In this way , one of the world will know that God would not be able to know that the glory of God had been called to those who knew God .
GOLD:	But the rulers of this world have not understood it ; if they had , they would not have crucified our glorious Lord .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁zituen , ▁aldiz , ▁Ai aren ▁alaba ▁R itz pak ▁Sauli ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁bi ▁semeak , ▁Ar m oni ▁eta ▁Mefi - Boxet , ▁eta ▁Saulen ▁alaba ▁Mikalek ▁Ad ri eli , ▁Meh olako ▁Bartzil airen ▁semeari , ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁bost ▁semeak ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits Saul , the daughter of Saul , the daughter of Saul , and she gave him two sons to Mephibosheth , the daughter of Saul .
GOLD:	But he gave them Saul 's two sons Armoni and Mephibosheth , whose mother was Rizpah daughter of Aiah . He also gave them the five sons of Saul 's daughter Merab , the wife of Adriel son of Barzillai from Meholah .

ID:	2104
INPUT:	▁Jakobek ▁Esau rekin ▁topo ▁egin
PRED:	Jacob Flees to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jacob and Esau Make Peace

ID:	2105
INPUT:	▁Bitartean , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁gudarostea ▁Jerusalemi ▁eta ▁artean ▁Judan ▁tinko ▁irauten ▁zuten ▁bi ▁hiri ▁got orrei , ▁Lakix ▁eta ▁Az ek ari , ▁erasotzen ▁ari ▁zen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the king of Babylon and his army was buried among the king of Judah . The king of Judah was located between the king and the king of Judah .
GOLD:	At this time the Babylonian army was besieging Jerusalem , Lachish , and Azekah — the only fortified cities of Judah not yet captured .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁utzirik , ▁berriz ▁ere ▁aldendu ▁eta ▁hirugarren ▁aldiz ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁lehengo ▁hitzak ▁berriro ▁esanez .
PRED:	But they left the third day and prayed to the third day . Then he prayed again to the third day .
GOLD:	So he went to pray a third time , saying the same things again .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁Jauna , ▁jende ▁leiala ▁nahi ▁duzu . Jo ▁zenituen , baina ▁ez ▁zuten ▁damu rik ▁izan ; ia ▁akabatu , ▁baina ▁ez ▁ziren ▁zentzatu . Hark aitza ▁bezain ▁gogor ▁aurpegia , ez ▁zuten ▁on bideratu ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	O Lord , you are faithful to him , but you refused to listen to him , but you refused to turn away from your face .
GOLD:	Lord , you are searching for honesty.You struck your people , but they paid no attention.You crushed them , but they refused to be corrected.They are determined , with faces set like stone ; they have refused to repent .

ID:	2108
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁eraman ▁zekorra ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁aurrera . ▁Aaronek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeek ▁buruan ▁eskuak ▁ezarriko ▁dizkiote .
PRED:	“ Aaron and his sons must lay their hands on the entrance of the Tabernacle , and his sons must lay their hands on the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Bring the young bull to the entrance of the Tabernacle , where Aaron and his sons will lay their hands on its head .

ID:	2109
INPUT:	▁Ilun petan ▁zaude ▁ezer ▁ikusi ▁ezin da , u holde ek ▁azpi ratua ▁bezala .
PRED:	For there is no sound like grass ; there is no grass in the grave .
GOLD:	That is why you can not see in the darkness , and waves of water cover you .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁irten ▁zen ▁H atak ▁Mardokeoren ▁bila , ▁jauregi ▁aurrean ▁zegoen ▁plaz ara .
PRED:	So she went out to search for the palace .
GOLD:	So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the square in front of the palace gate .

ID:	2111
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁lege ▁honen ▁xedapen ▁guztiak ▁liburuan ▁idatzi ▁zituenean ,
PRED:	So Moses wrote all these instructions in the Book of Instruction .
GOLD:	When Moses had finished writing this entire body of instruction in a book ,

ID:	2112
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁bereganatu ▁zituen ▁Judako ▁gizon ▁ororen ▁bihotzak ▁batean , ▁eta ▁eskari ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zioten ▁erregeari : ▁« Itzul ▁zakizkigu , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁guztiekin ».
PRED:	Then he sent his spirit into the region of Judah and sent this message to the king of Judah . They said , “ Return to your servants , your servants , and all your servants . ”
GOLD:	So the king started back to Jerusalem . And when he arrived at the Jordan River , the people of Judah came to Gilgal to meet him and escort him across the river .

ID:	2113
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁zitara ▁dol um inez ▁dago , tx iru la ▁negarrez .
PRED:	The Lord detests my prayer ; he hears my prayer .
GOLD:	My harp plays sad music , and my flute accompanies those who weep .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	▁Zeren , ▁egia ▁esan , ▁niregan ▁bete ▁beharra ▁baita ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁dioena : ▁Bekatari en ▁kideko tzat ▁jo ▁zuten . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁nireak ▁laster ▁egingo ▁du .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ Yes , the Scriptures say , ‘ Yes , I am going to curse you . ' ”
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	2115
INPUT:	▁Hara gi ▁gur iz janari tuko ▁ditut ▁apaizak , nire ▁ondasunez ▁aseko ▁da ▁herria . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Look , I will make them strong , and the priests will be destroyed . ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The priests will enjoy abundance , and my people will feast on my good gifts.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2116
INPUT:	▁Aldi ▁hartan ▁ez ▁zen ▁erregerik ▁Israelen . ▁Danen ▁leinukoak ▁lurralde ▁baten ▁bila ▁zebiltzan , ▁bertan ▁bizitzeko , ▁ordu ▁arte ▁zoz ketan ▁ez ▁baitzitzaien ▁atera ▁beren tzako ▁lurral derik ▁israeldarren ▁artean .
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel did not seek the land of Dan . They were allowed to stay in the land of the land of Israel .
GOLD:	Now in those days Israel had no king . And the tribe of Dan was trying to find a place where they could settle , for they had not yet moved into the land assigned to them when the land was divided among the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2117
INPUT:	▁Uholde ak ▁maitasuna ▁ezin ▁itzali , ezta ▁ibai ek ▁ere ▁ito . Norbaitek ▁maitasuna ▁erosi ▁nahi ▁balu , bere ▁ondasun ▁guztiak ▁emanik ▁ere , mes pretx ua ▁baizik ▁ez ▁luke ▁aterako .
PRED:	He does not forget the flood , but he does n't turn away from the sea . But if he wants them , he wo n't turn away from them .
GOLD:	Many waters can not quench love , nor can rivers drown it.If a man tried to buy lovewith all his wealth , his offer would be utterly scorned .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	▁Zi giluz ▁mar katuak ▁zenbat ▁ziren ▁entzun ▁nuen : ▁ehun ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁lau ▁mila , ▁israeldar ▁leinu ▁guzti etarik ▁hartuak :
PRED:	When they heard their surrounding villages , I heard the troops of the tribes of Israel ,
GOLD:	And I heard how many were marked with the seal of God — 144,000 were sealed from all the tribes of Israel :

ID:	2119
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁horrenbeste ▁egingo ▁duzue ▁herritarrak ▁galdu ▁eta ▁zuek ▁aurkitu tako ▁asto , ▁soingaineko ▁nahiz ▁beste ▁edozer ▁gauz arekin ▁ere ; ▁ez ▁egin ▁ez ▁ikusiarena .
PRED:	Then you will be cut off from your family , and you will have a piece of silver or fine linen or fine linen or fine linen .
GOLD:	Do the same if you find your neighbor 's donkey , clothing , or anything else your neighbor loses . Do n't ignore your responsibility .

ID:	2120
INPUT:	▁S ua ▁d oak io ▁aurretik , ▁inguruko ▁etsaiak ▁kiskal iz .
PRED:	But the wicked plot evil ; the noise of your enemies are filled with fire .
GOLD:	Fire spreads ahead of himand burns up all his foes .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	▁Efron ▁bera ▁eseria ▁zegoen ▁beste ▁hitita ▁guztien ▁artean , ▁hiri - sarrerako ▁plazan . ▁Den en ▁aurrean ▁erantzun ▁zion :
PRED:	She was sitting among the other nations who had been sitting on the gate . He said to him ,
GOLD:	Ephron was sitting there among the others , and he answered Abraham as the others listened , speaking publicly before all the Hittite elders of the town .

ID:	2122
INPUT:	▁Samariara ▁heltzean , ▁Eliseok ▁esan ▁zuen :— Ireki ▁iezazki ezu ▁begiak , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁ikus ▁dezatela . Ireki ▁zizkien , ▁beraz , ▁Jaunak ▁begiak ▁eta ▁Samaria ▁erdian ▁zeudela ▁ikusi ▁zuten .
PRED:	When Elisha arrived , Elisha said to Samaria , “ Do n't let anyone go down to Samaria and see the Lord , ” So the Lord saw the eyes of Samaria and Samaria .
GOLD:	As soon as they had entered Samaria , Elisha prayed , “ O Lord , now open their eyes and let them see. ” So the Lord opened their eyes , and they discovered that they were in the middle of Samaria .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁Odol ▁hau ▁Jainkoak ▁zuekin ▁egiten ▁duen ▁itunaren ▁ezaugarri ▁da .
PRED:	Then God said to you , “ This is a covenant with you . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ This blood confirms the covenant God has made with you . ”

ID:	2124
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁ote ▁l ezak ete ▁lauoin k ah aitz etan ▁zaldi ek ? G <unk> ▁ote ▁l ezak ete ▁itsasoa ▁idiek ? Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁zuzenbidea ▁pozoi bihurtu ▁duzue , ▁justizia ▁samin dura .
PRED:	“ Why do you look ? Who is you ? Who is you ? ” he asked . “ Why do you look ? Why do you look ? ”
GOLD:	Can horses gallop over boulders ? Can oxen be used to plow them ? But that 's how foolish you are when you turn justice into poisonand the sweet fruit of righteousness into bitterness .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	▁« Zuek , ▁Jainkoaren ▁agindua ▁bazterrera ▁utzi ▁eta ▁giza ▁ohitu rari ▁eusten ▁diozue ».
PRED:	“ You must not obey the commands of God . ”
GOLD:	For you ignore God 's law and substitute your own tradition . ”

ID:	2126
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁nion : ▁“ Hon aino ▁iritsiko ▁zara , ▁ez ▁aurrera go , hemen ▁amaitzen ▁da ▁zure ▁uhin en ▁harrokeria ”.
PRED:	Then I said to them , ‘ This is what your thoughts says : ‘ Your pride is filled with your pride . '
GOLD:	I said , ‘ This far and no farther will you come.Here your proud waves must stop ! '

ID:	2127
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Neuk ▁defen datuko ▁dut ▁zure ▁auzia , neure ▁gain ▁hartuko ▁zure ▁mendekua : Babiloniako ▁ibaiak ▁hustuko ▁ditut , itur buruak ▁agor tuko .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I will send you out against you , ” says the Lord . “ I will send them into battle .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Jerusalem : “ I will be your lawyer to plead your case , and I will avenge you.I will dry up her river , as well as her springs ,

ID:	2128
INPUT:	▁Goraintziak ▁Pris ka ▁eta ▁Ak il ari , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁zerbitzuan ▁laguntzaile ▁izan ▁ditudan ei .
PRED:	Give my greetings to my greetings to the believers in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila , my co-workers in the ministry of Christ Jesus .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁baitan ▁aita - amak ▁desohoratzen ▁dituzte , ▁etorkina ▁gogor ▁hartu ▁eta ▁umezur tza ▁eta ▁alarguna ▁ustia tzen .
PRED:	Your father is the father of adultery , sheep , goats , and widows .
GOLD:	Fathers and mothers are treated with contempt . Foreigners are forced to pay for protection . Orphans and widows are wronged and oppressed among you .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	▁Esklab oak ▁askatu ▁eta ▁berriro ▁esklabo ▁egin
PRED:	Slaves and Slaves
GOLD:	Freedom for Hebrew Slaves

ID:	2131
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁egin ▁dut ▁lurra eta ▁lur ▁gainean ▁gizakia ▁sortu ; neuk ▁hedatu ▁ditut ▁neure ▁eskuz ▁zeruak , eta ▁neuk ▁agintzen bertako ▁astro ▁guztiei .
PRED:	I have created the earth , and I created the heavens . I made the heavens and the heavens , the heavens , and the heavens of the earth .
GOLD:	I am the one who made the earthand created people to live on it.With my hands I stretched out the heavens.All the stars are at my command .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	▁Gol go ta ▁izeneko ▁tokira ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁Jesus ▁ ( G ol go tak ▁« B urez ur » ▁esan ▁nahi ▁du ) .
PRED:	The soldiers took him to the place where Jesus was named him . “ He is called the called to the named him , ” he said .
GOLD:	And they brought Jesus to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	▁Asetzeraino ▁jan ▁zuten ▁denek , ▁eta ▁gelditutako ▁hondar rez ▁hamabi ▁saski ▁bete ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So they ate as much as they had eaten , and they took twelve large baskets of bread .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted , and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftovers !

ID:	2134
INPUT:	▁Behartsu ▁izan ▁eta , ▁gero , ▁jende ▁xehea ▁zapaltzen ▁duen au holde ▁suntsi garria ▁da : ▁zer ▁janik ▁ere ▁ez ▁du ▁uzten !
PRED:	For the poor people of the poor , but the needy will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	A poor person who oppresses the pooris like a pounding rain that destroys the crops .

ID:	2135
INPUT:	▁Era bateko ▁ba tasuna
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Unity in the Body

ID:	2136
INPUT:	▁Israeldarren ▁artetik , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁inor ▁ere ▁esklabo ▁izatera ▁behartu ; ▁baizik ▁eta ▁bere ▁gudari , ▁ofizial , ▁gudalburu , ▁ezkutari ▁eta ▁bere ▁gurdi teria ▁eta ▁zaldi teriaren ▁arduradun ▁egin ▁zituen .
PRED:	But he did not include the army of Israel . Instead , he also sent his army to fight his chariot officers and horses .
GOLD:	But Solomon did not conscript any of the Israelites for forced labor . Instead , he assigned them to serve as fighting men , government officials , officers and captains in his army , commanders of his chariots , and charioteers .

ID:	2137
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zen ▁ohartu ▁bere ▁erraina ▁zela . ▁Hala , ▁hurbildu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— Uztazu ▁zurekin ▁oheratzen . Hark ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Zer ▁emango ▁didazu ▁ordainetan ?
PRED:	When he realized that he was not going , he said to his wife , “ What is he ? ” he asked . “ What is you ? ”
GOLD:	So he stopped and propositioned her . “ Let me have sex with you , ” he said , not realizing that she was his own daughter-in-law. “ How much will you pay to have sex with me ? ” Tamar asked .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	▁ergel ak ▁berrik eta ▁ugari . Gizon ak ▁ez ▁daki ▁zer ▁datorkion . Eta ▁nork ▁adieraz ▁diezaioke beraren ▁ondoren ▁zer ▁gertatuko ▁den ?
PRED:	The wise people do n't know how much the godless are saying , ‘ What can they understand ? What can they understand ? '
GOLD:	they chatter on and on.No one really knows what is going to happen ; no one can predict the future .

ID:	2139
INPUT:	▁para disu an ▁bizi ▁zinen , ▁Jainkoaren ▁baratzean , ▁mota ▁guztietako ▁harribitxiz ▁apaindua , ▁kor nal ina , ▁top azio ▁eta ▁ber il oz , ▁kri soli to , ▁onize ▁eta ▁jas pez , ▁zafiro , ▁erru bi ▁eta ▁esmeral daz ▁apaindua ; ▁urrez ▁landuak ▁ziren ▁zure ▁bitxi ▁eta ▁apain gail uak , ▁sortu ▁zintuzten ▁egun ▁berean ▁prestatu ak .
PRED:	Your neck was made of silver , precious jewels , precious jewels , and precious jewels , precious jewels , and precious jewels .
GOLD:	You were in Eden , the garden of God.Your clothing was adorned with every precious stone — red carnelian , pale-green peridot , white moonstone , blue-green beryl , onyx , green jasper , blue lapis lazuli , turquoise , and emerald — all beautifully crafted for youand set in the finest gold.They were given to youon the day you were created .

ID:	2140
INPUT:	▁Ar duradun ak ▁akats ▁gabea ▁izan ▁behar ▁du , ▁behin ▁bakarrik ▁ezkondua ; ▁haren ▁seme - alabek ▁sineste dunak ▁izan ▁behar ▁dute , ▁jokaera ▁gaiztoz ▁nahiz ▁errebeldi az ▁salatu ▁gabeak .
PRED:	“ If any of the man has been unfaithful to her , she must be faithful to her . She must be faithful to her , she must be faithful to her , and she must be unfaithful to her .
GOLD:	An elder must live a blameless life . He must be faithful to his wife , and his children must be believers who do n't have a reputation for being wild or rebellious .

ID:	2141
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁asko ▁zituen ▁sendatu ak , ▁eta ▁gaitzen ▁bat ▁zuten ▁guztiak ▁gainera ▁zetoz kion ▁ukitu ▁nahiz .
PRED:	For he healed many of them , and he healed everyone who touched him .
GOLD:	He had healed many people that day , so all the sick people eagerly pushed forward to touch him .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁herritarrak zintzo ▁izango ▁dira ▁denak eta ▁lurraldearen ▁jabe bihurtuko ▁betiko : nik ▁ezarritako ▁landare ▁berri , neure ▁ospea ▁agertzeko egin iko ▁o b ra .
PRED:	Your people will become an object of your people , and I will make you an end of your glory .
GOLD:	All your people will be righteous.They will possess their land forever , for I will plant them there with my own handsin order to bring myself glory .

ID:	2143
INPUT:	▁Kristo ▁zuengan ▁baldin ▁badago , ▁berriz , ▁gorputza ▁bekatuagatik ▁hil ▁egingo ▁den ▁arren , ▁Espirituak ▁badu ▁bizia , ▁Jainkoaren ▁salbamen - indar rari ▁esker .
PRED:	But if Christ is raised to you , he will die for the Spirit of God . But if the Spirit of God is raised to God , he will save them .
GOLD:	And Christ lives within you , so even though your body will die because of sin , the Spirit gives you life because you have been made right with God .

ID:	2144
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ke - s ein alea ▁hiritik ▁gora ▁ateratzen ▁hasi ▁zenean , ▁benjamindarrek ▁atzera ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁hiri ▁osoa ▁zeru rainoko ▁sugarretan ▁zegoela ▁ikusi ▁zuten .
PRED:	But the men of Benjamin began to come from the town of Benjamin , and the people of Benjamin saw that the Lord had seen him .
GOLD:	But when the warriors of Benjamin looked behind them and saw the smoke rising into the sky from every part of the town ,

ID:	2145
INPUT:	▁Une ▁hartan , ▁Melkisedek ▁X alem go ▁erregeak ▁ogi - ardo ak ▁atera ▁zituen , ▁Goi - goiko ▁Jainkoaren ▁apaiza ▁baitzen ,
PRED:	At that time , the king of Melchizedek took the new wine of the new wine of God . He took care of the new wine of God .
GOLD:	And Melchizedek , the king of Salem and a priest of God Most High , brought Abram some bread and wine .

ID:	2146
INPUT:	▁Zintzoen ▁salbamena ▁Jaunarengandik ▁dator : hura ▁dute ▁gotorleku ▁arrisku - garaian .
PRED:	The godly will come to the Lord , for the godly are in trouble .
GOLD:	The Lord rescues the godly ; he is their fortress in times of trouble .

ID:	2147
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁gogor arazten ▁dizut ▁indarberri ▁dezazula ▁nik ▁eskuak ▁ezar tzean ▁Jainkoak ▁eman ▁zizun ▁dohaina ,
PRED:	That is why I have you done to you , so that you have given you the gift you have given you .
GOLD:	This is why I remind you to fan into flames the spiritual gift God gave you when I laid my hands on you .

ID:	2148
INPUT:	▁Liho zko ▁tunika ▁sakratua ▁jantzita ▁sartuko ▁da , ▁lihozko ▁gal tzaz ▁estal ita ▁eta ▁lihozko ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁buruzapia ▁jarri ta ; ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak ▁direnez ▁gero , ▁bain ua ▁hartu ▁ondoren ▁jantziko ▁ditu .
PRED:	She must wear it on the head of linen clothing and linen linen linen linen linen linen linen linen linen linen linen linen clothing , purple , and scarlet thread . He must wear them on the altar .
GOLD:	He must put on his linen tunic and the linen undergarments worn next to his body . He must tie the linen sash around his waist and put the linen turban on his head . These are sacred garments , so he must bathe himself in water before he puts them on .

ID:	2149
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁esaten ▁zion ▁Joanek ▁bataiatzera ▁zetor kion ▁jendeari : ▁« S ug ek ume ok ! ▁Nork ▁esan ▁dizue ▁gainean ▁duzuen ▁haserre - zigor rari ▁ihes ▁egingo ▁diozuela ?
PRED:	John said to him , “ You are the people who persecute you ! Who will flee to you ? Who will flee ? ”
GOLD:	When the crowds came to John for baptism , he said , “ You brood of snakes ! Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	2150
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁nire ▁ardiek ▁zuek ▁zanpatu takoa ▁jan ▁behar ▁dute ▁eta ▁zuek ▁zikindu takoa ▁edan .
PRED:	When you eat my sheep , you may eat your food and drink .
GOLD:	Why must my flock eat what you have trampled down and drink water you have fouled ?

ID:	2151
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁aldarea ▁egin ▁Jaunari
PRED:	David Defeats the Lord
GOLD:	David Builds an Altar

ID:	2152
INPUT:	▁Hamabi ▁hauek ▁izendatu ▁zituen : ▁Simon ▁— h oni ▁Pedro ▁izena ▁jarri ▁zion —,
PRED:	Then he called the twelve disciples , who was the name of Simon .
GOLD:	These are the twelve he chose : Simon ( whom he named Peter ) ,

ID:	2153
INPUT:	▁inork ▁ez ▁dezala ▁gai ▁honetan ▁bere ▁senidea ▁irain ▁edo ▁engaina , ▁Jauna ▁bera ▁baita ▁horiez ▁guztiez ▁mend ek atzen ▁dena , ▁lehen ▁ere ▁behin ▁eta ▁berriro ▁zinez ▁esan ▁genizuen ▁bezala .
PRED:	Do n't let us become a believer in this language , so we can know that the Lord had spoken to you , just as we had said .
GOLD:	Never harm or cheat a fellow believer in this matter by violating his wife , for the Lord avenges all such sins , as we have solemnly warned you before .

ID:	2154
INPUT:	▁G eziak ▁jaurtiz ▁sakabanatu ▁zituen , tx imista ▁eginez ▁ihes ▁eragin .
PRED:	He scattered them into the sea , and he scattered them .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	2155
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dezazula ▁orduan , ▁ez ▁kezkatu , ▁ez ▁damutu ▁beharrik ▁izan , ▁odol ▁errugabea ▁isuri ▁eta ▁mendekua ▁zeure ▁eskuz ▁egina ▁duzulako . ▁Jaunak ▁ondasunez ▁bete ▁zaitzan ean , ▁oroit ▁zaitez ▁zeure ▁mirabe ▁honetaz ».
PRED:	But do n't worry about your sins , for you do n't need to do what the Lord says : “ You have done to your own hands , ” says the Lord . “ You have done this to me . ”
GOLD:	do n't let this be a blemish on your record . Then your conscience wo n't have to bear the staggering burden of needless bloodshed and vengeance . And when the Lord has done these great things for you , please remember me , your servant ! ”

ID:	2156
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁gertatuko ▁den ▁egunean , ▁ihes lari ▁bat ▁iritsiko ▁zaizu ▁berri ▁ematera .
PRED:	On the seventh day , you will run to the end of the Nile River .
GOLD:	And on that day a survivor from Jerusalem will come to you in Babylon and tell you what has happened .

ID:	2157
INPUT:	▁Senideok , ▁zertarako ▁du ▁batek ▁« Nik ▁badut ▁fedea » ▁esatea , ▁egintzetan ▁ez ▁badu ▁azaltzen ? ▁Horrelako ▁fede ak ▁salba ▁ote ▁dezake ?
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , how can I look to you ? How can I be afraid ? Is it right ?
GOLD:	What good is it , dear brothers and sisters , if you say you have faith but do n't show it by your actions ? Can that kind of faith save anyone ?

ID:	2158
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁esaera ▁hori ▁aurpegira tzen ▁dit , denek ▁listua ▁botatzen ▁aurpegira .
PRED:	The people say , ‘ Listen to me , O God ! '
GOLD:	“ God has made a mockery of me among the people ; they spit in my face .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁batean , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Samueli :— Noiz ▁arte ▁ari ▁behar ▁duzu ▁negarrez ▁Saul engatik ? ▁Baztertu ▁egin ▁dut , ▁Israelen ▁errege ▁izan ▁ez ▁dadin . ▁Bete ▁ezazu ▁olioz ▁adarra ▁eta ▁zoaz , ▁Belengo ▁Jeseren gana ▁bidaltzen ▁zaitut . ▁Honen ▁semeen ▁artean ▁begiztatu ▁dut ▁errege ▁eginen ▁dudana .
PRED:	One day the Lord said to Samuel , “ How long will you be with me ? How long will I be with you ? ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord said to Samuel , “ You have mourned long enough for Saul . I have rejected him as king of Israel , so fill your flask with olive oil and go to Bethlehem . Find a man named Jesse who lives there , for I have selected one of his sons to be my king . ”

ID:	2160
INPUT:	▁Ho deiak ▁zer umu gan ▁gora ▁igo arazten ▁ditu , erauntsiak ▁tximis taka ▁leher rarazten , haizea ▁bere ▁gordelekuetatik ▁ater arazten .
PRED:	The heavens proclaim his clouds , and the lightning flashed on the wind . He sends the wind from the wind .
GOLD:	He causes the clouds to rise over the whole earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁aker ▁bat ▁barkamen - oparitarako , ▁eguneroko ▁erre - opari ▁eta ▁berauei ▁dagozkien ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opariekin .
PRED:	In addition to the male goat , each male male goat , each male lambs and liquid offerings . In addition to the regular grain offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	▁« Jauna , ▁gure ▁Jainkoa , ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁atera ▁zenuen ▁herria ▁Egiptotik ▁eta ▁izen ▁handia ▁zeure ganatu ▁duzu ▁gaurdaino ; ▁guk , ▁berriz , ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁dugu ▁eta ▁gaizki ▁jokatu .
PRED:	“ Lord our God has brought us out of the land of Egypt , and you have been very angry with your people . But we have not done this day .
GOLD:	“ O Lord our God , you brought lasting honor to your name by rescuing your people from Egypt in a great display of power . But we have sinned and are full of wickedness .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁jakin ▁ongi , ▁ni ▁hiltzen ▁banauzue , ▁errugabe ▁baten ▁heriotzaren ▁erantzule ▁izango ▁zaretela ▁zuek , ▁hiri ▁hau ▁eta ▁bertako ▁bizilagunak , ▁benetan ▁Jainkoak ▁bidali ▁bainau ▁zuengana , ▁esan ▁dizuedan ▁guztia ▁iragar tzera ».
PRED:	But you know that I have been put to death , for you will be put to death , for you have sent me into a city . I have sent you to write this city to you . ”
GOLD:	But if you kill me , rest assured that you will be killing an innocent man ! The responsibility for such a deed will lie on you , on this city , and on every person living in it . For it is absolutely true that the Lord sent me to speak every word you have heard . ”

ID:	2164
INPUT:	▁Haietako ▁bakoitz ah aiz e tean ▁babes ▁izango ▁da , ek aitzean ▁aterpe ; lurralde ▁lehorrean ▁u bidea ▁bezala , basamortuan ▁harkaitz ▁handi ▁baten ger iza ▁bezala .
PRED:	As a result , each of them will be like a foreigner in the desert , as a foreigner in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Each one will be like a shelter from the windand a refuge from the storm , like streams of water in the desertand the shadow of a great rock in a parched land .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁utzi ▁zeure ▁ahoari bekatu ▁egin arazten , ez ▁esan ▁gero ▁Jainkoari oh artu ▁gabe ▁egin ▁duzula . Ea ▁haserretzen ▁zaizun ▁Jainkoaz eure ▁hitzen gatik eta ▁zeure ▁lanak ▁oro des egiten ▁dizkizun !
PRED:	Do n't tell you what you have done , for you have done . Do n't realize that you do n't know what you have done .
GOLD:	It is better to say nothing than to make a promise and not keep it .

ID:	2166
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁hartan ▁— hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak — ▁neurekin ▁hartuko ▁zaitut , ▁Xealtielen ▁seme ▁Zorobabel ▁ene ▁zerbitzari ▁hori , ▁eta ▁neure ▁zigilu ▁egingo ▁zaitut , ▁neuk ▁aukeratu ▁baitzaitut . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ».
PRED:	In that day , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ I will make you a seal , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ But when this happens , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , I will honor you , Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , my servant . I will make you like a signet ring on my finger , says the Lord , for I have chosen you . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2167
INPUT:	▁« Hil aren ▁hasieran , ▁bi ▁zekor , ▁ahari ▁bat ▁eta ▁urtebeteko ▁zazpi ▁arkume ▁— denak ▁akats ▁gabeak — ▁aurkeztuko ▁dizkiozue ▁Jaunari ▁erre - oparitzat .
PRED:	“ When you present a burnt offering to the Lord , you must present a young bull as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ On the first day of each month , present an extra burnt offering to the Lord of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	2168
INPUT:	▁Lurrak ▁gutiz iatzen ▁dituztela ? L ap urtu ▁egiten ▁dituzte . Etx eak ▁irrikatzen ▁dituztela ? Hartu ▁egiten ▁dituzte . In dar rez ▁hartzen ▁dute ▁nagusia , bere ▁familia ▁eta ▁etx alde arekin .
PRED:	Where are the whole earth ? They look at their homes ? They are all around their own homes ? They are their own family , and their own family .
GOLD:	When you want a piece of land , you find a way to seize it.When you want someone 's house , you take it by fraud and violence.You cheat a man of his property , stealing his family 's inheritance .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁aurpegira ▁bota ▁nien ▁hori ▁eta ▁madarikatu ▁egin ▁nituen ; ▁jo ▁ere ▁egin ▁nituen ▁batzuk ▁eta ▁ileak ▁atera ▁nizkien ; ▁gero , ▁herri ▁haietako ▁jendearekin ▁ez ▁zirela ▁ezkonduko ▁zin ▁eragin ▁nien ▁Jainkoaren ▁izenean .
PRED:	I threw them out and threw them out of my anger , and I took some of them . I took some of them into the name of God . I did not bring them into the name of God .
GOLD:	So I confronted them and called down curses on them . I beat some of them and pulled out their hair . I made them swear in the name of God that they would not let their children intermarry with the pagan people of the land .

ID:	2170
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁zuenetik ▁zabaldu ▁da ▁Mazedonia ▁eta ▁Akai ara ▁Jaunaren ▁mezua ; ▁eta ▁eskualde ▁hori etara ▁ez ▁ezik , ▁bazter ▁guztietara ▁ere ▁heldu ▁da ▁Jainkoarengan ▁duzuen ▁sinesmenaren ▁entzutea , ▁guk ▁ezer ▁esan ▁beharrik ▁gabe .
PRED:	For after the future , the message of the Lord came to visit you in Macedonia and throughout the province of the world . Instead , we do n't need to believe in God 's word .
GOLD:	And now the word of the Lord is ringing out from you to people everywhere , even beyond Macedonia and Achaia , for wherever we go we find people telling us about your faith in God . We do n't need to tell them about it ,

ID:	2171
INPUT:	▁I gorri ▁zituzten , ▁bada , ▁gizon ▁batzuk ▁Xilora ▁eta ▁ekarri ▁zuten ▁handik ▁izaki ▁hegaldun en ▁gainean ▁eseria ▁dagoen ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁itun - kutxa . ▁Jainkoaren ▁itun - kutx ari ▁lagun ▁eginez , ▁H ofni ▁eta ▁Pinhas , ▁Eliren ▁bi ▁semeak , ▁etorri ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the Ark of the Covenant came out of the Covenant . They brought out the Ark of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Covenant , and the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	So they sent men to Shiloh to bring the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim . Hophni and Phinehas , the sons of Eli , were also there with the Ark of the Covenant of God .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	▁Zuhur rekin ▁ibiltzen ▁dena ▁zuhur ▁bihurtzen ▁da , zentzugabe ekin ▁elkartzen ▁dena ▁galbidean ▁jartzen .
PRED:	The wise person is wise , but the mouth of the wise person becomes wise .
GOLD:	Walk with the wise and become wise ; associate with fools and get in trouble .

ID:	2173
INPUT:	▁Orain ▁bai , ▁badakit ▁jainko ▁guztien ▁aldean ▁handia ▁dela ▁Jauna , ▁egiptoarrek ▁herria ▁harrokeriaz ▁erabili ▁zutelarik , ▁haien ▁menpetik ▁libratu ▁baitu ».
PRED:	And now I know that the Lord is with all the nations , for he has rescued them from all the nations . ”
GOLD:	I know now that the Lord is greater than all other gods , because he rescued his people from the oppression of the proud Egyptians . ”

ID:	2174
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁aterako ▁du ▁onik ▁errugabea , eta ▁zu ▁ere ▁bai , ▁zure ▁jarduera ▁garbia ▁bada ».
PRED:	For he will rescue you ; you are more than gold . ”
GOLD:	Even sinners will be rescued ; they will be rescued because your hands are pure . ”

ID:	2175
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zioten ▁entzu leek :— Ez ▁dituzu ▁oraindik ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁urte , ▁eta ▁Abraham ▁ikusi ▁duzula ?
PRED:	Then the people said , “ Do n't understand all the people ? You have seen the same years ? ”
GOLD:	The people said , “ You are n't even fifty years old . How can you say you have seen Abraham ? ”

ID:	2176
INPUT:	▁Itzul arazi ▁egingo ▁zaitut , ▁mutur re takoa ▁ipini ▁eta ▁zeure ▁gudaroste ▁osoarekin ▁irten araziko ▁zaitut : ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁dotore ▁jantzitako ▁zaldizko ekin , ▁babes kiz ▁eta ▁bular - oskol ez ▁hornitu riko ▁gudaroste ▁handiarekin , ▁denak ▁ezpata ▁eskuetan ▁dutela .
PRED:	I will hand you with your horses and hand you with a horse . I will send you a horse with chariots and charioteers , charioteers , and charioteers , and charioteers and charioteers .
GOLD:	I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws to lead you out with your whole army — your horses and charioteers in full armor and a great horde armed with shields and swords .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	▁Mariak ▁esan ▁zion ▁aingeruari :— Baina ▁nola ▁gerta ▁daiteke ▁hori , ▁ez ▁bainaiz ▁gizon ▁batekin ▁bizi ?
PRED:	But Peter said to the angel , “ How can I be a man ? ”
GOLD:	Mary asked the angel , “ But how can this happen ? I am a virgin . ”

ID:	2178
INPUT:	▁« Ur rundu ▁elkarte ▁honetatik , ▁bat - batean ▁birrin duko ▁baitut ». Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁ziren ,
PRED:	“ Then the whole community will come down from the land of Moses , and they will bow down to the ground . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses : “ Place Aaron 's staff permanently before the Ark of the Covenant to serve as a warning to rebels . This should put an end to their complaints against me and prevent any further deaths . ”

ID:	2179
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁zure ▁maitasuna ▁zeru ▁zabala ▁baino ▁handiagoa , zure ▁leialtasuna ▁hodeietaraino koa .
PRED:	Yes , your unfailing love is higher than the heavens .
GOLD:	Be exalted , O God , above the highest heavens.May your glory shine over all the earth .

ID:	2180
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁agindu ▁zien : ▁« Kuts atu ▁tenplua , ▁a tariak ▁hildako z ▁betez ... ▁Zoazte !» ▁Irten ▁eta ▁ekin ▁zioten ▁trisk antz ari ▁hirian .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Get up the Temple of the Lord your God , and go out to the city . ”
GOLD:	“ Defile the Temple ! ” the Lord commanded . “ Fill its courtyards with corpses . Go ! ” So they went and began killing throughout the city .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Liburu ▁Santuak ▁dio : ▁Nire ▁etxea ▁otoitz - etxe ▁izango ▁da ; ▁zuek , ▁berriz , ▁lapur - zulo ▁egina ▁duzue ».
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is what the Scriptures say : ‘ This is what the Lord says : But you will be destroyed . ' ”
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves ! ”

ID:	2182
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁faraoiagana ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Hau ▁esan ▁du ▁Jaunak , ▁Israelgo ▁Jainkoak : ▁Utziozu ▁nire ▁herriari ▁basamortura ▁joaten , ▁ene ▁ohorez ▁festa ▁ospatzera .
PRED:	Then Moses went to Pharaoh and said , “ This is what the Lord says : This is what the Lord says : This is what the God of Israel says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	After this presentation to Israel 's leaders , Moses and Aaron went and spoke to Pharaoh . They told him , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Let my people go so they may hold a festival in my honor in the wilderness . ”

ID:	2183
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁hirira ▁sartu ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁Ismael ▁eta ▁beronen ▁gizonek ▁hil ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁eta ▁putzu ▁batera ▁bota .
PRED:	But Ishmael left the city and his men , and his men killed him .
GOLD:	But as soon as they were all inside the town , Ishmael and his men killed all but ten of them and threw their bodies into a cistern .

ID:	2184
INPUT:	▁« Itsaso » ▁zeritzan ▁uraska ▁handia , ▁eta ▁beroni ▁eusteko ▁hamabi ▁zezen ;
PRED:	“ The Sea of the Sea
GOLD:	the Sea and the twelve oxen under it ;

ID:	2185
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁emazte ▁egingo ▁zaitut leial tasun ▁iraunkor rez . Orduan ▁ezagutuko ▁du zuzeure ▁Jaun ▁hau .
PRED:	I will give you your wife , O Lord , and you will know the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Then the earth will answer the thirsty criesof the grain , the grapevines , and the olive trees.And they in turn will answer , ‘ Jezreel ' — ‘ God plants ! '

ID:	2186
INPUT:	▁Erru dun ▁izanez ▁gero , ▁ai ▁ene ! Erru gabe ▁izanik ▁ere , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁dut ▁buru rik ▁altxatu , lotsaz ▁betea ▁bainago , ▁miseria ▁beti ▁begi ▁aurrean .
PRED:	For if you have been sick , I will come , for I am sick . I will never be ashamed , for I am filled with violence .
GOLD:	If I am guilty , too bad for me ; and even if I 'm innocent , I ca n't hold my head high , because I am filled with shame and misery .

ID:	2187
INPUT:	▁Oih u ▁egin , ▁baina ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁die ▁erantzuten , gaiztoak ▁eta ▁harroak ▁direlako ;
PRED:	The wicked do not recognize the wicked , but the wicked are gone .
GOLD:	And when they cry out , God does not answerbecause of their pride .

ID:	2188
INPUT:	▁Bidali ▁zituen ▁morroiak ▁gonbidatu ei ▁dei ▁egitera . ▁Baina ▁haiek ▁ez ▁zuten ▁etorri ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	He called his servants to the guests , but he refused to come .
GOLD:	When the banquet was ready , he sent his servants to notify those who were invited . But they all refused to come !

ID:	2189
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁“ Gure ▁arbasoen ▁Jainkoak ▁hautatu ▁zaitu , ▁beraren ▁nahia ▁ezagutu , ▁Zintzoa ▁ikusi ▁eta ▁beronen ▁ahotsa ▁zuzen - zuzen ean ▁entzun ▁dezazun .
PRED:	He said to me , ‘ This is what the God of his ancestors , the God of his ancestors , and he has seen you .
GOLD:	“ Then he told me , ‘ The God of our ancestors has chosen you to know his will and to see the Righteous One and hear him speak .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	▁Al txa , ▁Jainkoa , ▁eta ▁goberna ▁mundua , zu ▁baitzara ▁herri ▁guztien ▁jabe !
PRED:	Get up , God , and he has chosen you to judge the world , for he has chosen you .
GOLD:	Rise up , O God , and judge the earth , for all the nations belong to you .

ID:	2191
INPUT:	▁Hau tsa ▁miaz katuko ▁dute , suge ek ▁eta ▁narrasti ek ▁bezala . D ar daraz ▁aterako ▁dira gordeleku etatik , ikaraz ▁joko ▁dute ▁Jaunarengana , gure ▁Jainkoarengana , eta ▁begirune ▁izango ▁diote .
PRED:	“ The birds will become like sheep , and birds will fall into the streets . They will come to the Lord , and those who fear our God .
GOLD:	Like snakes crawling from their holes , they will come out to meet the Lord our God.They will fear him greatly , trembling in terror at his presence .

ID:	2192
INPUT:	▁senideek ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Jesusi :— Irten ▁hemendik ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁Jude ara , ▁egiten ▁dituzun ▁egintzak ▁han ▁ere ▁zure ▁ikasleek ▁ikus ▁ditzaten .
PRED:	Then the brothers said to Jesus , “ Go out to Judea , and go out to the way of the country of Judea , where you see your disciples . ”
GOLD:	and Jesus ' brothers said to him , “ Leave here and go to Judea , where your followers can see your miracles !

ID:	2193
INPUT:	▁« Ikusi ▁dituzun ▁hamar ▁adarrak , ▁oraindik ▁erregetza ▁hartu ▁ez ▁duten ▁hamar ▁errege ▁dira ; ▁pizti arekin ▁batera ▁hartuko ▁dute ▁errege - agin tea , ▁baina ▁ordu ▁baterako ▁bakarrik .
PRED:	“ You have seen the four horns of the earth , ” says the king . “ All the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the earth , but the kingdoms of the earth will be given to the king .
GOLD:	The ten horns of the beast are ten kings who have not yet risen to power . They will be appointed to their kingdoms for one brief moment to reign with the beast .

ID:	2194
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁gure ▁ogi ari : ▁zuengana ▁etortzeko ▁etxetik ▁atera ▁ginenean , ▁bero - bero a ▁zegoen ; ▁orain , ▁gogorra ▁eta ▁apur ▁egina ▁dago .
PRED:	“ Look , we have come to you with you , so that you ca n't come to your house .
GOLD:	“ This bread was hot from the ovens when we left our homes . But now , as you can see , it is dry and moldy .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁oso ▁bestelako ▁asmoak ditu ▁Asiri ak ▁buruan : sun ts itzea ▁du ▁asmo , herri ▁asko ▁bir rintz ea .
PRED:	But I will punish you , ” says the Lord . “ I will punish you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But the king of Assyria will not understand that he is my tool ; his mind does not work that way.His plan is simply to destroy , to cut down nation after nation .

ID:	2196
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁al ▁dakizu , ▁Senakerib , aspaldi tik ▁neuk ▁prestatua ▁nuela , antz inatik ▁neuk ▁erabakia orain ▁burutzen ▁ari ▁naizen ▁hau ? Horregatik ▁bihurtu ▁dituzu hiri ▁gotor rak ▁zabor - pila .
PRED:	But do n't you know that King Sennacherib of Babylon has done to me , for I have built an object of ruins .
GOLD:	“ But have you not heard ? I decided this long ago.Long ago I planned it , and now I am making it happen.I planned for you to crush fortified citiesinto heaps of rubble .

ID:	2197
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁bizileku ▁eta ▁kultu - lekutzat ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁tokia ▁bizi ▁zareten ▁hiritik ▁urruti ▁badago , ▁berak ▁emandako ▁abere ▁handi ▁nahiz ▁txiki etatik ▁hil ▁dezakezue ▁haragi tarako , ▁nik ▁zuei ▁agindutako aren ▁arabera , ▁eta ▁nahi ▁adina ▁jan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says : If you live in the place where you live , you may live in the place of worship . If you have been allowed to live , you may eat the place of worship . ”
GOLD:	It might happen that the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — is a long way from your home . If so , you may butcher any of the cattle , sheep , or goats the Lord has given you , and you may freely eat the meat in your hometown , as I have commanded you .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	▁Esaiezu , ▁bada : ▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak : ▁Ala ▁ni ▁Jauna ! ▁Zeu ei ▁entzun aren ▁arabera ▁tra tatuko ▁zaituztet .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I am the Lord , the God of Israel , says to you .
GOLD:	Now tell them this : ‘ As surely as I live , declares the Lord , I will do to you the very things I heard you say .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁on tasuna ▁Israelekin
PRED:	A Message for Israel
GOLD:	Judgment against the Lord 's Enemies

ID:	2200
INPUT:	▁G aitz ▁gal garriz , ▁suk arrez ▁eta ▁han pa dura z ▁joko ▁zaituzte ; ▁lehor tez , ▁haize ▁errez ▁eta ▁gor rin ez ▁hondatuko ▁dizkizue ▁uztak : ▁ez ▁du ▁etsiko ▁zuek ▁desagerrarazi ▁arte .
PRED:	You will cut down your neck with a fire , and you will be filled with fire . You will never be destroyed , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord will strike you with wasting diseases , fever , and inflammation , with scorching heat and drought , and with blight and mildew . These disasters will pursue you until you die .

ID:	2201
INPUT:	▁Ruben ekin ▁batera ▁Simeon ▁eta ▁Gaden ▁leinuak ▁etxolatuko ▁dira . ▁Simeon darren ▁buruzagia ▁T zuri xad airen ▁seme ▁Xel um iel ▁izango ▁da ,
PRED:	The sons of Reuben , Reuben , Gad , and Simeon were the sons of Reuben . The sons of Simeon will be the father of Reuben .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	2202
INPUT:	▁Gure ▁Jainkoaren barru ▁errukitsu ari ▁esker , goiz - argia ▁agertuko ▁zai guz er u ▁goitik ,
PRED:	Yes , you are the joys of our God , for you have turned to the end of the wicked .
GOLD:	Because of God 's tender mercy , the morning light from heaven is about to break upon us ,

ID:	2203
INPUT:	▁astin duko ▁du ▁Jaunak ▁Israel ! ▁U retan ▁dardar atzen ▁den ▁kanabera ▁bezala ▁izango ▁da . ▁Beraien ▁gurasoei ▁eman ▁zien ▁lurralde ▁eder ▁honetatik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁ditu ▁israeldarrak ▁eta ▁Eufrates ▁ibaiaz ▁beste ▁aldean ▁barreiatuko . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁israeldarrek ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁egin ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁Jauna ▁haserrarazi .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : It will be like the mountains of Israel , and it will be poured out from the Euphrates River . He will destroy them from the Euphrates River , and he will scatter them from the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	Then the Lord will shake Israel like a reed whipped about in a stream . He will uproot the people of Israel from this good land that he gave their ancestors and will scatter them beyond the Euphrates River , for they have angered the Lord with the Asherah poles they have set up for worship .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zidan ▁Jaunak : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁hartu ▁aiz to ▁zorrotz ▁bat ▁eta ▁erabili ▁bizarra ▁moz teko ▁lab ana ▁bezala : ▁moztu ▁ilea ▁eta ▁bizarra , ▁pisatu ▁eta ▁banatu ▁hiru ▁meta txo tan .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , pick up a cloak and put it on your head . They must wear a cloak and put it on your head .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , take a sharp sword and use it as a razor to shave your head and beard . Use a scale to weigh the hair into three equal parts .

ID:	2205
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien , ▁orduan :— G aldera ▁bat : ▁Larun batez ▁zer ▁dugu ▁legezko , ▁on ▁egitea ▁ala ▁gaitz ▁egitea , ▁bizia ▁salba tzea ▁ala ▁ken tzea ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If we are going to pay the Sabbath day , we can not be allowed to live in the area , or it is good to save us . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his critics , “ I have a question for you . Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ”

ID:	2206
INPUT:	▁Ezekiasek ▁tenplua ▁garbitu ▁eta ▁konpondu
PRED:	Hezekiah 's Glory Leaves Jerusalem
GOLD:	Hezekiah Reopens the Temple

ID:	2207
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁maila ▁zituen ▁errege - aul kiak ▁eta , ▁berari ▁atxikiak , ▁oin - aulkia ▁eta ▁jar leku aren ▁alde ▁banatan , ▁besoak . ▁Bes oen ▁ondoan ▁bi ▁lehoi ▁zeuden ▁zutik ,
PRED:	He made two cherubim on each side of his garden , and his feet were decorated with his feet . He overlaid the cherubim with two cherubim .
GOLD:	The throne had six steps , with a footstool of gold . There were armrests on both sides of the seat , and the figure of a lion stood on each side of the throne .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	▁Bedein katzen ▁zaituen abe dein katu ▁egingo ▁dut ; madarik atzen ▁zaituena , ▁berriz , madarik atu . Zure ▁bitartez ▁bedeinkatuko ▁ditut lurreko ▁herri ▁guztiak ».
PRED:	I will bless you and bless you , but I will bless you . But I will bless you , and it will bless you . ”
GOLD:	I will bless those who bless you and curse those who treat you with contempt . All the families on earth will be blessed through you . ”

ID:	2209
INPUT:	▁Aldarea ▁zar tatu ▁egin ▁zen ▁eta ▁errautsa ▁aldaretik ▁behera ▁isuri , ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizonak , ▁Jaunaren ▁aginduz , ▁emaniko ▁ezaugarri aren ▁arabera .
PRED:	When the Lord had finished saying , he poured out the altar from the altar from the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	At the same time a wide crack appeared in the altar , and the ashes poured out , just as the man of God had predicted in his message from the Lord .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁egokitu ▁mundu ▁honen ▁iritzi etara , ▁eraberri ▁zaitezte ▁baizik , ▁zeuen ▁pentsa era ▁aldatu z ; ▁horrela ▁bereizi ▁ahal ▁izango ▁duzue ▁zer ▁den ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁duena , ▁zer ▁den ▁ona , ▁atsegingarri ▁zaiona ▁eta ▁bikaina .
PRED:	It is not good to do what is happening to you . Do n't be sure to do what is right , for you are doing what is right to do .
GOLD:	Do n't copy the behavior and customs of this world , but let God transform you into a new person by changing the way you think . Then you will learn to know God 's will for you , which is good and pleasing and perfect .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁herri - agintarien ▁deia darrak , ar talde - gidari en ▁garrasiak : hondatu ▁ditu ▁Jaunak beraien ▁larreak !
PRED:	Listen to the sound of their cries ; the Lord detests their cries .
GOLD:	Listen to the frantic cries of the shepherds.The leaders of the flock are wailing in despair , for the Lord is ruining their pastures .

ID:	2212
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Mardoke orentzat ▁prestatua ▁zuen ▁ur kabean ▁zintzilikatu ▁zuten ▁Haman . ▁Orduan ▁baretu ▁zen ▁erregearen ▁haserrea .
PRED:	So the king summoned Haman 's body , and he was very angry with the king .
GOLD:	So they impaled Haman on the pole he had set up for Mordecai , and the king 's anger subsided .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	▁Ongi ▁ikusten ▁dut ▁ez ▁dagoela ▁niregan ▁— nire ▁giza ▁grin etan , ▁alegia — ▁ezer ▁onik , ▁nire ▁esku ▁baitago ▁on ▁egin ▁nahi ▁izatea , ▁baina ▁ez ▁on ▁egitea .
PRED:	I do n't know that I do n't know that God has come to me . He is good to me , but he is good to me .
GOLD:	And I know that nothing good lives in me , that is , in my sinful nature . I want to do what is right , but I ca n't .

ID:	2214
INPUT:	▁K R I S T A U ▁J O K A E RA ▁ <unk> , 1 — 15 , <unk>
PRED:	The citizens of Simeon
GOLD:	A Living Sacrifice to God

ID:	2215
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁israeldar ▁elkarteko ▁ordezkari tzat ▁aukeraturiko ▁leinuburuak , ▁horiek ▁israeldar ▁gudari - taldeen ▁buruzagiak .
PRED:	These were the leaders of the people of Israel — the leaders of the leaders of Israel .
GOLD:	These are the chosen leaders of the community , the leaders of their ancestral tribes , the heads of the clans of Israel . ”

ID:	2216
INPUT:	▁Zeru - lurrak ▁igaroko ▁dira , ▁baina ▁nire ▁hitzak ▁ez ▁dira ▁bete ▁gabe ▁igaroko .
PRED:	The heavens will disappear , but my words will never disappear .
GOLD:	Heaven and earth will disappear , but my words will never disappear .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Jainkoak ▁nola ▁lagundu ▁zidan ▁eta ▁erregeak ▁zer ▁esan ▁zidan ▁agertu ▁nien . ▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zuten : ▁« Goazen , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁eraiki ▁dezagun !» Eta ▁kementsu ▁prestatu ▁ziren ▁lan ▁eder ▁hori ▁egiteko .
PRED:	When the king heard this , he said to me , “ Let 's build this work and build it up to work . ” So they said , “ Let 's build this work and build it to work . ”
GOLD:	Then I told them about how the gracious hand of God had been on me , and about my conversation with the king.They replied at once , “ Yes , let 's rebuild the wall ! ” So they began the good work .

ID:	2218
INPUT:	▁Zuzen ▁eta ▁zintzo ▁izaten ▁saiatzen ▁den aluz aro ▁eta ▁ohorez ▁betea ▁biziko ▁da .
PRED:	Your life is full of good , and you will live in the land of the wicked .
GOLD:	Whoever pursues righteousness and unfailing lovewill find life , righteousness , and honor .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	▁Erre - oparitarako ▁abereak ▁hiltzeko ▁lau ▁mah aiak ▁harlan du zkoak ▁ziren : ▁hirurogeita ▁hamabost ▁zentimetro ▁ziren ▁luze - zabal ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁gora ; ▁mahai ▁gainean ▁oparigaiak ▁ipintzen ▁ziren . ▁Gel aren ▁bira ▁guztian ▁sei ▁zentimetro ko ▁apal txo ▁bat ▁zegoen , ▁eta ▁bertan ▁ipintzen ▁zen ▁opari tarako ▁abereak ▁hiltzeko ▁tresneria .
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant were made with the altar , including the altar that had been made with the Ark of the Covenant . He also built a piece of blue cloth , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	There were also four tables of finished stone for preparation of the burnt offerings , each 311/2 inches square and 21 inches high . On these tables were placed the butchering knives and other implements for slaughtering the sacrificial animals .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	▁« Orduan , ▁etxearen ▁garbikuntza ▁egiteko , ▁bi ▁hegazti , ▁zedro - zura , ▁purpura ▁gorrimina ▁eta ▁isipua ▁hartuko ▁ditu ▁apaizak .
PRED:	“ After this , the priest will purify the altar , and he will purify the altar with a piece of blue cloth , a blue cloth , a blue cloth , a blue cloth , and a blue cloth .
GOLD:	To purify the house the priest must take two birds , a stick of cedar , some scarlet yarn , and a hyssop branch .

ID:	2221
INPUT:	▁Bidal ▁dezala ▁txin garra ▁eta ▁suf re - euria ▁horien ▁gainera ! Izan ▁bedi ▁haize ▁kiskalgarria ▁horien ▁zoria !
PRED:	Send them into the hands of the heavens and burning sulfur from the dust .
GOLD:	He will rain down blazing coals and burning sulfur on the wicked , punishing them with scorching winds .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁aginduko ▁diozu ▁israeldarren ▁elkarteari : ▁Hil ▁honen ▁hamarrean ▁har ▁beza ▁bakoitzak ▁familia ▁eta ▁etxe ▁bakoitzeko ▁abere ▁xehe ▁bana .
PRED:	Then you will say to the Lord , ‘ Let the whole community of Israel enter the house of the Lord 's family . '
GOLD:	Announce to the whole community of Israel that on the tenth day of this month each family must choose a lamb or a young goat for a sacrifice , one animal for each household .

ID:	2223
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁agertuko ▁digu ▁Jaunakbere ▁ospe ▁handia . I bai ▁eta ▁ubide ▁zabaleko lurraldea ▁izango ▁da ; baina ▁etsaien ▁arra un - tx alu parik ez ▁da ▁handik ▁igaroko , ez ▁ontzi ▁handirik ▁bertan ▁ibiliko .
PRED:	The Lord will come to us , and the whole land will be filled with the fields . The fields will be filled with water , but the fields will be covered with water .
GOLD:	The Lord will be our Mighty One.He will be like a wide river of protectionthat no enemy can cross , that no enemy ship can sail upon .

ID:	2224
INPUT:	▁Bada , ▁Jaunarenak ▁dira ▁jakinduria ▁eta ▁ahalmena , ber arenak ▁treb ezia ▁eta ▁zuhurtzia .
PRED:	Yes , wisdom , wisdom , wisdom , wisdom , and wisdom .
GOLD:	“ But true wisdom and power are found in God ; counsel and understanding are his .

ID:	2225
INPUT:	▁Jesusekin ▁zeuden ▁fariseu etako ▁batzuek , ▁hori ▁entzunik , ▁esan ▁zioten :— Gu ▁ere ▁itsu ▁ote ▁gara ?
PRED:	Some of the Pharisees and the Pharisees heard him , saying , “ Who are we blind ? ”
GOLD:	Some Pharisees who were standing nearby heard him and asked , “ Are you saying we 're blind ? ”

ID:	2226
INPUT:	▁Mika , ▁Rehob , ▁Haxab ias ,
PRED:	Abdon , Harim ,
GOLD:	Zaccur , Sherebiah , Shebaniah ,

ID:	2227
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Zer ▁egin ▁behar ▁dugu ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁duena ▁egiteko ?
PRED:	“ What do we want to do ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	They replied , “ We want to perform God 's works , too . What should we do ? ”

ID:	2228
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoen ▁sakrifizioak ▁higuingarriak ▁dira , are ▁gehiago ▁asmo ▁txarrez ▁eskainiak ▁badira .
PRED:	But the wicked are saying , ‘ What is your bed ? '
GOLD:	The sacrifice of an evil person is detestable , especially when it is offered with wrong motives .

ID:	2229
INPUT:	▁Bernabek ▁berekin ▁eraman ▁nahi ▁zuen ▁Joan ▁Markos ▁ere .
PRED:	Paul stayed with John with John .
GOLD:	Barnabas agreed and wanted to take along John Mark .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁parabola ▁bidez ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁hasi ▁zitzaien : ▁« Gizon ▁batek ▁mahastia ▁landatu ▁zuen ▁eta ▁harresiz ▁inguratu ; ▁lurrean ▁dolar ea ▁egin ▁eta ▁mahastiz ain aren ▁dorrea ▁eraiki ▁zuen . ▁Gero , ▁nekazari ▁batzuei ▁erren tan ▁utzirik , ▁urrutira ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	Then Jesus began speaking to them , saying , “ A man planted a vineyard and planted a vineyard in its vineyard . Then he built a vineyard in a vineyard . Then he built a vineyard in a vineyard .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began teaching them with stories : “ A man planted a vineyard . He built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	2231
INPUT:	▁An aiek ▁bek aitz ez ▁begiratzen ▁zioten ; ▁aitak , ▁ordea , ▁gauza ▁hauek ▁sarri tan ▁hausnartzen ▁zituen .
PRED:	But his father with his father , his father , but his father did as his father .
GOLD:	But while his brothers were jealous of Joseph , his father wondered what the dreams meant .

ID:	2232
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁aurkitzean , ▁adiskideak ▁eta ▁auzoko ak ▁bildu ▁eta ▁esaten ▁die : ▁“ Egin ▁festa ▁nirekin , ▁aurkitu ▁baitut ▁galdua ▁nuen ▁txan pona !”
PRED:	When they arrived , he said , ‘ This is what the Teacher says : I found you , ‘ I found a few days . '
GOLD:	And when she finds it , she will call in her friends and neighbors and say , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost coin . '

ID:	2233
INPUT:	▁ezta ▁gaur ▁adierazten ▁dizuedan ▁irakaspen ▁hau ▁bezain ▁lege ▁eta ▁erabaki ▁zuzenak ▁dituen ik ▁ere .
PRED:	I am giving you this command : Do not forget your decrees and regulations .
GOLD:	And what great nation has decrees and regulations as righteous and fair as this body of instructions that I am giving you today ?

ID:	2234
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁itunaren ▁egoitza ▁eraikitzeko ▁erabilitako ▁metal en ▁kontua , ▁Moisesen ▁aginduz ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁apaizaren ▁seme ▁Itamarren ▁gidaritzapean ▁lebitarrek ▁jas ori koa .
PRED:	These are the terms of the Tabernacle that was made of the covenant with Moses and Aaron , the Levites , and Aaron son of Aaron .
GOLD:	This is an inventory of the materials used in building the Tabernacle of the Covenant . The Levites compiled the figures , as Moses directed , and Ithamar son of Aaron the priest served as recorder .

ID:	2235
INPUT:	▁Tom asek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ene ▁Jauna ▁eta ▁ene ▁Jainkoa !
PRED:	“ Lord , my God , ” said , “ God is my God ! ”
GOLD:	“ My Lord and my God ! ” Thomas exclaimed .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	▁Errege ▁jauna , ▁zeu ▁zara ▁zuhaitz ▁hori ! ▁Handi ▁eta ▁sendo ▁egin ▁zara ▁zeu ▁ere ; ▁zeruraino ▁iritsi ▁da ▁zure ▁handitasuna , ▁lurraren ▁ertzeraino ▁zabaldu ▁zure ▁boterea .
PRED:	Your Majesty , O Lord , you have fallen ! You have set up your throne , O heavens , O Lord , the earth of your glory .
GOLD:	“ Upon hearing this , Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) was overcome for a time , frightened by the meaning of the dream . Then the king said to him , ‘ Belteshazzar , do n't be alarmed by the dream and what it means . ' “ Belteshazzar replied , ‘ I wish the events foreshadowed in this dream would happen to your enemies , my lord , and not to you !

ID:	2237
INPUT:	▁Erre - oparitzat ▁eskaini ▁beharrekoa ▁abelgorria ▁bada , ▁zekor ▁akats ▁gabea ▁eskainiko ▁da ▁eta ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarrerara ▁eramango , ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onar ▁dezan .
PRED:	If you present a burnt offering to the Lord , you must present a young bull as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If the animal you present as a burnt offering is from the herd , it must be a male with no defects . Bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle so you may be accepted by the Lord .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁beraz , ▁zoaz , ▁xeh a ▁itzazu ▁amalektarrak ▁eta ▁suntsitu ▁haien ▁ondasun ▁guztiak ; ▁hil , ▁gupidarik ▁gabe , ▁gizaseme ▁eta ▁emakumeak , ▁haur ▁eta ▁bularrekoak , ▁idi ▁eta ▁ardiak , ▁gamelu ▁eta ▁astoak ”».
PRED:	Now go out to the Amalekites and killed all the armies of the Amalekites , sheep , goats , and cattle , sheep , sheep , goats , and cattle , and cattle , sheep , sheep , and goats . ”
GOLD:	Now go and completely destroy the entire Amalekite nation — men , women , children , babies , cattle , sheep , goats , camels , and donkeys . ”

ID:	2239
INPUT:	▁beraren ▁hark aitzak ▁zafiro - toki ▁dira , beraren ▁hautsetan ▁urrea ▁aurkitzen ▁da .
PRED:	He makes a blue lapis lazuli , and the gold molding around him .
GOLD:	Here the rocks contain precious lapis lazuli , and the dust contains gold .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁egun ▁horietan ▁iritsi ▁baitzuten ▁juduek ▁bakea ▁beren ▁etsaien ▁aurrean ; ▁hil ▁horretan ▁aldatu ▁zitzaien ▁egoera , ▁atsekabea ▁atsegin ▁eta ▁negarra ▁bozkari o ▁bihurtuz . ▁Egun ▁horietan , ▁bada , ▁jai ▁al aiak ▁eta ▁otor duak ▁behar ▁zituzten ▁egin , ▁elkarri ▁erregaluak ▁bidaliz ▁eta ▁behartsuei ▁esku - erakutsiak ▁eginez .
PRED:	When the Jewish leaders arrived in front of peace , they killed all the people in front of their enemies . So they took some food to the poor and put them on the ground .
GOLD:	He told them to celebrate these days with feasting and gladness and by giving gifts of food to each other and presents to the poor . This would commemorate a time when the Jews gained relief from their enemies , when their sorrow was turned into gladness and their mourning into joy .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	▁Hain ▁zuzen , ▁faraoia , ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁jakin ▁zuelarik , ▁Moises ▁hil ▁nahian ▁zebilen , ▁baina ▁honek ▁faraoia gandik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuen ▁eta ▁Madian ▁esku aldera ▁joan ▁zen ▁bizitzera . ▁Han , ▁putzu ▁baten ▁ondoan ▁eseri ▁zen .
PRED:	When Moses heard what the Lord had told Moses , he told Moses , “ When Moses had been killed , he fled to the land of Egypt , he fled to the land of Midian .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	2242
INPUT:	▁Abimelek , ▁dor reraino ▁heldurik , ▁eraso ▁eta ▁su ▁emateko ▁asmoz ▁ateraino ▁hurbildu ▁zenean ,
PRED:	When Abimelech arrived , he went down to the wall and came to the wall .
GOLD:	Abimelech followed them to attack the tower . But as he prepared to set fire to the entrance ,

ID:	2243
INPUT:	▁Gedeonek ▁Israelgo ▁gizon ▁gehienak ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁nor ▁bere ▁etxera , ▁hirurehun ▁haiekin ▁bakarrik ▁geldi tuz ; ▁hauek ▁beren ▁lagunen ▁jaki ak ▁eta ▁adarrak ▁hartu ▁zituzten . ▁Madian darren ▁kanpalekua ▁israeldarren a ▁baino ▁behera go ▁zegoen , ▁lautadan .
PRED:	But Gideon sent his men out of the tribe of Israel to be with them . He also sent them out of the Jordan River , and they were camped in the plains of Midian .
GOLD:	So Gideon collected the provisions and rams ' horns of the other warriors and sent them home . But he kept the 300 men with him.The Midianite camp was in the valley just below Gideon .

ID:	2244
INPUT:	▁Harra pa ▁bitza ▁azpian ▁beren ▁harrokeriak , beren ▁ahoko ▁bekatu ▁eta ▁es ames ek , zabaldu ▁dituzten ▁madarikazio ▁eta ▁gezur rek .
PRED:	Let them tell them what they say , ‘ May the words of their sins be forgiven , ' says the Lord .
GOLD:	Destroy them in your anger ! Wipe them out completely ! Then the whole world will knowthat God reigns in Israel.Interlude

ID:	2245
INPUT:	▁Zuzen gabeari ▁matrail ezurra ▁apurtzen ▁nion h agin etatik ▁harrapakin a ▁kentzeko .
PRED:	The king detests its prey , and he measured its prey .
GOLD:	I broke the jaws of godless oppressorsand plucked their victims from their teeth .

ID:	2246
INPUT:	▁Aurrerantzean , ▁ez ▁duzu Ab ram ▁izango ▁izen , ▁Abraham ▁baizik , herri ▁askoren ▁sorburu egingo ▁baitzaitut .
PRED:	In fact , you will be destroyed , but Abraham will be given to the descendants of Abraham .
GOLD:	What 's more , I am changing your name . It will no longer be Abram . Instead , you will be called Abraham , for you will be the father of many nations .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	▁Dedan goek ▁zaldi ▁gainean ▁ibiltzeko ▁tresnak ▁saleros ten ▁zizkizuten .
PRED:	Your horses were your horses , bronze , and your horses are stored on your neck .
GOLD:	“ Dedan sent merchants to trade their expensive saddle blankets with you .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	▁Honetan ▁ezagutuko ▁dute ▁guztiek ▁zuek ▁nire ▁ikasle ▁zaretela : ▁zuek ▁elkar ▁maite ▁izatean ».
PRED:	You know that you are my disciple who love me . ”
GOLD:	Your love for one another will prove to the world that you are my disciples . ”

ID:	2249
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁israeldarrek ▁jainko ▁arrotzen ▁irudiak ▁bota ▁eta ▁Jauna ▁gurtu ▁zuten . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁ezin ▁izan ▁zuen ▁gehiago ▁jasan ▁israeldarren ▁sufrimen dua .
PRED:	Then the Israelites worshiped the Lord and worshiped the gods of Israel and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the Israelites put aside their foreign gods and served the Lord . And he was grieved by their misery .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ilundu ▁egin ▁zitzaien ▁adimena ▁israeldarrei , ▁eta ▁gaur ▁bertan ▁ere , ▁itun ▁zah arreko ▁idaz tiak ▁irakurtzen ▁dituztenean , ▁hor ▁irauten ▁du ▁haientzat ▁estalki ▁horrek , ▁Kristok ▁bakarrik ▁ken ▁baitez ake .
PRED:	But when the people of Israel came to the people of Israel , he wrote this message to the new moon , and it will be observed from God 's cover .
GOLD:	But the people 's minds were hardened , and to this day whenever the old covenant is being read , the same veil covers their minds so they can not understand the truth . And this veil can be removed only by believing in Christ .

ID:	2251
INPUT:	▁Salomonek ▁Jaunaren ▁etxea , ▁errege - j au re gia ▁eta ▁berak ▁nahi ▁izan ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁eraiki ▁zuenean ,
PRED:	Solomon built a Temple to the Lord for the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	So Solomon finished building the Temple of the Lord , as well as the royal palace . He completed everything he had planned to do .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁diotsuet ▁nik , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun ▁honek : Itzul iko ▁naiz ▁Sion era , Jerusalemen ▁naiz ▁biziko , Jerusalem ▁“ Hiri ▁Zintzo ” ▁deituko ▁da ; Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁Sion ▁mendia “ Mendi ▁Santu ”.
PRED:	I say , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : I will live in Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	“ And now the Lord says : I am returning to Mount Zion , and I will live in Jerusalem . Then Jerusalem will be called the Faithful City ; the mountain of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be called the Holy Mountain .

ID:	2253
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁lurraren ▁emaitza ▁eta ▁zuen ▁neke ▁guztien ▁fruitua ▁herri ▁ezez agunak ▁irentsiko ▁ditu . ▁Jende ▁zapaldu ▁eta ▁larru tua ▁izango ▁zarete ▁bizitza ▁osoan .
PRED:	For all the nations of the earth will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	A foreign nation you have never heard about will eat the crops you worked so hard to grow . You will suffer under constant oppression and harsh treatment .

ID:	2254
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Sar aren ▁gorpua ▁ze tzan ▁lekua ▁utzirik , ▁hititen gana ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zien :
PRED:	Then he went to the place where he got up to the place where he said ,
GOLD:	Then , leaving her body , he said to the Hittite elders ,

ID:	2255
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Daviden ▁salmoa .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O Lord , for you are my God .
GOLD:	O God , listen to my complaint.Protect my life from my enemies ' threats .

ID:	2256
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak : ▁« Zoaz ▁Judako ▁hirietara ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁kale etara ▁eta ▁hots ▁egin ▁nire ▁mezu ▁hau : ▁Onartu ▁nire ▁aginduak ▁eta ▁bete .
PRED:	Then this is what the Lord says : “ Go and tell you what the Lord says : ‘ Go and tell me what I have done . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁agindutakoa ▁hartzera , ▁eta ▁am arengana ▁itzuli ▁zen . ▁Honek ▁jaki ▁goxoa ▁prestatu ▁zuen , ▁aitak ▁atsegin ▁zuen ▁bezalakoa .
PRED:	So John went out to the gate to the baby 's father . She prepared a father 's father as a father 's father .
GOLD:	So Jacob went out and got the young goats for his mother . Rebekah took them and prepared a delicious meal , just the way Isaac liked it .

ID:	2258
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁duzu ▁ikusiko ▁gehiago herri ▁harroa , hizk untza ▁iluna , hizk eta ▁arrotz ▁uler tez ina duen ▁herria .
PRED:	Do n't look for the nations , O Lord , for you are filled with fear .
GOLD:	You will no longer see these fierce , violent peoplewith their strange , unknown language .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁Moisesek ▁lurraldea ▁ikertzera ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁gizonak . ▁Nunen ▁seme ▁Oseasi ▁Josue ▁izena ▁ezarri ▁zion .
PRED:	These are the twelve men who sent the land to the land of Moses , the descendants of Moses .
GOLD:	These are the names of the men Moses sent out to explore the land . ( Moses called Hoshea son of Nun by the name Joshua . )

ID:	2260
INPUT:	▁“ Ez ▁al ▁dira ▁amaituko ▁hitz ▁hutsal ▁horiek ?” edo ▁“ Zer k ▁ziri katzen ▁zaitu ▁erantzuteko ?” ▁dio s ta zue .
PRED:	“ Do n't you say , ‘ What will you happen ? ' “ What is you saying ? ‘ What is you ? '
GOLD:	Wo n't you ever stop blowing hot air ? What makes you keep on talking ?

ID:	2261
INPUT:	▁Hura ▁da ▁askatzaile , hura ▁salbatzaile ; egintza ▁harrigarriak ▁eta ▁mirariak egiten ▁ditu ▁zeru - lur retan . Hark ▁askatu ▁du ▁Daniel lehoi en ▁atzaparretatik ».
PRED:	The Lord is powerful , and he has redeemed you , and he has redeemed you from heaven . He has redeemed you in heaven . ”
GOLD:	So Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁apal arazi ▁egiten ▁ditu ▁harroak , eta ▁apal tzen ▁direnak ▁salbatu .
PRED:	Fear of joy ; he delights in trouble ; he delights in integrity .
GOLD:	If people are in trouble and you say , ‘ Help them , 'God will save them .

ID:	2263
INPUT:	▁Kristau ▁bezala ▁baduzue ▁irakasle ▁franko , ▁ez ▁ordea ▁aitarik ▁asko ; ▁kristau ▁bezala ▁nik ▁sortu ▁zintuztedan ▁berri ▁onaren ▁bidez .
PRED:	But if you are slaves to you , you are not writing to the Good News .
GOLD:	For even if you had ten thousand others to teach you about Christ , you have only one spiritual father . For I became your father in Christ Jesus when I preached the Good News to you .

ID:	2264
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁betiko ▁bedeinkazioa ▁ematen ▁diozu , zeure ▁pres entzi az ▁poz arren ▁jartzen .
PRED:	You have blessed the blessing for joy ; you bless the rights of blessing .
GOLD:	For the king trusts in the Lord.The unfailing love of the Most High will keep him from stumbling .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	▁Z apuztu ▁ezazue ▁Mo re xet - G at ▁hiria . A k z ib ▁hiriaren ▁lagun tz aus tel ▁aterako ▁zaie ▁Israelgo ▁erregeei .
PRED:	Make sure that you have been destroyed by the towns of the town , which you have been given to the Lord .
GOLD:	Send farewell gifts to Moresheth-gath ; there is no hope of saving it.The town of Aczibhas deceived the kings of Israel .

ID:	2266
INPUT:	▁Garbi ▁itzazu ▁zeure ▁eskuz , ▁Jauna , garbi tu ▁mundutik ! ▁Gal ▁bitez ▁bizidunen ▁artetik ! Zuk ▁zaintzen ▁dituzun ei , ▁ordea , ▁bete ▁sabela ; ase ▁itzazu ▁horien ▁seme - alabak , eta ▁utz ▁bezate ▁sobera ▁dutena ▁beren ▁haurren tzat .
PRED:	May your hands be filled with your own hands , Lord , and you have seen your own eyes , and your children are filled with their children .
GOLD:	By the power of your hand , O Lord , destroy those who look to this world for their reward.But satisfy the hunger of your treasured ones.May their children have plenty , leaving an inheritance for their descendants .

ID:	2267
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Liburu ▁Santuak : ▁Harengan ▁sinesten ▁duenak ▁ez ▁du ▁huts ▁egingo .
PRED:	“ Anyone who believes in the Scriptures say , “ Anyone who believes in the Scriptures will never believe . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures tell us , “ Anyone who trusts in him will never be disgraced . ”

ID:	2268
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁gaiztakeria ▁egiten ▁duzueeta ▁eskuak ▁odolez ▁zikin ▁dauz k azue ; gezurra ▁dar izue ▁ezpain etatik , hitz ▁kalte garriak ▁ahotik .
PRED:	For you have sinned against me , and you will know what you have done .
GOLD:	Your hands are the hands of murderers , and your fingers are filthy with sin.Your lips are full of lies , and your mouth spews corruption .

ID:	2269
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁aldatzen ▁ditu ur tar oak ▁eta ▁garai ak ; berak ▁jartzen ▁eta ▁kentzen ▁erregeak ; berak ▁ematen ▁jakinduria ▁jakintsu eieta ▁ezaguera ▁buru tsu ei .
PRED:	He gives justice to the wise , but wise wise wise people turn to understanding .
GOLD:	He controls the course of world events ; he removes kings and sets up other kings.He gives wisdom to the wiseand knowledge to the scholars .

ID:	2270
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Josueri : ▁« Ez ▁izan ▁horien ▁beldur ! ▁Bihar , ▁ordu ▁honetan , ▁hilda ▁utziko ▁ditut ▁israeldarren ▁aurrean ; ▁zuk ▁ebaki ▁horien ▁zaldien ▁hanka - z ainak ▁eta ▁erre ▁guda - gurdiak ».
PRED:	But the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do n't be afraid of the Israelites . I will not be afraid of them , and your horses will strike the horses and charioteers of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do not be afraid of them . By this time tomorrow I will hand all of them over to Israel as dead men . Then you must cripple their horses and burn their chariots . ”

ID:	2271
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , honela ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak :« Hona ▁nik ▁Sionen harri ▁aukeratua ▁ipini , gil tzarri ▁bikain ▁eta ▁oinarri ▁sendo . Hura ▁euskarri ▁duenak kol ok arik ▁ez .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Lord has given you victory over the ground .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Look ! I am placing a foundation stone in Jerusalem , a firm and tested stone.It is a precious cornerstone that is safe to build on.Whoever believes need never be shaken .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁egingo ▁dugu , ▁beraz , ▁Jainkoa ▁lagun .
PRED:	So we will worship God 's command , and we will worship God .
GOLD:	And so , God willing , we will move forward to further understanding .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	▁« Jainkoaren ▁barren - b arrena ▁ikertu ▁nahi ▁al ▁duzueta ▁Ahaltsuaren ▁handitasuna ▁besarkatu ?
PRED:	“ Have you come down to the throne of God ? Do you make him strong ?
GOLD:	“ Can you solve the mysteries of God ? Can you discover everything about the Almighty ?

ID:	2274
INPUT:	▁Erregeak , ▁herri ▁osoarekin , ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaini ▁zizkion ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	So the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	▁Giza ▁indarra ▁baizik ▁ez ▁du ▁horrek ; ▁guk , ▁ordea , ▁Jauna , ▁geure ▁Jainkoa , ▁dugu ▁geurekin , ▁laguntzeko ▁eta ▁gurekin ▁borrokatzeko ». Judako ▁errege ▁Ezekiasen ▁hitz ▁hauek ▁bizkortu ▁egin ▁zuten ▁herria .
PRED:	But we have no power to say , “ We are the Lord our God . We are our God , the God of our people , and we have spoken to us . ”
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	2276
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hirurehun ▁babeski ▁txiki ▁ere ▁egin ▁zituen ▁urre ▁garbiz , ▁babeski ▁bakoitza ▁egiteko ▁ia ▁bi ▁kilo ▁urre ▁behar ▁izan ▁zelarik . ▁Eta ▁« Libanoko ▁Oih ana » ▁zeritzan ▁jauregian ▁ipini ▁zituen .
PRED:	He also made two shields of gold , hammered gold . He also made two quarts of gold , two quarts with gold .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing nearly four pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	2277
INPUT:	▁Badakigu ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea ▁etorri ▁dena ▁eta ▁adimena ▁eman ▁diguna ▁egiazko ▁Jainkoa ▁ezagutzeko . ▁Egiazko ▁Jainkoarekin ▁bat ▁eginik ▁gaude , ▁beraren ▁Seme ▁Jesu ▁Kristorekin ▁bat ▁eginda ▁egonik . ▁Hauxe ▁dugu ▁egiazko ▁Jainkoa ▁eta ▁betiko ▁bizia .
PRED:	We know God 's Son , the Son of God , who gives us knowledge to God . We have a true life to Christ Jesus Christ , the Son of God , who gives us eternal life .
GOLD:	And we know that the Son of God has come , and he has given us understanding so that we can know the true God . And now we live in fellowship with the true God because we live in fellowship with his Son , Jesus Christ . He is the only true God , and he is eternal life .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Egipto ▁zigortuko
PRED:	A Message for Egypt
GOLD:	A Sad Day for Egypt

ID:	2279
INPUT:	▁« Ur tero , ▁zeuen ▁lurreko ▁uz taren ▁emaitzen ▁hamarrena ▁bereiziko ▁duzue .
PRED:	“ You must build a tenth of your grain offering to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ You must set aside a tithe of your crops — one-tenth of all the crops you harvest each year .

ID:	2280
INPUT:	▁adar - pun ta ▁ebaki , mer katari - herri aldera ▁eraman eta ▁tratu lari en ▁hiri ▁batean lan datu ▁zuen .
PRED:	He took the wild animal from the south ; he took it to the south of the south .
GOLD:	and plucked off its highest branch.He carried it away to a city filled with merchants.He planted it in a city of traders .

ID:	2281
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁garrasi , gainean ▁baita ▁Jaunaren ▁eguna ! Hor ▁dator ▁Jainko ▁ahaltsu aren hondamen - indarrez .
PRED:	Watch out ! For the day of the Lord is coming out of your salvation !
GOLD:	Scream in terror , for the day of the Lord has arrived — the time for the Almighty to destroy .

ID:	2282
INPUT:	▁Behinola , ▁profeta - taldeak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Eliseori :— Zurekin ▁biltzeko ▁dugun ▁biltzar - toki ▁hau ▁estu egia ▁da ▁guretzat .
PRED:	One day the prophet said to him , “ We have enough to live ! ”
GOLD:	One day the group of prophets came to Elisha and told him , “ As you can see , this place where we meet with you is too small .

ID:	2283
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁zazpi ▁ontziak ▁azken ▁zazpi ▁izurri ez ▁beterik ▁zeuzkaten ▁zazpi ▁aingeru etako ▁batek ▁etorri ▁eta ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁« Zatoz , ▁emaztegaia ▁erakutsi ▁behar ▁dizut , ▁Bildotsaren ▁emaztea ».
PRED:	Then the seven days of the seven days of the seven angels were seven years old , and she said to me , “ Come , and I will give you a man to the Lamb . ”
GOLD:	Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues came and said to me , “ Come with me ! I will show you the bride , the wife of the Lamb . ”

ID:	2284
INPUT:	▁bere ▁haserre ari ▁bidea ▁libre ▁uzteko . Ez ▁zituen ▁heriotzatik ▁gorde , haien ▁bizia ▁izurri aren ▁menpe ▁utzi ▁zuen .
PRED:	He led his way to the man from his death , from his life . He did not lose his life , so he would lose his life .
GOLD:	He turned his anger against them ; he did not spare the Egyptians ' livesbut ravaged them with the plague .

ID:	2285
INPUT:	▁« Ni ▁pertsegi tzeko ▁asmoa ▁baduzue , gaitz aren ▁sustraia ▁niregan ▁dago elakoan ,
PRED:	“ When you say , you will know your own thoughts , you will know me .
GOLD:	“ How dare you go on persecuting me , saying , ‘ It 's his own fault ' ?

ID:	2286
INPUT:	▁Erromes - kanta ▁. Larri aldian ▁Jaunari ▁egin ▁nion ▁dei ▁eta ▁hark ▁erantzun .
PRED:	When I prayed to the Lord , I prayed to the Lord .
GOLD:	I took my troubles to the Lord ; I cried out to him , and he answered my prayer .

ID:	2287
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁jendea , ▁aita ▁madarikatu eta ▁ama ▁bedeinkatzen ▁ez ▁duena !
PRED:	Those who curse the father of those who say , “ Anyone who does n't curse you .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	2288
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁egunak ▁hurbiltzen ▁ari ▁zitzaizki olarik , ▁agindu ▁hauek ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁Davidek ▁bere ▁seme ▁Salomoni :
PRED:	When David returned to Jerusalem , David gave him this message to Solomon :
GOLD:	As the time of King David 's death approached , he gave this charge to his son Solomon :

ID:	2289
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregeak , ▁pozaren ▁pozez , ▁Daniel ▁zulo tik ▁ateratzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen . ▁Atera ▁zutenean , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁urratu ▁bat ▁ere , ▁Jainkoarengan ▁jarri ▁baitzuen ▁bere ▁uste ▁ona .
PRED:	When Daniel heard that Daniel had a dream , the king said to him , “ If a dream , he sent a message to God , he sent a message to God .
GOLD:	Then the king gave orders to arrest the men who had maliciously accused Daniel . He had them thrown into the lions ' den , along with their wives and children . The lions leaped on them and tore them apart before they even hit the floor of the den .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	▁Abiatu ▁ziren , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁Jainkoarekiko ▁izuak ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁hirietako ▁jendea : ▁inork ▁ez ▁zien ▁eraso ▁Jakoben ▁semeei .
PRED:	So they went out to the land of Jacob , and no one of them .
GOLD:	As they set out , a terror from God spread over the people in all the towns of that area , so no one attacked Jacob 's family .

ID:	2291
INPUT:	▁« Jerusalem , ▁Jerusalem , ▁profetak ▁hiltzen ▁eta ▁Jainkoak ▁zuri ▁bidaliak ▁harri katzen ▁dituzuna ! ▁Zenbat ▁aldiz ▁ez ▁ditut ▁bildu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁zure ▁seme - alabak , ▁o iloak ▁bere ▁tx ita - taldea ▁hegalpean ▁bezala , ▁eta ▁zuek ▁ez ▁duzue ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	“ Jerusalem , Jerusalem , the prophets of Jerusalem , the prophets of Jerusalem , says the Lord your God , “ I will bring you out of your eyes , and you have no pity on your feet .
GOLD:	“ O Jerusalem , Jerusalem , the city that kills the prophets and stones God 's messengers ! How often I have wanted to gather your children together as a hen protects her chicks beneath her wings , but you would n't let me .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁Daviden ▁ondoren ▁ibil tzeari ▁utzi ▁eta ▁filistearrei ▁aurre ▁egitera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁Saul . ▁Horregatik ▁deritza ▁toki ▁hari ▁S ela - Ham ah l eko t , ▁hau ▁da , ▁« Bere iz te - harkaitza ».
PRED:	So David went out to the Philistines , and he went out to the Philistines . That is why he is the place of place where he would be called .
GOLD:	So Saul quit chasing David and returned to fight the Philistines . Ever since that time , the place where David was camped has been called the Rock of Escape .

ID:	2293
INPUT:	▁Ikusi ▁herri ▁koskor ▁hura . ▁Nah iko ▁hurbil ▁dago , ▁bertan ▁babesteko . ▁Arren , ▁uztazu ▁herri ▁txiki ▁horre taraino ▁joaten , ▁eta ▁bizirik ▁aterako ▁naiz .
PRED:	When they see him , they will go to the valley of despair , and I will send them into exile . I will let them go down to the city .
GOLD:	See , there is a small village nearby . Please let me go there instead ; do n't you see how small it is ? Then my life will be saved . ”

ID:	2294
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jainkoak ▁aitzaki ak ▁asmatzen ▁ditu ▁nire ▁aurka , ets ai tzat ▁hartzen ▁nau ;
PRED:	But they are trying to kill me .
GOLD:	God is picking a quarrel with me , and he considers me his enemy .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	▁Bitar te ▁horretan , ▁iskanbila ▁gogorra ▁sortu ▁zen ▁Efeson , ▁kristau - bidea ▁zela ▁eta .
PRED:	A Message about Ephesus and Ephesus , a Jew .
GOLD:	About that time , serious trouble developed in Ephesus concerning the Way .

ID:	2296
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Daviden ▁salmoa . Ene ▁Jainko , ▁ez ▁egin ▁entzungor ▁nire ▁gorespen ari !
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O God , O God ! Do not forget me .
GOLD:	O God , whom I praise , do n't stand silent and aloof

ID:	2297
INPUT:	▁Berari ▁adieraziko ▁diozu ▁zer ▁esan ▁behar ▁duen ; ▁ni , ▁berriz , ▁zeuekin ▁biok in ▁izango ▁nauzue , ▁hitz ▁egin ▁behar ▁duzuen ▁bakoitzean . ▁Eta ▁zer ▁egin ▁eta ▁zer ▁esan ▁ere ▁irakatsiko ▁dizuet .
PRED:	Then you will tell you what I say , but I will tell you what I am going . Then you will speak to you , and I will speak to you .
GOLD:	Talk to him , and put the words in his mouth . I will be with both of you as you speak , and I will instruct you both in what to do .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁bainau ▁ekaitz az ▁zanpatu , berak ▁dizkit ▁arrazoirik ▁gabe ▁zauriak ▁ugaldu ,
PRED:	He has rejected me ; he has torn me without despair .
GOLD:	For he attacks me with a stormand repeatedly wounds me without cause .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁irakasten ▁hasi ▁zitzaien , ▁Gizonaren ▁Semeak ▁asko ▁sufritu ▁behar ▁zuela ; ▁zahar , ▁apaizburu ▁eta ▁lege - maisuek ▁gaitzetsi ▁egingo ▁zutela ▁eta ▁hil ; ▁eta ▁hiru ▁egunen ▁buruan ▁piztu ▁egingo ▁zela .
PRED:	Then the Son of Man began to teach the Son of Man . He must suffer many teachers of religious law , the leading priests and teachers of religious law , and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to tell them that the Son of Man must suffer many terrible things and be rejected by the elders , the leading priests , and the teachers of religious law . He would be killed , but three days later he would rise from the dead .

ID:	2300
INPUT:	▁Lurreko ▁belarra , ▁baraz kiak ▁eta ▁zuhaitzak ▁ez ▁hondatzeko ▁agindua ▁eman ▁zitzaien , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁zigil uaren ▁marka ▁bekokian ▁ez ▁zeramaten ▁gizakiak ▁bakarrik .
PRED:	For the Kingdom of the world began to spread out the trees of the trees , and it was written on the foreheads of the beast .
GOLD:	They were told not to harm the grass or plants or trees , but only the people who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads .

ID:	2301
INPUT:	▁« Gal ▁bitez ▁horre l azure ▁etsaiak , ▁Jauna . Zure ▁adiskideak , ▁aldiz , izan ▁bitez ▁eguzkia egun sen tian ▁bezain ▁bizi !» Hau en ▁guztien ▁ondoren , ▁bakean ▁bizi ▁izan ▁ziren ▁israeldarren ▁herrialdean ▁berrogei ▁urtez .
PRED:	“ May the Lord be afraid of your enemies , O Lord ! May your enemies be like a thousand years as you live in the land of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Lord , may all your enemies die like Sisera ! But may those who love you rise like the sun in all its power ! ” Then there was peace in the land for forty years .

ID:	2302
INPUT:	▁Josue ▁hil ▁zenean , ▁israeldarrek ▁kontsulta ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari :— Gure ▁leinu etarik ▁zein ▁igoko ▁da ▁lehena ▁kanaan darrei ▁erasotzera ?
PRED:	When the people of Israel died , they said to the Lord , “ Where is the leaders of the Amorites ? ”
GOLD:	After the death of Joshua , the Israelites asked the Lord , “ Which tribe should go first to attack the Canaanites ? ”

ID:	2303
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁hitza ▁bidali ▁zien ▁sen d agarri eta ▁hondamendi tik ▁atera .
PRED:	He sent his mouth to a fool , and he sent a fool to curse .
GOLD:	He sent out his word and healed them , snatching them from the door of death .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	▁nire ▁legeen ▁arabera ▁ibiltzen ▁da ▁eta ▁nire ▁erabakiak ▁betetzen , ▁leial ▁jokatuz . ▁Honelako a ▁gizon ▁zintzoa ▁da ; ▁beraz , ▁bizi ▁egingo ▁da . ▁Honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	My decrees and regulations are faithful to me , and they are faithful to me . I am the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	and faithfully obeys my decrees and regulations . Anyone who does these things is just and will surely live , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2305
INPUT:	▁Eliz ▁elkarte ▁bakoitzean ▁arduradunak ▁izendatu ▁zituzten ▁eta , ▁otoitz ▁eta ▁barau ▁egin ▁ondoren , ▁Jaunari ▁gomen datu ▁zizkioten , ▁harengan ▁sinetsi ▁baitzuten .
PRED:	The whole church met together with the church and prayed to the Lord . When they believed in him , they prayed to the Lord .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas also appointed elders in every church . With prayer and fasting , they turned the elders over to the care of the Lord , in whom they had put their trust .

ID:	2306
INPUT:	▁Bost ▁or ga ▁tenpluaren ▁eskuinaldean ▁jarri ▁zituen ▁eta ▁beste ▁bos tak ▁ezkerra ldean ; ▁« Itsaso » ▁zeritzan ▁uraska ▁handia , ▁berriz , ▁tenpluaren ▁eskuinaldean ▁jarri ▁zuen , ▁hego - eki aldera .
PRED:	He measured the wall on the north side of the Temple , and he measured the Sea . He overlaid the Sea with the Sea .
GOLD:	He set five water carts on the south side of the Temple and five on the north side . The great bronze basin called the Sea was placed near the southeast corner of the Temple .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	▁Perts egi tu ▁egiten ▁ditueta ▁aurrera ▁doa ▁seguru , bere ▁oinez ▁lurrik ▁ia ▁ukitu ▁gabe .
PRED:	The wicked fall into a trap , but he touched her paths .
GOLD:	He chases them away and goes on safely , though he is walking over unfamiliar ground .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	▁Eliseok ▁erantzun :— Zoaz ▁bakean . N a am an ▁Eliseo gandik ▁puska ▁bat ▁urrundu ▁zelarik ,
PRED:	Elisha replied , “ Go and get him in peace . ”
GOLD:	“ Go in peace , ” Elisha said . So Naaman started home again .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	▁Herri ▁horien ▁erlijio ah uts aren ▁pareko : horien ▁idoloak baso an ▁ebaki tako ▁egur - pus kak ▁dira , ar tisau aren ▁eskuak ▁zizel ez ▁landuak ,
PRED:	These people are detestable to their idols ; their idols are like an idol of their hands . They will never break their hands on their hands .
GOLD:	Their ways are futile and foolish.They cut down a tree , and a craftsman carves an idol .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	▁Haien ▁odola ▁p al as taka ▁isuri ▁dute ▁Jerusalem ▁inguruan , eta ▁lur ▁emateko ▁inor ▁ez .
PRED:	Their blood burns against Jerusalem , and no one will turn to the earth .
GOLD:	Blood has flowed like water all around Jerusalem ; no one is left to bury the dead .

ID:	2311
INPUT:	▁D u dan ▁guztia ▁behartsuen ▁artean ▁banatu ▁eta ▁neure ▁gorputza ▁erre tzeraino ▁emanik ▁ere ▁, ▁maitasunik ▁ez ▁badut , ▁ez ▁naiz ▁ezer .
PRED:	If the poor are poor and needy , I have put them on the poor , and I would not be with you .
GOLD:	If I gave everything I have to the poor and even sacrificed my body , I could boast about it ; but if I did n't love others , I would have gained nothing .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁tenplu ▁santura ▁begira ▁ahuspezten ▁naiz , zuri ▁eskerrak ▁emanez : zeure ▁maitasun ▁eta ▁leialtasun az , par eg abe ▁handi ▁egin ▁dituzu ▁zeure ▁izena ▁eta ▁promesa .
PRED:	I will praise your name , O Lord , your unfailing love and unfailing love .
GOLD:	I bow before your holy Temple as I worship.I praise your name for your unfailing love and faithfulness ; for your promises are backedby all the honor of your name .

ID:	2313
INPUT:	▁Saia ▁gaitezen , ▁bada , ▁bakea ▁indar tzeko ▁eta ▁elkarte - bizitza ▁eraikitzeko ▁lagungarri ▁diren ▁gauzetan .
PRED:	Now let us work in your presence , and may your whole body be filled with fear .
GOLD:	So then , let us aim for harmony in the church and try to build each other up .

ID:	2314
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁handitasuna ▁eta ▁gizakiaren ▁hutsa
PRED:	The Faith of God
GOLD:	Bildad 's Third Response to Job

ID:	2315
INPUT:	▁B ib l os eko ▁artisau ▁trebatu enak zen ituen ▁zeure ▁itsas ▁ar otz ; itsas ontzi ▁guztietako ▁marin elek eros ten ▁zizuten ▁merk antzia .
PRED:	The merchants of the sea you have made your precious jewels .
GOLD:	Wise old craftsmen from Gebal did the caulking.Ships from every land came with goods to barter for your trade .

ID:	2316
INPUT:	▁Isaakek ▁berrogei ▁urte ▁zituen , ▁Betu elen ▁alaba ▁eta ▁Labanen ▁arreba ▁zen ▁Rebek arekin ▁ezkondu ▁zenean . ▁Betu el ▁eta ▁Laban ▁Mesopotam iako ▁arame arrak ▁ziren .
PRED:	When Isaac had finished forty years , Laban 's sister , she married her to Laban , Laban , and Laban 's wife .
GOLD:	When Isaac was forty years old , he married Rebekah , the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan-aram and the sister of Laban the Aramean .

ID:	2317
INPUT:	▁Hiri aren ▁per im etroa ▁bederatzi ▁kilometro koa ▁izango ▁da .« Aur rerantzean , ▁“ Jauna ▁bertan ▁dago ” ▁deituko ▁da ▁hiria ».
PRED:	Your towns will be 81/3 miles wide , and the city will be called to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	2318
INPUT:	▁Epai - egunean ▁askok ▁esango ▁didate : ▁“ Jauna , ▁Jauna ! ▁Ez ▁ote ▁genuen ▁zure ▁izenean ▁hitz ▁egin ▁eta ▁zure ▁izenean ▁deabruak ▁bota ▁eta ▁zure ▁izenean ▁mirari ▁asko ▁egin ?”
PRED:	They will say to me , ‘ Lord , ' he said , ‘ Lord , ‘ Why do you hear your name ? '
GOLD:	On judgment day many will say to me , ‘ Lord ! Lord ! We prophesied in your name and cast out demons in your name and performed many miracles in your name . '

ID:	2319
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁nik ▁esan : ▁Inork ▁bere ▁emaztea ▁utzi ▁eta ▁beste ▁bat ▁hartzen ▁badu ▁— lege aren ▁kontra ▁elkar tuak ▁ez ▁badira ▁behintzat — ▁adulterio ▁egiten ▁du .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ If a man has sex with her , she has sex with her . If she commits adultery . ”
GOLD:	And I tell you this , whoever divorces his wife and marries someone else commits adultery — unless his wife has been unfaithful . ”

ID:	2320
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁espiritua ▁hirurogeita ▁hamar ▁herri - arduradunei ▁eman
PRED:	The Spirit of God
GOLD:	The Lord Sends Quail

ID:	2321
INPUT:	▁Bekatu ak ▁aitortu ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egin
PRED:	Living for God 's People
GOLD:	Restore Wandering Believers

ID:	2322
INPUT:	▁Min duak ▁ditut ▁begiak , ▁nire ▁herriko ▁alab ei ▁gertatua ▁ikusiz .
PRED:	I have seen the eyes of the wicked , the little little little daughters .
GOLD:	My heart is breakingover the fate of all the women of Jerusalem .

ID:	2323
INPUT:	▁Lehen dik ▁filistearren ▁zerbitzura ▁egon ▁eta ▁berauen ▁zelai ra ▁igo tako ▁hebre arrak ▁israeldarren gana ▁igaro ▁ziren , ▁Saul ▁eta ▁Jonatanen ▁aldera .
PRED:	The Philistines were camped at the Philistines and camped at the Philistines .
GOLD:	Even the Hebrews who had previously gone over to the Philistine army revolted and joined in with Saul , Jonathan , and the rest of the Israelites .

ID:	2324
INPUT:	▁M atxinada ▁denean , ▁herriak ▁buruzagi ▁ugari ; gizon ▁buru tsu ▁eta ▁aditu arekin ▁ord ena ▁nagusi .
PRED:	When the people do n't listen , they judges judges to work .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	2325
INPUT:	▁mota ▁guztietako ▁bel eak ,
PRED:	Parable of all kinds ,
GOLD:	ravens of all kinds ,

ID:	2326
INPUT:	▁Tenpl ua ▁eraikitzen ▁bukatu ▁zutenean , ▁sab aia ▁zedrozko ▁h abez ▁eta ▁ohol ez ▁jantzi ▁zuen .
PRED:	When he finished building the Temple , he covered the Temple with wood .
GOLD:	After completing the Temple structure , Solomon put in a ceiling made of cedar beams and planks .

ID:	2327
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁luzatu ▁zuen ▁Ester ren gana ▁urrezko ▁makila , ▁eta ▁Ester ▁zutik ▁gelditu ▁zen .
PRED:	So the king went to Esther and stood before Esther .
GOLD:	Again the king held out the gold scepter to Esther . So she rose and stood before him .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	▁azpikeriaz ▁zirik atu ▁baitzaituzte te ▁beraiek ▁ere ▁Peor ko ▁auzian , ▁baita ▁Peor ko aren ▁ondorioz ▁izandako ▁izurri - egunean ▁hildako ▁K oz bi ren ▁kas uan ▁ere , ▁buruzagi ▁madiandar raren ▁alabaren ean ».
PRED:	If you think you are doing what you are saying , you are saying , ‘ Even if you want to kill you , you would have a son of Beor with her . ' ”
GOLD:	because they assaulted you with deceit and tricked you into worshiping Baal of Peor , and because of Cozbi , the daughter of a Midianite leader , who was killed at the time of the plague because of what happened at Peor . ”

ID:	2329
INPUT:	▁Bitartean , ▁Esteban ▁hil ▁zutenean ▁sortutako ▁erasoaldi koan ▁sakabanatu ▁ziren ▁fededunak ▁ F en iz ia , ▁Zi pre ▁eta ▁Antioki araino ▁heldu ▁ziren ; ▁juduei ▁baizik ▁ez ▁zieten , ▁ordea , ▁mezua ▁iragartzen .
PRED:	When they saw him , they were overwhelmed by the believers who lived there . They were many believers in Antioch of the Jews , they were preaching to the Jews . But they were trying to hear the Jews .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the believers who had been scattered during the persecution after Stephen 's death traveled as far as Phoenicia , Cyprus , and Antioch of Syria . They preached the word of God , but only to Jews .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁ezagutzen ▁du ▁zure ▁haserrearen ▁indarra ? Nork ▁dio ▁aski ▁beldur ▁zure ▁sumin ari ?
PRED:	Who is your enemies ? Who is your enemies ? Who will be able to save your anger ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	2331
INPUT:	▁Josueren ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Lord 's Family
GOLD:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed

ID:	2332
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁ordea , ▁biziki ▁gorrotatu ▁zuen ▁Amnonek ▁neska , ▁lehen ▁izan ▁zion ▁amo dioa ▁baino ▁gorroto ▁askoz ▁handiagoz . ▁Amnonek ▁esan ▁zion :— Jaiki ▁zaitez ! ▁Alde ▁hemendik !
PRED:	But when she saw her , she would n't kill her , she loved her . But she loved her , she said to her , “ Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! ”
GOLD:	Then suddenly Amnon 's love turned to hate , and he hated her even more than he had loved her . “ Get out of here ! ” he snarled at her .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	▁E duki ▁beti ▁bes oan ▁babeski tzat ▁fedea , ▁etsaiaren ▁suzko ▁geziak ▁oro ▁itzali ▁ahal ▁izateko .
PRED:	Your breasts are like a young lion ; your enemies will be filled with violence .
GOLD:	In addition to all of these , hold up the shield of faith to stop the fiery arrows of the devil .

ID:	2334
INPUT:	▁eta ▁hemendik ▁mendebaldera , ▁j af l et i arren ▁mug az ▁muga , ▁Bet - Horon ▁Az p iko raino ▁eta ▁Gezer reraino ▁jaisten , ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoan ▁bukatzeko .
PRED:	A Message to the Mediterranean Sea , east of the Dead Sea , going to the Dead Sea , to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	Then it descended westward to the territory of the Japhletites as far as Lower Beth-horon , then to Gezer and over to the Mediterranean Sea .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	▁bata , ▁amondarren ▁Raba ▁hirira ; ▁bestea , ▁Judako ▁Jerusalem ▁hiri ▁gotortu ra .
PRED:	The fortified towns of Ammon , Ammon , and the towns of Ammon .
GOLD:	“ O you corrupt and wicked prince of Israel , your final day of reckoning is here !

ID:	2336
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁fidatu , ▁“ Jaunaren ▁tenplua , ▁Jaunaren ▁tenplua ” ▁erre pik atuz ▁engainatzen ▁zaituzteten ▁horietaz .
PRED:	Do not say to the Lord , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , your God will forgive you . '
GOLD:	But do n't be fooled by those who promise you safety simply because the Lord 's Temple is here . They chant , “ The Lord 's Temple is here ! The Lord 's Temple is here ! ”

ID:	2337
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁ulertu ▁ahal ▁izango ▁duzue , ▁fededun ▁guztiekin ▁batera , ▁zein ▁zabal ▁eta ▁luze , ▁garai ▁eta ▁sakon ▁den ▁Kristoren ▁maitasuna ;
PRED:	In this way , you will understand all the things of God 's holy people and sisters , how long will you be filled with Christ .
GOLD:	And may you have the power to understand , as all God 's people should , how wide , how long , how high , and how deep his love is .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	▁Zatoz kit ▁zeure ▁gupidaz , ▁biziberri ▁nadin , zure ▁irakaspena ▁baitut ▁gozamen !
PRED:	Come , let me forget your word , for I am your instructions .
GOLD:	Surround me with your tender mercies so I may live , for your instructions are my delight .

ID:	2339
INPUT:	▁Siriako ▁erregeak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Tira , ▁zoaz , ▁bada ! ▁Gu tuna ▁emango ▁dizut ▁Israelgo ▁erregearentzat . Ab iatu ▁zen , ▁beraz , ▁Naaman ▁hirurehun ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamarren ▁bat ▁kilo ▁zilar , ▁urrezko ▁sei ▁mila ▁txanpon ▁eta ▁hamar ▁jantzi - sorta ▁berekin ▁zeramatz ala .
PRED:	The king of Aram replied , “ Go and go with us , and go to the Temple of the Lord . I will give you two silver silver silver , silver , and scarlet thread . ”
GOLD:	“ Go and visit the prophet , ” the king of Aram told him . “ I will send a letter of introduction for you to take to the king of Israel. ” So Naaman started out , carrying as gifts 750 pounds of silver , 150 pounds of gold , and ten sets of clothing .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	▁mahai tik ▁jaiki , ▁soingainekoa ▁erantzi ▁eta , ▁eskuz <unk> ▁harturik , ▁gerrian ▁lotu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then he took his cloak and put him on his head and put it on top of the chestpiece .
GOLD:	So he got up from the table , took off his robe , wrapped a towel around his waist ,

ID:	2341
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁bidea ▁sas iz ▁itxiko ▁diot , inguru an ▁hesia ▁jarriko , bere ▁bidez id or rik ▁gehiago aurki ▁ez ▁dezan .
PRED:	That is why I set up the road to the wall ; I would not protect them .
GOLD:	She does n't realize it was I who gave her everything she has — the grain , the new wine , the olive oil ; I even gave her silver and gold.But she gave all my gifts to Baal .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁berriro ▁agertu ▁Salomoni
PRED:	The Lord 's Glory Leaves Solomon
GOLD:	The Lord 's Response to Solomon

ID:	2343
INPUT:	▁Saulen <unk> az ▁labur pena
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer of Saul
GOLD:	Saul 's Military Successes

ID:	2344
INPUT:	▁Jesu ▁Kristo gandik ▁hartu ▁dugu ▁apostolu ▁izateko ▁dohaina , ▁jentil - herri ei ▁sinesmena ▁eramateko ▁eta ▁f ed ezko ▁erantzuna ▁haiengan ▁sor tzeko .
PRED:	And we have received by the Spirit of Christ Jesus Christ , who gives us to the Gentiles . And we know that you have been given to you .
GOLD:	Through Christ , God has given us the privilege and authority as apostles to tell Gentiles everywhere what God has done for them , so that they will believe and obey him , bringing glory to his name .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	▁Jende ari ▁zelaian ▁eser tzeko ▁agindu ▁ondoren , ▁hartu ▁zituen ▁bost ▁ogiak ▁eta ▁bi ▁arrainak ▁eta , ▁begiak ▁zerura ▁jasorik , ▁bedeinkazioa ▁esan , ▁ogiak ▁zatitu ▁eta ▁ikasleei ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁eta ▁ikasleek ▁jendeari .
PRED:	When the people sat down on the ground , he took five loaves of bread and the fish in the sky . He gave them two loaves of bread and the fish , he gave them to the people .
GOLD:	Then he told the people to sit down on the grass . Jesus took the five loaves and two fish , looked up toward heaven , and blessed them . Then , breaking the loaves into pieces , he gave the bread to the disciples , who distributed it to the people .

ID:	2346
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁jarri ▁du ▁beraren ▁zain pean ▁lurra ? Nork ▁eman ▁dio ▁mundu ▁osoaren ▁ardura ?
PRED:	Who gives the earth to the earth ? Who has given the earth ?
GOLD:	Did someone else put the world in his care ? Who set the whole world in place ?

ID:	2347
INPUT:	▁I zer di rik ▁aterarazi ▁ez ▁dizuen ▁lurraldea ▁eman ▁dizuet , ▁eraiki ▁ez ▁dituzuen ▁hiriak , ▁eta ▁berorietan ▁bizi ▁zarete ; ▁baita ▁landatu ▁ez ▁dituzuen ▁mahasti ▁eta ▁olibadi ak ▁ere , ▁eta ▁berorien ▁fruitu ez ▁elikatzen ▁zarete ».
PRED:	I have built a land for you , for you have built your towns . You have built your towns , and you will plant your vineyards and vineyards and vineyards . ”
GOLD:	I gave you land you had not worked on , and I gave you towns you did not build — the towns where you are now living . I gave you vineyards and olive groves for food , though you did not plant them .

ID:	2348
INPUT:	▁Emaguzu ▁garaipena ▁zeure ▁ahalmenaz , ▁eta ▁erantzun , hain ▁maite ▁dituzun ok ▁libra ▁daitezen .
PRED:	Give us the power of your power , and let them rescue them from your power .
GOLD:	Gilead is mine , and Manasseh , too.Ephraim , my helmet , will produce my warriors , and Judah , my scepter , will produce my kings .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	▁Honelako ▁gauz ek ▁pizten ▁dute ▁Jainkoaren ▁haserrea ▁errebelde en ▁gain .
PRED:	These are the day of God 's anger , and we have rebelled against God .
GOLD:	Because of these sins , the anger of God is coming .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	▁Etor raldi ▁bakoitzean ▁joko ▁zaituzte , egun ero - egun ero , ▁gau ▁eta ▁egun . H orren ▁berri ▁jaki te ▁hutsak ikara ▁gorria ▁emango ▁dizue .
PRED:	On each day you will be on every day , so you will know that all night . Instead , you will know that I am in the presence of you .
GOLD:	Again and again that flood will come , morning after morning , day and night , until you are carried away. ” This message will bring terror to your people .

ID:	2351
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Hob abi , ▁bere ▁aitaginarreba ▁Reu el ▁madiandar raren ▁semeari :— Gu ▁ba go az ▁Jaunak ▁agindutako ▁lurraldera . ▁Zatoz ▁gurekin ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁Israeli ▁hitzemandako ▁ondasunetan ▁parte ▁emango ▁dizugu .
PRED:	But Moses said to his father-in-law , “ Let us go to the land of the Lord , the Lord has commanded you to give you the land of Israel . Come , and let us go to the land of Israel . ”
GOLD:	One day Moses said to his brother-in-law , Hobab son of Reuel the Midianite , “ We are on our way to the place the Lord promised us , for he said , ‘ I will give it to you . ' Come with us and we will treat you well , for the Lord has promised wonderful blessings for Israel ! ”

ID:	2352
INPUT:	▁Babes - hiriak
PRED:	Summary of Deliverance
GOLD:	The Cities of Refuge

ID:	2353
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁toki ak ▁aukeratu ▁eta ▁behartsuak ▁gonbidatu
PRED:	Paul 's Call to the Church
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Humility

ID:	2354
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁artzain ok , ▁entzun ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua :
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	“ Therefore , you shepherds , hear the word of the Lord :

ID:	2355
INPUT:	▁Lebiren ▁leinuaren ▁izen - bilketa ▁senitarteka : ▁Gerxonen gandik ▁gerx on darrak , ▁Kehaten gandik ▁k eh atarrak ▁eta ▁Merariren gandik ▁mer ari tarrak .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the tribe of Levi : The clan of Levi , named after their clan , named after the clans of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	This is the record of the Levites who were counted according to their clans : The Gershonite clan , named after their ancestor Gershon.The Kohathite clan , named after their ancestor Kohath.The Merarite clan , named after their ancestor Merari .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	▁Aldi ▁hartan ▁gaixotu ▁egin ▁zitzaion ▁Jeroboami ▁bere ▁seme ▁Abias .
PRED:	When Jeroboam son of Jeroboam began to rule over Judah .
GOLD:	At that time Jeroboam 's son Abijah became very sick .

ID:	2357
INPUT:	▁Su ge gorri aren ▁poz oia ▁zen ▁x ur gatzen ▁zuena , bi per aren ▁m iz toak ▁bezala ▁hilko ▁du .
PRED:	She fell like a snake ; she died like a fool .
GOLD:	They will suck the poison of cobras.The viper will kill them .

ID:	2358
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁eta ▁Pedrok ▁tenplurako ▁zerga ▁ordaindu
PRED:	Peter and the Temple
GOLD:	Payment of the Temple Tax

ID:	2359
INPUT:	▁Gizaki ▁txarra ▁higuingarri ▁da ▁zintzo entzat , jokabide ▁zuzen ekoa ▁higuingarri ▁gaizto entzat .
PRED:	Their detestable deeds are detestable to those who are detestable to the wicked .
GOLD:	The righteous despise the unjust ; the wicked despise the godly .

ID:	2360
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁ez ▁Kareahen ▁seme ▁Johananek , ▁ez ▁gudalburuek , ▁ez ▁beste ▁inork , ▁ez ▁zioten ▁Jaunari ▁aditu , ▁eta ▁ez ▁ziren ▁gelditu ▁Juda ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	But the other leaders did not listen to the Lord . They did not listen to the Lord . They did not listen to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Johanan and the other military leaders and all the people refused to obey the Lord 's command to stay in Judah .

ID:	2361
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁denek ▁S osten es ▁sinagogako ▁buruzagiari ▁heldu ▁eta ▁j ip oi ▁ederra ▁eman ▁zioten ▁auzi tegi ▁aurrean ▁bertan . ▁Gal i onek ▁ez ▁zien ▁jaramonik ▁egin .
PRED:	Then everyone went home to the leader of the synagogue , and he went home to the name of the Lord . So he refused to listen to Moses .
GOLD:	The crowd then grabbed Sosthenes , the leader of the synagogue , and beat him right there in the courtroom . But Gallio paid no attention .

ID:	2362
INPUT:	▁Jonadabek ▁esan ▁zion :— E tzan ▁zaitez ▁zeure ▁ohean ▁eta ▁egin ▁gaixo - itxura . ▁Aita ▁ikustera ▁etortzean , ▁esaiozu : ▁« Otoi , ▁esaiozu ▁gure ▁arreba ▁Tam arri ▁niri ▁jaten ▁ematera ▁etortzeko ; ▁hark ▁nire ▁aurrean ▁eta ▁ni ▁begira ▁nauela ▁jateko ▁zerbait ▁prestatzen ▁eta ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁ematen ▁badi t , ▁jango ▁dut ».
PRED:	Then she said to her , “ Come , my lord , ” she said . “ Please tell me , ‘ Please tell me what I am saying , ‘ Please let me eat me . '
GOLD:	“ Well , ” Jonadab said , “ I 'll tell you what to do . Go back to bed and pretend you are ill . When your father comes to see you , ask him to let Tamar come and prepare some food for you . Tell him you 'll feel better if she prepares it as you watch and feeds you with her own hands . ”

ID:	2363
INPUT:	▁Badakit ▁zerutik ▁jaitsi tako ▁suak ▁kiskali ▁dituela ▁beste ▁bi ▁buruzagiak ▁eta ▁beren ▁gizonak ; ▁baina ▁ni ▁utz ▁nazazu ▁bizirik .
PRED:	I went down from heaven , and the officials of the sky and the other men of the sky . ”
GOLD:	See how the fire from heaven came down and destroyed the first two groups . But now please spare my life ! ”

ID:	2364
INPUT:	▁Arrats ▁beh er ean , haizeak ▁jo ▁eta ▁itzalak ▁ihes ▁egitean , itzul ▁zaitez , ▁ene ▁maitea , g azela ▁edo ▁orein kumea ▁bezala , mendi ▁eta ▁sak an etan ▁barrena .
PRED:	When you flee , my lover is like the road , let me run like a pleasing aroma to the Lord , as a pleasing aroma to the mountain .
GOLD:	Before the dawn breezes blowand the night shadows flee , return to me , my love , like a gazelleor a young stag on the rugged mountains .

ID:	2365
INPUT:	▁Moisesen ▁legearen ▁bidetik ▁salbamena ▁lortu ▁nahi ▁duzuenok , ▁Kristoren gandik ▁bereizi ▁egin ▁zarete ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁onginahi tik ▁saihestu .
PRED:	For you refuse to obey the law of the law of Moses . You are following the law of God 's law .
GOLD:	For if you are trying to make yourselves right with God by keeping the law , you have been cut off from Christ ! You have fallen away from God 's grace .

ID:	2366
INPUT:	▁Des agertu ▁egin ▁behar ▁al ▁du ▁horregatik ▁gure ▁aitaren ▁izenak ▁beraren ▁senitarte tik ? ▁Emaguzu , ▁beraz , ▁guri ▁lur - jabe tza ▁gure ▁aitaren ▁anaiei ▁bezala ».
PRED:	So do you think we have done to our father , and we are all the names of our father 's family . ”
GOLD:	Why should the name of our father disappear from his clan just because he had no sons ? Give us property along with the rest of our relatives . ”

ID:	2367
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁engainatu ▁zuen ▁Jakobek ▁Laban ▁arame arra , ▁ez ▁baitzion ▁adierazi ▁alde ▁egiteko ▁asmorik .
PRED:	So Jacob told Laban , “ Do n't go through the island of Laban .
GOLD:	Jacob outwitted Laban the Aramean , for they set out secretly and never told Laban they were leaving .

ID:	2368
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2369
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁da ▁Moaben ▁hondamena , gainean ▁du ▁zoritxarra .
PRED:	The salvation of Moab is gone , and the salvation of the earth is gone .
GOLD:	“ Destruction is coming fast for Moab ; calamity threatens ominously .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	▁Pedro , ▁Jesusi ▁urrutitik ▁jarraituz , ▁apaiz ▁nagusiaren ▁jauregi raino ▁joan ▁eta , ▁barrura ▁sarturik , ▁morroiekin ▁eseri ▁zen , ▁hura ▁guztia ▁zertan ▁amaitzen ▁zen ▁ikusteko .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter went into the distance to the house of the high priest and went down to the palace . He sat down and sat down to see everything he had done .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and came to the high priest 's courtyard . He went in and sat with the guards and waited to see how it would all end .

ID:	2371
INPUT:	▁Bar e tu ▁bero aldi ▁hori , ▁itzali ▁zeure ▁haserre - sua !
PRED:	You must be angry with evil , and your fierce anger will be swept away .
GOLD:	Now restore us again , O God of our salvation.Put aside your anger against us once more .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	▁« Moises en ▁legearen ▁eta ▁profeten ▁garaia ▁Joan ▁Bataia tzaile arekin ▁bukatu ▁da ; ▁geroztik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁erregetzaren ▁berri ▁ona ▁adierazten ▁da , ▁eta ▁denek ▁indar ▁egiten ▁dute ▁bertan ▁sartzeko .
PRED:	“ This is the law of Moses and John the law of Moses , the law of God , the law of Moses , the law of God , and the law of God is giving them the law of God .
GOLD:	“ Until John the Baptist , the law of Moses and the messages of the prophets were your guides . But now the Good News of the Kingdom of God is preached , and everyone is eager to get in .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	▁Ezekiasen ▁erregealdia
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	2374
INPUT:	▁« Ber rogei ▁urtez ▁ibil arazi ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak ▁basamortuan , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zaizkizue ▁ez ▁arropak , ▁ez ▁oinetakoak , ▁hondatu .
PRED:	“ When you arrive in the wilderness for forty years , you must not wash your clothes and bathe yourself in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But to this day the Lord has not given you minds that understand , nor eyes that see , nor ears that hear !

ID:	2375
INPUT:	▁Zorionekoak ▁lehen ▁piztuera ▁honetan ▁parte ▁dutenak , ▁Jainkoarenak ▁baitira ! ▁Bigarren ▁herio tzak ▁ez ▁du ▁agin terik ▁beraien ▁gain , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁eta ▁Mesiasen ▁apaiz ▁izango ▁dira , ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁errege ▁mila ▁urteetan .
PRED:	All who belong to the resurrection of the resurrection of God . They will be buried in the presence of God , but they will be buried in the presence of the Lord 's reign .
GOLD:	Blessed and holy are those who share in the first resurrection . For them the second death holds no power , but they will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with him a thousand years .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haiek ▁bertan ▁utzi ▁eta ▁hiritik ▁kanpora ▁atera ▁zen , ▁Betan iara , ▁eta ▁han ▁eman ▁zuen ▁gaua .
PRED:	So he left the city and left the town of Capernaum , where he left the night .
GOLD:	Then he returned to Bethany , where he stayed overnight .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	▁Herio tzatik ▁libratu ▁zaretenok , alde ▁egin ▁luz atz eke ! O ro itu ▁Jaunaz ▁urrutitik , ekarri ▁gogora ▁Jerusalem .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to what you have done , O Lord , you have done to me .
GOLD:	Get out , all you who have escaped the sword ! Do not stand and watch — flee while you can ! Remember the Lord , though you are in a far-off land , and think about your home in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	2378
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2379
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁batzuk ▁“ harri - artea ” ▁bezala ▁dira : ▁mezua ▁entzutean , ▁berehala ▁pozik ▁onartzen ▁dute ;
PRED:	They say to others , ‘ The Scriptures say , ‘ This is what the word tells you . '
GOLD:	The seed on the rocky soil represents those who hear the message and immediately receive it with joy .

ID:	2380
INPUT:	▁Moab , ▁zeure ▁indar ▁eta ▁ondasunetan fi datu ▁zara : hara ▁orain ▁zu ▁ere ▁konkis tatua ! Zure ▁jainko ▁Kem ox ▁erbestera ▁doa , bere ▁apaiz ▁eta ▁buruzagiekin .
PRED:	You are your strength , O Lord , your God , and you are filled with your royal throne . You are your god , his officials , and your royal officials .
GOLD:	Because you have trusted in your wealth and skill , you will be taken captive.Your god Chemosh , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands !

ID:	2381
INPUT:	▁toki ▁sakratuan ▁jango ▁duzue . ▁Horixe ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁opari tik ▁zeuri ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeei ▁dagokizuen ▁partea , ▁Jaunak ▁agindu ▁zidan ▁bezala .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to me , “ It is a special gift to your sons and your sons . This is what the Lord had commanded me .
GOLD:	You must eat it in a sacred place , for it has been given to you and your descendants as your portion of the special gifts presented to the Lord . These are the commands I have been given .

ID:	2382
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretzeko ▁oparigai ▁den ▁aberearen ▁gantza ▁jaten ▁duena , ▁herritik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁duzue .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to the Lord your God , and you will take away from the community of Israel .
GOLD:	Anyone who eats fat from an animal presented as a special gift to the Lord will be cut off from the community .

ID:	2383
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁erantzun ▁zuen :— Sin es mena ▁bazenute , ▁m ostaza - hazia ▁bezain ▁txikia ▁izanik ▁ere , ▁pikondo ▁honi ▁« Atera ▁hortik ▁eta ▁landatu ▁itsasoan » ▁esango ▁zen iok ete , ▁eta ▁obeditu ▁egingo ▁lizu eke .
PRED:	Then the Lord replied , “ If you believe that the Lord has planted a little crowd , you will say , ‘ You will tell you what you have happened . '
GOLD:	The Lord answered , “ If you had faith even as small as a mustard seed , you could say to this mulberry tree , ‘ May you be uprooted and be planted in the sea , ' and it would obey you !

ID:	2384
INPUT:	▁Omriren ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak ▁eta ▁egintza ▁adoretsuak ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in the reign of the events of the Kings of Israel are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Omri 's reign , the extent of his power , and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	▁Kux an darren ▁oihal - etxolak des egin ak ▁ikusi ▁ditut , ma dian darren ▁oihal - tx ab olak astin durik .
PRED:	I have seen the tents of Moab , and I saw you as he had seen . I did not let them go on the side of his tent .
GOLD:	I see the people of Cushan in distress , and the nation of Midian trembling in terror .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	▁Josuek , ▁israeldarren ▁artean ▁aukeratu ▁zituen ▁hamabi ▁gizonei ▁— le inu ▁bakoitzeko ▁bati — ▁dei ▁egin
PRED:	Joshua called twelve men from the tribe of Israel , one of the tribe of Levi , one of the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	So Joshua called together the twelve men he had chosen — one from each of the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2387
INPUT:	▁eskaini ▁elkartasun - opariak ▁ere ▁eta ▁jan ▁bertan , ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁festa ▁eginez .
PRED:	Then sacrifice burnt offerings and peace offerings to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Also sacrifice peace offerings on it , and celebrate by feasting there before the Lord your God .

ID:	2388
INPUT:	▁Su ari ▁indartsu ▁haize ▁emanez meta lari ▁zab orra ▁kentzen ▁zaio . Baina ▁alferrik ▁da haiek ▁garbitzen ▁ari tzea : egi te ▁txarrak ▁ez ▁zaizkie ▁joaten .
PRED:	He makes a strong wind as a clay pot . But they are allowed to turn away from their own eyes . But they can not turn away from their evil deeds .
GOLD:	The bellows fiercely fan the flamesto burn out the corruption.But it does not purify them , for the wickedness remains .

ID:	2389
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁bada , ▁sinesmenetik ▁bizi ▁direnek ▁hartzen ▁dute ▁bedeinkazioa ▁Abraham ▁sinestedun arekin ▁batera .
PRED:	So everyone who live in faith in the faith of Abraham .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	2390
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁zuzen dariak , ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxezain ▁denez ▁gero , ▁akats ▁gabea ▁izan ▁behar ▁du : ▁ez ▁harro , ▁ez ▁haserre kor , ▁ez ▁ardo zale , ▁ez ▁ses io zale , ▁ez ▁okerreko ▁irabazi en ▁gose ;
PRED:	For there is no resurrection of God . It is not a descendant of God . It is not allowed to be allowed to be angry with no wine .
GOLD:	A church leader is a manager of God 's household , so he must live a blameless life . He must not be arrogant or quick-tempered ; he must not be a heavy drinker , violent , or dishonest with money .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	▁Garai ▁hartan , ▁Moabeko ▁erregea ▁Tzip orren ▁seme ▁Balak ▁zen . ▁Jakin ▁zuen ▁erregeak ▁israeldarrek ▁amortarrei ▁egindakoa , ▁eta ▁moabdarrak ▁beldurrak ▁hartu ▁zituen ▁Israel ▁herria ▁hain ▁ugaria ▁zela ▁ikusirik . ▁Israeldarren ▁aurrean ▁izutu ta , ▁moabdarrek ▁Madiango ▁herri - arduradunei ▁esan ▁zieten : ▁« I diak ▁zelai ko ▁belarra ▁bezala ▁garbituko ▁ditu ▁jen d alde ▁horrek ▁gure ▁inguru ▁guztiak ».
PRED:	At that time the king of Moab came to Balaam son of Moab , the king of Moab , and the people of Moab followed the land of Moab .
GOLD:	Balak son of Zippor , the Moabite king , had seen everything the Israelites did to the Amorites .

ID:	2392
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak , ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	The Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	2393
INPUT:	▁Deiadar ▁egingo ▁dute ▁zuregatik , garra tz ▁egingo ▁garrasi , erra uts ez ▁burua ▁estali eta ▁lurrean ▁iraul katuko .
PRED:	“ You are like a lion , ” says the Lord. “ If you hide your feet , you will fall down on the ground .
GOLD:	They cry aloud over youand weep bitterly.They throw dust on their headsand roll in ashes .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁hitz ▁egin ▁dezaket ▁zurekin , ▁ene ▁jauna , ▁indarra ▁ez ▁ezik ▁arnasa ▁bera ▁ere ▁galdu ▁du dalarik ?”
PRED:	How can I speak to you , my lord , my strength , and his strength is gone .
GOLD:	How can someone like me , your servant , talk to you , my lord ? My strength is gone , and I can hardly breathe . ”

ID:	2395
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁zeru - lur rok ! Honela ▁mintzo ▁da ▁Jauna :« Haur rak ▁sortu ▁ditut ▁eta ▁hazi , baina ▁aurka ▁altxatu ▁zaizkit .
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , and I am saying , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Listen , O heavens ! Pay attention , earth ! This is what the Lord says : “ The children I raised and cared forhave rebelled against me .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	▁Jobek ▁ez ▁dizkit ▁niri ▁zuzendu ▁bere ▁hitzak , nik ▁ere ▁ez ▁diot ▁zuen ▁arrazoi bidez ▁erantzungo .
PRED:	Then Job spoke to me , “ What sorrow awaits me ? What sorrow awaits you ? ”
GOLD:	If Job had been arguing with me , I would not answer with your kind of logic !

ID:	2397
INPUT:	▁Semea ▁erdaindu ▁zuelako ▁esan ▁zion ▁hori . Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁joaten ▁utzi ▁zion .
PRED:	When the Son of Man was circumcised , the Lord gave him to him .
GOLD:	( When she said “ a bridegroom of blood , ” she was referring to the circumcision . ) After that , the Lord left him alone .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	▁Xa al b ongo ▁Elia h ba ; ▁G un go ▁Ja xen ; ▁Jonatan ,
PRED:	The descendants of Ammihud
GOLD:	Eliahba from Shaalbon ; the sons of Jashen ; Jonathan

ID:	2399
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁Jauna ! ▁Erruki ▁nitaz ! ▁Jauna , ▁zatozkit ▁lagun !»
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , Lord , and come to me . ”
GOLD:	You have turned my mourning into joyful dancing.You have taken away my clothes of mourning and clothed me with joy ,

ID:	2400
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁Ate ▁Eder ▁ondoan ▁eserita ▁limosna ▁eske ▁egoten ▁zena ▁bera ▁zela ▁oharturik , ▁denak ▁zur ▁eta ▁lur ▁gelditu ▁ziren ▁gertatu tako az .
PRED:	When he was sitting on the door , they asked him what he was going to pray .
GOLD:	When they realized he was the lame beggar they had seen so often at the Beautiful Gate , they were absolutely astounded !

ID:	2401
INPUT:	▁Batzuk ▁bizkor ▁guda - gurdi ekin , ▁beste ▁batzuk ▁zaldi ekin ; gu , ▁berriz , ▁Jaunarekin , ▁geure ▁Jainkoarekin .
PRED:	Some of his chariot horses were filled with chariots and horses . But the Lord our God , the God of our God .
GOLD:	Those nations will fall down and collapse , but we will rise up and stand firm .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	▁« Israelgo ▁edozein ▁hiri tan ▁bizi ▁den ▁lebitarrak , ▁Jaunak ▁beretzat ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁lekura ▁joatea ▁erabakitzen ▁badu ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : If you are to take place place to the place where the Lord is giving to you .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a Levite chooses to move from his town in Israel , wherever he is living , to the place the Lord chooses for worship .

ID:	2403
INPUT:	▁« Itx <unk> ▁egon ▁naiz ▁zuek ▁hitz ▁egin ▁bitartean ; erne , ▁zuen ▁arrazoi bideak ▁aditzen , zer ▁esan ▁asmatzen ▁ari ▁zineten ▁bitartean .
PRED:	“ I am looking for you while you do n't understand what you are saying . When you are saying , you are doing wrong .
GOLD:	“ I have waited all this time , listening very carefully to your arguments , listening to you grope for words .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁da ▁besterik ; ez ▁da ▁ni ▁beste ▁jainkorik . Agin pi dez ▁jantzi ▁zaitut , ez agutzen ▁ez ▁nauzun ▁arren ,
PRED:	For I am the Lord , your God , and you are not my God . I am a covenant with you , as you are my God .
GOLD:	I am the Lord ; there is no other God.I have equipped you for battle , though you do n't even know me ,

ID:	2405
INPUT:	▁Prest ▁nago ▁hirugarren ▁aldiz ▁zuengana ▁joateko , ▁eta ▁oraingo ▁honetan ▁ere ▁ez ▁natzaizue ▁nekagarri ▁izango . ▁Ez ▁nabil ▁zuen ▁ondasunen ▁bila , ▁zeuen ▁bila ▁baizik . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dute ▁seme - alabek ▁aurrera tzen ▁guraso entzat , ▁gurasoek ▁seme - alabentzat ▁baizik .
PRED:	For I am ready to come to you on this day . I will do n't want you to know that you have not been ready to go to you , but your ancestors have no mercy on your ancestors .
GOLD:	Now I am coming to you for the third time , and I will not be a burden to you . I do n't want what you have — I want you . After all , children do n't provide for their parents . Rather , parents provide for their children .

ID:	2406
INPUT:	▁gero , ▁aharia ▁eskainiko ▁du ▁elkartasun - oparitzat , ▁legamia ▁gabeko ▁ogien ▁saski arekin ▁batera , ▁eta ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opariak .
PRED:	After the ram 's ram , the ram of choice flour mixed with olive oil , with olive oil , and olive oil .
GOLD:	then the ram for a peace offering , along with the basket of bread made without yeast . The priest must also present the prescribed grain offering and liquid offering to the Lord .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	▁Adar - hots ▁luzea ▁entzun ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁herri ▁osoak ▁irrintzi ▁handia ▁egingo ▁du ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁harresia ▁behera ▁etorriko ▁da . ▁Orduan , ▁eraso ▁diezaiola ▁jende ▁guztiak , ▁nork ▁bere ▁aurrean ▁izango ▁duen ▁tar tetik »
PRED:	On the sound of the ram 's horn , the great city will come to the wall , and all the people will attack the wall . Then the wall will be at the entrance of the wall .
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	2408
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herri ▁osoak ▁hautsi ▁egin ▁du ▁zure ▁legea , ▁eta ▁bizkarra ▁eman ▁dizu ▁zure ▁esana ▁ez ▁bete tzearren . ▁Horregatik ▁erori ▁zaigu ▁gainera ▁zure ▁zerbitzari ▁Moisesen ▁legean ▁idatzitako ▁madarikazioa , ▁zure ▁aurka ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁dugulako .
PRED:	When all the people of Israel saw this , the people of Israel brought your instructions to your ancestors . That is why your servant has commanded you to curse your servant Moses .
GOLD:	All Israel has disobeyed your instruction and turned away , refusing to listen to your voice. “ So now the solemn curses and judgments written in the Law of Moses , the servant of God , have been poured down on us because of our sin .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	▁Etsai ▁gisa ▁jokatu ▁du ▁Jaunak : ▁Israel ▁desegin ▁du , haren ▁jauretx eak ▁desegin , ▁haren ▁gotorlekuak ▁ezereztu . Ats ek abea ▁eta ▁nahigabea ▁ugaldu ▁dizkio ▁Juda ▁lurralde ▁ederrari .
PRED:	The Lord will destroy the people of Israel , and he will destroy them in the temple of the temple of the Lord . He will punish them , and I will punish them .
GOLD:	Yes , the Lord has vanquished Israellike an enemy.He has destroyed her palacesand demolished her fortresses.He has brought unending sorrow and tearsupon beautiful Jerusalem .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	▁Jainkoarentzat , ▁bere ▁Ait arentzat , ▁errege - herri ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁egin ▁gaituen ari , ▁aintza ▁eta ▁agintea ▁menderen ▁mendetan ! ▁Amen .
PRED:	For the glory of the Lord , the God of the nations , who created us forever and ever ! Amen .
GOLD:	He has made us a Kingdom of priests for God his Father . All glory and power to him forever and ever ! Amen .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁bat ▁urte ▁zituen ▁Sedekiasek ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hastean , ▁eta ▁hamaika ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Jerusalemen .
PRED:	Zedekiah was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	▁Jesus , ▁ordea , ▁zin ▁eginez ▁izendatu ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak , ▁hartaz ▁esaten ▁denez : ▁Zin ▁egina ▁du ▁Jaunak ▁eta ▁ez ▁zaio ▁damutuko : ▁« Betiko ▁zara ▁zu ▁apaiz ».
PRED:	But Jesus said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : He will give him a vow to him , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	but there was an oath regarding Jesus . For God said to him , “ The Lord has taken an oath and will not break his vow : ‘ You are a priest forever . ' ”

ID:	2413
INPUT:	▁Aztertu ▁dut ▁neure ▁jokabidea , eta ▁neure ▁pausoak ▁zure ▁xedapen etara ▁nahi ▁ditut ▁bidera tu .
PRED:	Lord , listen to me , and I want you to follow your instructions .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	2414
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁dakizue ? Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁inoiz ▁entzun ? Ez ▁al ▁dizuete ▁hasieratik horren ▁berri ▁eman ? Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁uler tun ork ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁mundua ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you have not heard ? Do n't you hear the beginning of the beginning ? Do n't you know that you have seen the world ? ”
GOLD:	Have n't you heard ? Do n't you understand ? Are you deaf to the words of God — the words he gave before the world began ? Are you so ignorant ?

ID:	2415
INPUT:	▁« Negar - zot inak ▁ditut ▁ogi , urak ▁bezala ▁gainezka ▁egiten ▁nire ▁intziri ek .
PRED:	“ I am glad when I pray , I sing for joy .
GOLD:	I can not eat for sighing ; my groans pour out like water .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	▁Gu dariak ▁bezala ▁oldartzen ▁dira , ger lari en ▁antzera ▁igotzen harre si etan ▁gora . B ako itza ▁bere ▁bidetik ▁doa , nor ▁bere ▁lerro tik ▁okertu ▁gabe .
PRED:	The armies of the battle will be like a battle , like the wall of its mouth . They will break their feet in the middle of his own mouth .
GOLD:	The attackers march like warriorsand scale city walls like soldiers.Straight forward they march , never breaking rank .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	▁asmo ▁tx arretan ▁dabilen ▁burua , gaiztakeria ▁egiteko ▁pres a ▁duten ▁oinak ,
PRED:	Evil people are pure with evil , and they are trapped by their feet .
GOLD:	a heart that plots evil , feet that race to do wrong ,

ID:	2418
INPUT:	▁« Ba ▁al ▁da ▁Ahal tsu arekin ▁eztabai datu ▁nahi ▁duenik ? Jainkoa ▁kri tik atu ▁nahi ▁duenak , ▁erantzun ▁beza ».
PRED:	“ Is it right ? ” he asked . “ Is it right ? ”
GOLD:	“ Do you still want to argue with the Almighty ? You are God 's critic , but do you have the answers ? ”

ID:	2419
INPUT:	▁Basamortu ra ▁jaurtiko ▁zaitut N iloko ▁arrain ▁guztiekin ; han ▁geldituko ▁zara ▁lur ▁gainean , inork ▁ez ▁zaitu ▁jasoko ▁hilobira tzeko ; basapiz tien ▁eta ▁hegazti ▁harraparien janari ▁bihurtuko ▁zaitut ;
PRED:	I will send you down to the mountains , and I will send you into a field , and I will send you into the fields . I will send you into a field , and I will send you into the fields .
GOLD:	I will leave you and all your fishstranded in the wilderness to die.You will lie unburied on the open ground , for I have given you as food to the wild animals and birds .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	▁« Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak As iriako ▁erregeari ▁buruz :“ Ez ▁da ▁hiri ▁honetan ▁sartuko , ez ▁dio ▁gez irik ▁jaurtiko , ez ▁ezku tuen ▁babespean ▁erasoko , ez ▁hiria ▁hartzeko ▁bete lan ik ▁egingo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : The city will never enter its walls . They will not enter its walls .
GOLD:	“ And this is what the Lord says about the king of Assyria : “ ‘ His armies will not enter Jerusalem.They will not even shoot an arrow at it.They will not march outside its gates with their shieldsnor build banks of earth against its walls .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁jokabideak ▁kontsolatu ▁egin ▁nau . Eta ▁oraindik ▁gehiago ▁poztu ▁nau ▁T it oren ▁zoriona ▁ikus teak , ▁zuek ▁guztiok ▁biziberri tua ▁utzi ▁baituzue ▁berorren ▁bihotza .
PRED:	For your heart has filled me with joy . Instead , you have heard me from your unfailing love .
GOLD:	We have been greatly encouraged by this.In addition to our own encouragement , we were especially delighted to see how happy Titus was about the way all of you welcomed him and set his mind at ease .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁aurrera xeago ▁joanik , ▁ahuspez ▁erori ▁zen ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁esanez : ▁« Ene ▁Aita , ▁ahal ▁bada , ▁urrun ▁ezazu ▁niregandik ▁edari ▁samin ▁hau . ▁Hala ▁ere , ▁egin ▁bedi ▁zuk ▁nahi ▁bezala , ▁ez ▁nik ▁nahi ▁bezala ».
PRED:	When he came to the ground , he fell down to the ground and prayed , “ Come , my Father , please give me this cup to me . ”
GOLD:	He went on a little farther and bowed with his face to the ground , praying , “ My Father ! If it is possible , let this cup of suffering be taken away from me . Yet I want your will to be done , not mine . ”

ID:	2423
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁jadanik ▁ikuskari ▁hutsal ik ▁eta ▁iragarpen ▁gezurti rik ▁izango ▁Israel ▁herrian .
PRED:	You will not fight against you , O Israel , and you will be heard in your land .
GOLD:	“ There will be no more false visions and flattering predictions in Israel .

ID:	2424
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁Etzion - Geber ▁eta ▁El atera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Salomon . ▁Hiri ▁hauek ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri aren ▁ertzean ▁daude , ▁Edom ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	The young men of Edom went to the Red Sea and camped at the Red Sea .
GOLD:	Later Solomon went to Ezion-geber and Elath , ports along the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom .

ID:	2425
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2426
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁arte ▁egon ▁behar ▁dut ▁kezkatu rik , bihotza ▁etengabe ▁pen aturik ? ▁Noiz ▁arte ▁etsaiaren ▁menpe ?
PRED:	How long long will I be ashamed ? How long long will I be ashamed ?
GOLD:	Turn and answer me , O Lord my God ! Restore the sparkle to my eyes , or I will die .

ID:	2427
INPUT:	▁errege ▁bil ak atzen ▁den ▁esklaboa , j akia ▁sobera ▁duen ▁txor oa ,
PRED:	“ If you are a slave , a slave may become a slave ,
GOLD:	a slave who becomes a king , an overbearing fool who prospers ,

ID:	2428
INPUT:	▁Sodo man ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Abramen ▁iloba ▁Lot ▁ere ▁atxilotu ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁bere ▁ondasun ▁eta ▁guzti . ▁Eta ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	So Abram lived there , and Lot took him and took him to him .
GOLD:	They also captured Lot — Abram 's nephew who lived in Sodom — and carried off everything he owned .

ID:	2429
INPUT:	▁Al txatu ▁eta ▁haran erantz ▁irten ▁nintzen ; ▁eta ▁hantxe ▁zegoen ▁Jaunaren ▁aintza , ▁Kebar ▁ibai ▁ondoan ▁ikusia ▁nuena ▁bera . ▁Ahuspez ▁erori ▁nintzen ;
PRED:	I looked at the valley of the Lord , and I looked at the valley of the Lord . I saw the glory of the Lord , and I looked at the ground .
GOLD:	So I got up and went , and there I saw the glory of the Lord , just as I had seen in my first vision by the Kebar River . And I fell face down on the ground .

ID:	2430
INPUT:	▁Haserre ▁mintzo ▁zaie , ▁bere ▁suminaz ▁ikara ▁ematen ▁die :
PRED:	Their fury burns against them ; their hair is covered with fire .
GOLD:	Then in anger he rebukes them , terrifying them with his fierce fury .

ID:	2431
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunakbere ▁ospea ▁agertuko ▁dueta ▁gizaki ▁guztiek ▁batera ikusiko ▁dute . Jaunak ▁berak ▁esan ▁du ».
PRED:	Then the Lord will proclaim his glory , and everyone will see the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord will be revealed , and all people will see it together.The Lord has spoken ! ”

ID:	2432
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁da ▁Jauna ▁dei ▁egiten ▁dioten engandik , benetan ▁dei ▁egiten ▁dioten engandik .
PRED:	The Lord is coming , and the righteous will come from the grave .
GOLD:	The Lord is close to all who call on him , yes , to all who call on him in truth .

ID:	2433
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁ondorengoen ▁bidez ▁lurreko ▁herri ▁guztiak ▁bedeinkatuko ▁ditut , ▁nire ▁esana ▁bete ▁duzulako ».
PRED:	I will bless all the people of the earth , and I will bless you . ”
GOLD:	And through your descendants all the nations of the earth will be blessed — all because you have obeyed me . ”

ID:	2434
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁kultu - lekuak ▁ez ▁ziren ▁desagertu ▁Israelen ; ▁hala ▁ere , ▁Asak ▁zintzo ▁jokatu ▁zuen ▁bere ▁bizitza ▁osoan .
PRED:	But he did not forget the pagan shrines , and he did not remember his life .
GOLD:	Although the pagan shrines were not removed from Israel , Asa 's heart remained completely faithful throughout his life .

ID:	2435
INPUT:	▁Munduko ▁erresum ok , ▁kanta ▁Jainkoari , ▁jo ▁soinua ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	Arise , O God of Heaven 's Armies , and praise the Lord .
GOLD:	Sing to the one who rides across the ancient heavens , his mighty voice thundering from the sky .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁esan ▁zion :— Eta ▁nork ▁jakinarazi ▁dizu ▁biluzik ▁zaudela ? ▁Gal arazi ▁nizun ▁arb olako ▁fruitua ▁jan ▁al ▁duzu ?
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ You know how can you eat ? Why do you eat your fruit ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who told you that you were naked ? ” the Lord God asked . “ Have you eaten from the tree whose fruit I commanded you not to eat ? ”

ID:	2437
INPUT:	▁Gerxonen ▁ondorengo ▁senitarteei , ▁guztira , ▁hamahiru ▁hiri ▁eman ▁zizkieten , ▁beraien ▁herri - lur ▁eta ▁guzti .
PRED:	The descendants of Gershon were given to the clans of the Kohathite clan , named after their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	So in all , thirteen towns with their pasturelands were allotted to the clan of Gershon .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	▁Zen <unk> ▁dio : ▁« Gu tun ak ▁gogor rak ▁eta ▁zorro tzak ▁dira ; ▁baina ▁bera ▁itxura ▁kas karre ko ▁gizona ▁da ▁eta ▁hiz lari ▁esk asa ».
PRED:	She says , “ She is a young man , and she is weak with a voice , but she is a man who gives birth to the ground . ”
GOLD:	For some say , “ Paul 's letters are demanding and forceful , but in person he is weak , and his speeches are worthless ! ”

ID:	2439
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁jendeak , ▁berriz :« Zer ▁egiten ▁dugu ▁hemen ▁geldi ? Bil ▁gaitezen , ▁goazen ▁gotorleku etara , bertan ▁hiltzera , Jaunak , ▁gure ▁Jainkoak , herio tzara ▁ematen ▁baikaitu ; ur ▁pozoi tua ▁eskaintzen ▁digu , beraren ▁aurka ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁dugulako .
PRED:	But the people of Israel are saying , “ Let us go to the grave , let us go out to the city of the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the people will say , ‘ Why should we wait here to die ? Come , let 's go to the fortified towns and die there.For the Lord our God has decreed our destructionand has given us a cup of poison to drinkbecause we sinned against the Lord .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	▁Gaizto a ▁ausar ti ▁agertzen ▁da ; zintzoak ▁bere ▁jokabidea ▁sendo tzen ▁du .
PRED:	The godly are wise , but the godly are trapped by the wicked .
GOLD:	The wicked bluff their way through , but the virtuous think before they act .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	▁baina ▁sustrairik ▁gabeak ▁eta ▁iraupen ▁gutxiko ak ▁izanik , ▁mezua ▁dela - eta ▁estuasun ▁edo ▁erasoaldi ren ▁bat ▁sortu ▁orduko , ▁erori ▁egiten ▁dira .
PRED:	But when they do n't believe , they do n't know how long they do n't believe in trouble .
GOLD:	But since they do n't have deep roots , they do n't last long . They fall away as soon as they have problems or are persecuted for believing God 's word .

ID:	2442
INPUT:	▁Garai ▁hartan ▁desegin ▁zituen ▁Josuek ▁Hebron , ▁Debir ▁eta ▁An abeko , ▁Judako ▁nahiz ▁Israelgo ▁mendialde etako , ▁Anaken ▁ondorengoak ▁ere : ▁erabat ▁suntsitu ▁zituen ▁beraien ▁hiriekin ▁batera .
PRED:	In that day Joshua conquered the territory of Israel , Joshua and the people of Israel and the tribe of Levi , who lived in the hill country of Ephraim , and all the towns of Israel .
GOLD:	During this period Joshua destroyed all the descendants of Anak , who lived in the hill country of Hebron , Debir , Anab , and the entire hill country of Judah and Israel . He killed them all and completely destroyed their towns .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁hiru ▁hiri ▁horiek ▁aukeratzeko .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the towns of Israel .
GOLD:	That is why I am commanding you to set aside three cities of refuge .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2445
INPUT:	▁Nori ▁izan ▁beldur ?
PRED:	Are you afraid ? Are you afraid ? Are you afraid ? Are you afraid ?
GOLD:	Parable of the Rich Fool

ID:	2446
INPUT:	▁Aitak , ▁ordea , ▁zapal kun tzak ▁eta ▁lapurretak ▁egin ▁eta ▁bere ▁herritarrak ▁gaizki ▁erabili ▁zituen ; ▁beraz , ▁bere ▁erruarengatik ▁hilko ▁da .
PRED:	But when the Father spoke , he destroyed all the people of Israel , including their sins and their sins .
GOLD:	But the father will die for his many sins — for being cruel , robbing people , and doing what was clearly wrong among his people .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	▁Jeremiasen ▁gutuna ▁erbesteratu ei
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Call to Jeremiah
GOLD:	A Letter to the Exiles

ID:	2448
INPUT:	▁« Jaunak ▁apaiz ▁izendatu ▁zaitu ▁Joiadaren ▁ordez , ▁eta ▁zeu ▁zara ▁orain ▁tenpluko ▁arduradun ▁nagusi . ▁Zeuri ▁dagokizu , ▁bada , ▁aho ber oren ▁bat ▁profeta gintzan ▁hasten ▁bada , ▁ze poan ▁eta ▁katez ▁loturik ▁ezar tzea .
PRED:	“ The Lord has appointed you to build you in the Temple of Jehoiada the priests and the elders of the Temple . If you are in front of the Temple , you are trying to stand in front of the Temple . ”
GOLD:	“ The Lord has appointed you to replace Jehoiada as the priest in charge of the house of the Lord . You are responsible to put into stocks and neck irons any crazy man who claims to be a prophet .

ID:	2449
INPUT:	▁Adierazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Zure ▁biztan leek ▁hilketak ▁egiten ▁dituzte , ▁horrela ▁zure ▁ordua ▁hurbil araziz ; ▁idoloak ▁egiten ▁dituzte , ▁horrela ▁zu ▁kuts atuz .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Lord says : The whole land of Heaven 's Armies is in your presence , and your sins will be forgiven .
GOLD:	and give her this message from the Sovereign Lord : O city of murderers , doomed and damned — city of idols , filthy and foul —

ID:	2450
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁arbasoek ▁oihu ▁egin ▁zidaten , ▁eta ▁nik ▁ilunpea ▁jarri ▁nuen ▁haien ▁eta ▁egiptoarren ▁artean , ▁eta ▁itsasoa ▁hauen ▁gainera ▁erorarazi , ▁denak ▁estali ▁zituelarik . ▁Zeuen ▁begiz ▁ikusi ▁zenuten ▁egiptoarrei ▁egin ▁ni ena . ▁Gero , ▁basamortuan ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zineten ▁luzaro .
PRED:	When I cried out to you , I cried out to the Red Sea and saw them in the wilderness . When you saw that you had seen the Red Sea , you saw that I had seen the Egyptians had seen in the wilderness .
GOLD:	When your ancestors cried out to the Lord , I put darkness between you and the Egyptians . I brought the sea crashing down on the Egyptians , drowning them . With your very own eyes you saw what I did . Then you lived in the wilderness for many years .

ID:	2451
INPUT:	▁« Zatozte ▁niregana , ▁nekatu ▁eta ▁zam atu ▁guztiok , ▁eta ▁neuk ▁emango ▁dizuet ▁atseden .
PRED:	“ Come , listen to me , and I will give you rest .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁nazioa ▁nazio aren ▁kontra ▁eta ▁erreinua ▁erreinuaren ▁kontra ▁altxatuko ▁dira ; ▁han ▁eta ▁hemen ▁lurrik ar ak ▁eta ▁gosete ak ▁izango ▁dira . ▁Hori ▁guztia ▁erdimin en ▁hasiera ▁da .
PRED:	For the nation of nation will be able to fight against the kingdom of the kingdom of the world , and all the kingdoms of the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Nation will go to war against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . There will be earthquakes in many parts of the world , as well as famines . But this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	2453
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁os ab arik ▁ere ▁ez ▁badu , ▁gainerako ▁ahaide etatik ▁hurbil eneko ari ▁emango ▁zaio ▁ondarea ▁eta ▁bera ▁izango ▁da ▁jabe . ▁Lege ▁izango ▁dute ▁hau ▁israeldarrek , ▁nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁Moisesi ▁agindutako aren ▁arabera ».
PRED:	But if the entire land is not an inheritance , it will be given to the other family of Israel . This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : ' ”
GOLD:	But if his father has no brothers , give his inheritance to the nearest relative in his clan . This is a legal requirement for the people of Israel , just as the Lord commanded Moses . ”

ID:	2454
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Joiakimek ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁ote ▁sendag ai rik ▁Galaaden , ez ▁ote ▁m e dik urik ? Zergatik ▁ez ▁da ▁sendatzen nire ▁herria ?
PRED:	Do n't you have no rest of the tribe of Gilead ? Do n't you know my people ? ”
GOLD:	Is there no medicine in Gilead ? Is there no physician there ? Why is there no healingfor the wounds of my people ?

ID:	2456
INPUT:	▁Zintzoak , ▁berriz , ▁pozik ▁dira , Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁dantzan , ▁bozkarioz ▁gainezka .
PRED:	But the godly love when they walk before God , they were filled with joy .
GOLD:	Sing praises to God and to his name ! Sing loud praises to him who rides the clouds.His name is the Lord — rejoice in his presence !

ID:	2457
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁jabe ▁izateko ▁bertara ▁sartu ▁zirenean , ▁ez ▁ziren ▁zure ▁esaneko ▁izan , ▁ez ▁zituzten ▁zure ▁legeak ▁bete , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁zuk ▁aginduaren ▁arabera ▁jokatu . ▁Horregatik ▁bidali ▁diezu ▁zoritxar ▁handi ▁hau .
PRED:	But when they entered your hand , they refused to obey your commandments . They did not obey your commandments .
GOLD:	Our ancestors came and conquered it and lived in it , but they refused to obey you or follow your word . They have not done anything you commanded . That is why you have sent this terrible disaster upon them .

ID:	2458
INPUT:	▁amets ez ▁beldur tzen ▁nauzu eta ▁ikuskari ▁gaiztoz ▁izu - ikara tzen .
PRED:	I am terrified by your dream , and I am terrified .
GOLD:	but then you shatter me with dreamsand terrify me with visions .

ID:	2459
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁gal bideratu ▁edonolako ▁idolo ▁edo ▁jainko - irudiak ▁eginez : ▁gizonezko nahiz ▁emakumezko - irudiak ,
PRED:	Do not worship idols or worship other gods , or worship idols are detestable to idols .
GOLD:	So do not corrupt yourselves by making an idol in any form — whether of a man or a woman ,

ID:	2460
INPUT:	▁Jobek ▁erantzun ▁zuen :
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	2461
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Ez ▁dute ▁osasun dunek ▁sendag ilea ▁behar , ▁gaixo ek ▁baizik ;
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ They are n't doing wrong , but they are sick .
GOLD:	Jesus answered them , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	▁Ah iz paren ▁bidea ▁hartu ▁duzu ▁eta , ▁beraz , ▁haren ▁kopa ▁jarriko ▁dut ▁zure ▁eskuan .
PRED:	You took the Ark of the sea , and I will put your hand on your hand .
GOLD:	Because you have followed in your sister 's footsteps , I will force you to drink the same cup of terror she drank .

ID:	2463
INPUT:	▁An imal ia ▁garbiak ▁eta ▁kutsatuak
PRED:	Instructions for God
GOLD:	Ceremonially Clean and Unclean Animals

ID:	2464
INPUT:	▁Sedekiasen ▁erregealdiko ▁bederatzigarren ▁urtean , ▁hamargarren ▁hilaren ▁hamarrean , ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonosor ▁Jerusalemen ▁kontra ▁etorri ▁zen ▁gudaroste ▁osoarekin ▁eta ▁setiatu ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁inguru ▁guztian ▁harresia ▁eraikiz .
PRED:	On the ninth year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , during the eleventh year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem and built a wall .
GOLD:	So on January 15 , during the ninth year of Zedekiah 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon led his entire army against Jerusalem . They surrounded the city and built siege ramps against its walls .

ID:	2465
INPUT:	▁Paulok , ▁aldiz , ▁Silas ▁aukeratu ▁zuen ▁eta , ▁senideek ▁Jaunaren ▁onginahiari ▁gomen datu ▁ziote larik , ▁atera ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	Paul and Silas were chosen by the other believers who were traveling with the other believers .
GOLD:	Paul chose Silas , and as he left , the believers entrusted him to the Lord 's gracious care .

ID:	2466
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁egingo ▁dizue ▁kalte , ▁zuek ▁beti ▁on ▁egiten ▁saiatzen ▁bazarete ?
PRED:	Who will be patient with you ? If you continue to fear you ?
GOLD:	Now , who will want to harm you if you are eager to do good ?

ID:	2467
INPUT:	▁Gau ▁horretan ▁jagole ▁egon ▁zen ▁Jauna ▁haiek ▁Egiptotik ▁ateratzeko . ▁Horregatik , ▁Jaunaren ▁omenez , ▁israeldarrek ▁erne ▁egon ▁behar ▁dute ▁gau ▁horretan , ▁be ila ▁eginez , ▁belaunez ▁belaun .
PRED:	That night the Lord was ready for a time for the people of Israel . That is why the people of Israel must be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	On this night the Lord kept his promise to bring his people out of the land of Egypt . So this night belongs to him , and it must be commemorated every year by all the Israelites , from generation to generation .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	▁Bakea ▁ematen ▁digun ▁Jainkoak ▁luzaro ▁gabe ▁zapalduko ▁du ▁Satanas ▁zuen ▁oinpean . ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunaren ▁grazia ▁izan ▁bedi ▁zuekin .
PRED:	May God gives us a long time to be with you . May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you .
GOLD:	The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet . May the grace of our Lord Jesus be with you .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	▁Bazi ren ▁han ▁emakume ▁asko ▁ere , ▁urrutitik ▁begira ; ▁Jesusi ▁jarraituz ▁Galileatik ▁etorriak ▁ziren , ▁beraren ▁zerbitzari ;
PRED:	They were overwhelmed with many women , along with a distance from the distance .
GOLD:	And many women who had come from Galilee with Jesus to care for him were watching from a distance .

ID:	2470
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁batean , ▁Jesus ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zen : ▁« Go res ten ▁zaitut , ▁Aita , ▁zeru - lurren ▁Jauna , ▁gauza ▁hauek ▁jakintsu ▁eta ▁ikasi ei ▁ezkutatu ▁dizki ez ul ako ▁eta ▁jende ▁x ume ari ▁agertu .
PRED:	One day Jesus said to the disciples , “ I am the Father , the Father , the Father , the Father , and the wise people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	At that time Jesus prayed this prayer : “ O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , thank you for hiding these things from those who think themselves wise and clever , and for revealing them to the childlike .

ID:	2471
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ere ▁ez ▁dut ▁errukirik ▁izango ▁lurraldeko ▁bizilagun ekin . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁honek . ▁Gizakia , ▁nor ▁bere ▁artzain aren ▁eta ▁erregearen ▁esku ▁utziko ▁dut ; ▁erregeek ▁lurraldea ▁erraus tuko ▁dute , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dut ▁inor ▁aterako ▁haien ▁eskuetatik ».
PRED:	“ I will not reject the land of the Lord , ” says the Lord . “ I will make them strong , and I will give them victory over them . ”
GOLD:	Likewise , I will no longer have pity on the people of the land , ” says the Lord . “ I will let them fall into each other 's hands and into the hands of their king . They will turn the land into a wilderness , and I will not rescue them . ”

ID:	2472
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁hiria ▁inguratuko ▁duzue : ▁sei ▁egunez , ▁egunero ▁itzuli ▁bat ▁eginen ▁duzue ▁gerra - gizon ▁guztiok ▁hiriaren ▁inguruan .
PRED:	“ Then you will send an army for six days , and you will attack the town .
GOLD:	You and your fighting men should march around the town once a day for six days .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	▁Axdod ▁hiritik kendu ▁egingo ▁dut ▁buruzagia , Ax kelon dik ▁aginte - makila ▁duena ; Ek ron ▁hiriaren ▁aurka jasoko ▁dut ▁eskua , eta ▁gainerako ▁filistear ▁ap urrak galdu ▁egingo ▁dira ». Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁du .
PRED:	I will restore the city of Gaza , the city of Gaza , and there will be no more powerful . ”
GOLD:	I will slaughter the people of Ashdodand destroy the king of Ashkelon.Then I will turn to attack Ekron , and the few Philistines still left will be killed , ” says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2474
INPUT:	▁« A ber ea ▁hiltzen ▁duenak , ▁aberea ▁itzuliko ▁du ; ▁gizakia ▁hiltzen ▁duena ▁heriotzara ▁emango ▁dute .
PRED:	“ Anyone who kills another person must be killed , and the person must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Whoever kills an animal must pay for it in full , but whoever kills another person must be put to death .

ID:	2475
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁behartsuak ▁beti ▁dituzue ▁zeuen ▁artean , ▁baina ▁ni ▁ez ▁nauzue ▁betiko ▁zuekin .
PRED:	You are poor among you , but you are not faithful to me .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , but you will not always have me .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	▁Barneko ▁ataria ▁eta ▁tenplua
PRED:	The Fall of the Temple
GOLD:	The North Gateway

ID:	2477
INPUT:	▁« Eraman ▁zeuen ▁lurreko ▁lehen ▁fruituak ▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁etxera .« Ez ▁egosi ▁antx umerik ▁bere ▁amaren ▁esn etan ».
PRED:	“ The rest of the Lord your God is left in the place of honor at the Temple of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	“ As you harvest your crops , bring the very best of the first harvest to the house of the Lord your God. “ You must not cook a young goat in its mother 's milk . ”

ID:	2478
INPUT:	▁« Nire gan ▁sinesten ▁duten ▁txiki ▁hau etakoren ▁bat ▁galbidean ▁jartzen ▁duenak , ▁, ▁hobe ▁luke ▁errotarri ▁bat ▁lepotik ▁erantsi ▁eta ▁itsas ▁hondora ▁amilduko ▁balute .
PRED:	“ Anyone who believes in me will be cut off to those who believe it is better to be cut off off off from the sea . If you have been cut off from the sea , you will be cut off from the sea .
GOLD:	But if you cause one of these little ones who trusts in me to fall into sin , it would be better for you to have a large millstone tied around your neck and be drowned in the depths of the sea .

ID:	2479
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁baten ▁bekatuak ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztiei ▁gaitzespena ▁ekarri ▁zien ▁bezala , ▁baten ▁leialtasunak ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztiei ▁salbazioa ▁eta ▁bizia ▁ekartzen ▁dizkie .
PRED:	So he brought all the sins of sin , and he brought all the people to life .
GOLD:	Yes , Adam 's one sin brings condemnation for everyone , but Christ 's one act of righteousness brings a right relationship with God and new life for everyone .

ID:	2480
INPUT:	▁erregetza ▁Saulen ▁etxeari ▁kendu ▁eta ▁Israelen ▁eta ▁Judan , ▁Dandik ▁hasi ▁eta ▁Beer - Xebaraino , ▁Daviden ▁errege - aulkia ▁sendotuko ▁zuela ▁egin ▁baitzuen ▁zin .
PRED:	The kingdom of Saul and his kingdom began to rule over Israel in the south of the north . He made a covenant with David and his throne .
GOLD:	I 'm going to take Saul 's kingdom and give it to David . I will establish the throne of David over Israel as well as Judah , all the way from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south . ”

ID:	2481
INPUT:	▁Daviden ▁hileta - kan tua ▁Saulen ▁eta ▁Jonatanen ▁heriotz agatik
PRED:	David 's Kindness to Saul
GOLD:	David 's Song for Saul and Jonathan

ID:	2482
INPUT:	▁Arratsean , ▁Jesusen ▁ikasleak ▁aintzirara ▁jaitsi
PRED:	When the disciples came to the Sea of Jesus ,
GOLD:	That evening Jesus ' disciples went down to the shore to wait for him .

ID:	2483
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁izan ▁zaitut ▁euskarri ▁amaren ▁sabeletik , zuk ▁atera ▁nauzu ▁amaren ▁errai etatik . Zuri ▁etengabe ▁nire ▁gorespena !
PRED:	Your mother was in your womb , and your mother came to me from the womb .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been with me from birth ; from my mother 's womb you have cared for me.No wonder I am always praising you !

ID:	2484
INPUT:	▁D elaias , ▁Tobias ▁eta ▁Neko daren ▁ondorengoak ▁ziren , ▁ <unk> ▁lagun .
PRED:	From the family of Mattaniah , Meshach , and Abednego .
GOLD:	This group included the families of Delaiah , Tobiah , and Nekoda — a total of 652 people .

ID:	2485
INPUT:	▁Er antzia ▁dut ▁soinekoa ; n olatan ▁jantzi ▁berriro ? Garbi tuak ▁ditut ▁oinak ; n olatan ▁zikindu ▁berriro ?
PRED:	My robe is covered with fine linen , and I can wear it up .
GOLD:	But I responded , “ I have taken off my robe.Should I get dressed again ? I have washed my feet.Should I get them soiled ? ”

ID:	2486
INPUT:	▁Ar m ate gia ▁zabaldu eta ▁armak ▁atera ▁ditut , neure ▁haserre - zigorra ▁burutzeko : nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , egin behar ▁bat ▁dut babiloni arren ▁herrialdean .
PRED:	I will send them out of your weapons , and your weapons will tell you , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	The Lord has opened his armoryand brought out weapons to vent his fury.The terror that falls upon the Babylonianswill be the work of the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2487
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave these instructions to Moses :

ID:	2488
INPUT:	▁Jeftek , ▁orduan :— Amon darren ▁kontra ▁borrokatzera ▁joatea ▁nahi ▁baduzue ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁eskura ▁ematen ▁baldin ▁badizki t , ▁neu ▁izango ▁nauzue ▁buruzagi .
PRED:	Then the Lord said , “ If you go to war against you , you will be handed over to you . ”
GOLD:	Jephthah said to the elders , “ Let me get this straight . If I come with you and if the Lord gives me victory over the Ammonites , will you really make me ruler over all the people ? ”

ID:	2489
INPUT:	▁Berriro ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Jesus , ▁garai ▁batean ▁Joan ▁bataiatzen ▁ari ▁izan ▁zen ▁lekura . ▁Han ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁aldi ▁batez ,
PRED:	Then Jesus went to the other side of the Jordan River , where John was going to go to the place where he was going .
GOLD:	He went beyond the Jordan River near the place where John was first baptizing and stayed there awhile .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁leiho tik ▁behera ▁eraitsi ▁zuen . ▁Orduan , ▁Davidek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuen ▁eta ▁bere ▁burua ▁salbatu .
PRED:	Then David escaped from the window of his tent , and David fled to his head .
GOLD:	So she helped him climb out through a window , and he fled and escaped .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	▁Jakobek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Labani :— Beldur ▁nintz elako ▁egin ▁dut ▁ihes , ▁zeure ▁alabak ▁kendu ▁egingo ▁zenizki dala ▁uste ▁nuen ▁eta .
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ If I was afraid , I would flee to you , you would not be afraid of your daughters . ”
GOLD:	“ I rushed away because I was afraid , ” Jacob answered . “ I thought you would take your daughters from me by force .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁eman ▁dio ▁hari ▁lehenengo , ▁gero ▁hark ▁itzuli ▁behar ▁izateko ?
PRED:	Who gives the first to the first to return to the first place ?
GOLD:	And who has given him so muchthat he needs to pay it back ?

ID:	2493
INPUT:	▁Men d eku - eskubidea ▁duena ▁atzetik ▁badator kio ▁ere , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁dute ▁hiltzailea ▁beraren ▁esku ▁utzi , ▁nahi ▁gabe ▁hil ▁baitu ▁bere ▁lagun ▁hurkoa ▁eta ▁ez ▁lehen dik ▁gorroto ▁zuelako .
PRED:	Anyone who refuses to live in the field is coming , but the person who refuses to kill his neighbor . He must not kill his neighbor .
GOLD:	If the relatives of the victim come to avenge the killing , the leaders must not release the slayer to them , for he killed the other person unintentionally and without previous hostility .

ID:	2494
INPUT:	▁Seme - alabatxo ok , ▁ibili ▁kontuz ▁idoloekin .
PRED:	Dear children , listen to each other .
GOLD:	Dear children , keep away from anything that might take God 's place in your hearts .

ID:	2495
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁mandatariak ▁bidali ▁nizkien ▁erantzun ▁honekin : ▁« Lan ▁handi etan ▁nabil ▁eta ▁ez ▁naiteke ▁joan . ▁Zuen gana ▁jo ateagatik ▁bakarrik ▁lanak ▁ez ▁ni tuzke ▁utzi ▁nahi ».
PRED:	So David sent messengers to tell them , “ If I have n't done to you , I would n't want you to pay attention to you . ”
GOLD:	so I replied by sending this message to them : “ I am engaged in a great work , so I ca n't come . Why should I stop working to come and meet with you ? ”

ID:	2496
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁zurik eriaz ▁menderatu ▁egiten ▁du , bere ▁hitz ▁goxo ez ▁erakarri .
PRED:	He makes them strong , and he does n't speak for them .
GOLD:	So she seduced him with her pretty speechand enticed him with her flattery .

ID:	2497
INPUT:	▁Huts ▁egiezu ▁eta ▁lots arazi ▁ni ▁hiltzeko ▁dabiltzanak . A tzera ▁egin ▁bezate , ▁lotsa ▁gorrian , ni ▁nondik ▁hondatuko ▁dabiltzan ek .
PRED:	They have abandoned their idols and shame , and they will be destroyed . They will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Bring shame and disgrace on those trying to kill me ; turn them back and humiliate those who want to harm me .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁ihardetsi ▁zuen :— Ez ▁dezazuela ▁horrelakorik ▁egin , ▁ene ▁anai ok , ▁Jaunak ▁eman ▁digun arekin ! ▁Zaindu ▁egin ▁gaitu ; ▁eraso ▁zigun ▁lapur - talde ▁hura ▁eskura ▁eman ▁digu .
PRED:	David replied , “ Do n't be angry with you ! You have given us the Lord your brothers , you have given us victory over us . ”
GOLD:	But David said , “ No , my brothers ! Do n't be selfish with what the Lord has given us . He has kept us safe and helped us defeat the band of raiders that attacked us .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁kontra ▁bidaliko ▁dizkizuen ▁etsaiak ▁baldin tza ▁gogorre tan ▁zerbitzatu ▁beharko ▁dituzue : ▁gose - e garriz , ▁biluzik ▁eta ▁behar ▁gorrian . ▁Le poan ▁burdinazko ▁uztarria ▁ezarriko ▁dizuete , ▁suntsitu ▁arte .
PRED:	The Lord will strike you with your enemies , and you will serve your enemies . They will be filled with gold , and you will break their yoke with iron chains .
GOLD:	you will serve your enemies whom the Lord will send against you . You will be left hungry , thirsty , naked , and lacking in everything . The Lord will put an iron yoke on your neck , oppressing you harshly until he has destroyed you .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	▁Bera ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁tenplua jasoko ▁duena ; oho rez ▁betea ▁izango ▁daeta ▁errege - aulkian ▁jes arriko go bern atzeko ; apaiz a ▁ere ▁bere ▁aulkian ▁jes arriko ▁da , eta ▁zeharo ▁bat ▁etorriko ▁dira ▁biak .
PRED:	All the glory of the Lord is filled with the Temple of the Lord , and there will be a descendant of the Temple of the Lord . There will be a throne of the priests , and the priests will be a throne of the Lord .
GOLD:	Yes , he will build the Temple of the Lord . Then he will receive royal honor and will rule as king from his throne . He will also serve as priest from his throne , and there will be perfect harmony between his two roles . '

ID:	2501
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Semeak ▁askatzen ▁bazaituzte , ▁benetan ▁aske ▁izango ▁zarete .
PRED:	“ If you go , you will flee , you will flee to the grave .
GOLD:	So if the Son sets you free , you are truly free .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	▁Asak ▁Jaunaren , ▁bere ▁Jainkoaren , ▁begietan ▁on ▁eta ▁zuzen ▁dena ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Asa did what was evil in the Lord 's sight and does good .
GOLD:	When Abijah died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Asa became the next king . There was peace in the land for ten years .

ID:	2503
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁espero an ▁nago , gau ▁osoan ▁esna , ▁goiza ▁arte ▁be il ari .
PRED:	When I am in the Lord 's presence , I will remain silent until evening .
GOLD:	I long for the Lordmore than sentries long for the dawn , yes , more than sentries long for the dawn .

ID:	2504
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁badiote ▁entzuten , herio tzaren ▁muga ▁pas atuko ▁dute , ▁konturatu ▁gabe ▁hilko .
PRED:	But if the Lord heard this , he will kill you .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to listen to him , they will cross over the river of death , dying from lack of understanding .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	▁« Israel ▁ez ▁da ▁izatez ▁esklabo , ezta ▁esklabo - seme ▁ere . Zergatik ▁bihurtu ▁da , ▁bada , bes teren ▁harrapakin ?
PRED:	“ Why is your slaves to you , not your slaves ? Why is your father ? Why is your younger women ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why has Israel become a slave ? Why has he been carried away as plunder ?

ID:	2506
INPUT:	▁Lau ▁kerubin ek ▁launa ▁aurpegi ▁eta ▁launa ▁hego ▁zituzten ▁eta , ▁hegalpean , ▁giza ▁bes oen ▁itxurako ak .
PRED:	The cherubim had four wings of the wings of the cherubim and four cherubim were four cherubim .
GOLD:	for each had four faces and four wings and what looked like human hands under their wings .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁artetik ▁ere ▁aterako ▁dira ▁batzuk ▁irakaspen ▁okerrak ▁zabalduz , ▁ikasleak ▁beren ▁atzetik ▁eramateko .
PRED:	Then everyone will be able to save you , and some of his disciples will carry out his way .
GOLD:	Even some men from your own group will rise up and distort the truth in order to draw a following .

ID:	2508
INPUT:	▁Kan abera ▁printz atua ▁ez ▁du ▁hautsiko , ▁ahuldu riko ▁argi - m etx a ▁ez ▁du ▁itzaliko , ▁justizia ▁nagusi ▁ezar ▁dezan ▁arte .
PRED:	He will not reject the wicked , and my strength will be filled with violence . They will not bow before the Almighty .
GOLD:	He will not crush the weakest reedor put out a flickering candle.Finally he will cause justice to be victorious .

ID:	2509
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Pazkoa ▁ospatzeko ▁agindu
PRED:	Instructions for the Passover
GOLD:	The First Passover

ID:	2510
INPUT:	▁Biharamunean , ▁goizean ▁goiz ▁jaiki ▁zen ▁Josue . ▁Apaizek ▁kutxa ▁hartu ▁zuten ,
PRED:	The next morning Joshua got up early the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Joshua got up early the next morning , and the priests again carried the Ark of the Lord .

ID:	2511
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁inork ▁ezer ▁esaten ▁badizue , ▁erantzun : ▁“ Jaunak ▁behar ▁ditu , ▁baina ▁berehala ▁itzuliko ▁ditu ”».
PRED:	“ If you say , ‘ The Lord will return to you , he will return to the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	If anyone asks what you are doing , just say , ‘ The Lord needs them , ' and he will immediately let you take them . ”

ID:	2512
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁eta ▁nire ▁taldeak ▁adarrak ▁jotzean , ▁jo ▁zuek ▁ere ▁kanpalekuaren ▁inguru ▁guztian ▁eta ▁egin ▁oihu : ▁« Jaunaren gatik ! ▁Gedeonen gatik !»
PRED:	I will destroy all the nations and wild animals , and you will disappear . They will cry out to the Lord , saying , “ You have turned away from the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	As soon as I and those with me blow the rams ' horns , blow your horns , too , all around the entire camp , and shout , ‘ For the Lord and for Gideon ! ' ”

ID:	2513
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁harlauza ▁biak ▁jaurti ▁eta ▁puskatu ▁egin ▁nituen ▁zuen ▁aurrean .
PRED:	Then I threw them out of the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant .
GOLD:	So I took the stone tablets and threw them to the ground , smashing them before your eyes .

ID:	2514
INPUT:	▁Es mir nako ▁eliz ▁elkarteari
PRED:	Parable of the Church in Ephesus
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Smyrna

ID:	2515
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁dira ▁haren ▁beldur ▁gizakiak , eta ▁berak ▁ez ▁ditu ▁jakintsu ▁us tekoak ▁kontuan ▁hartzen ».
PRED:	Therefore , people are afraid to be afraid , and people do n't understand their sins . ”
GOLD:	No wonder people everywhere fear him.All who are wise show him reverence . ”

ID:	2516
INPUT:	▁Aleluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! Bai ▁eder , ▁gure ▁Jainkoa ▁kantuz ▁ospa tzea , bai ▁gozo , ▁bera ▁doinu ▁ez tiz ▁gores tea !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of his unfailing love ; he is as holy as a pleasing aroma to him .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! How good to sing praises to our God ! How delightful and how fitting !

ID:	2517
INPUT:	▁Emakume ▁honen gandik ▁Jaunak ▁emango ▁dizkizun ▁seme - alabek ▁egin ▁bezate ▁zure ▁familia , ▁Juda ▁eta ▁Tam arren ▁seme ▁Peretzen ▁familia ▁bezain ▁handi .
PRED:	May the Lord give you your children as you promised , your son , your family is as beautiful as a foreigner .
GOLD:	And may the Lord give you descendants by this young woman who will be like those of our ancestor Perez , the son of Tamar and Judah . ”

ID:	2518
INPUT:	▁Saulek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Samueli :— Ez ▁al ▁dut , ▁bada , ▁egin ▁Jaunaren ▁esana ? ▁Berak ▁bidali ▁ninduen ▁bidetik ▁ibili ▁naiz . ▁Ekarri ▁dut ▁Agag , ▁amalektarren ▁erregea , ▁eta ▁suntsitu ▁ditut ▁amalektarrak .
PRED:	Saul replied , “ Have I sent me out to the Lord ? ” So Saul replied , “ I am the Lord , the king of Israel , the king of Israel , and I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	“ But I did obey the Lord , ” Saul insisted . “ I carried out the mission he gave me . I brought back King Agag , but I destroyed everyone else .

ID:	2519
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁mais ul ana ▁da ; neuk ▁bakarrik , ▁bere ▁egileak , ▁mendera ▁lezake ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	They will obey my laws , and I will punish those who fear him .
GOLD:	It is a prime example of God 's handiwork , and only its Creator can threaten it .

ID:	2520
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jerusalemen ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁batzuk ▁galdezka ▁hasi ▁ziren : ▁« Ez ▁al ▁da ▁hau ▁hil ▁nahi ▁dutena ?
PRED:	Then the people began to live in Jerusalem , saying , “ Is it it to die ? ”
GOLD:	Some of the people who lived in Jerusalem started to ask each other , “ Is n't this the man they are trying to kill ?

ID:	2521
INPUT:	▁Santua ▁da , ▁oi ▁Jainko , ▁zure ▁jarduera ! Zein ▁jainko ▁zu ▁bezain ▁handi ?
PRED:	O Lord , how can you think you think you are like a mighty nation ?
GOLD:	You are the God of great wonders ! You demonstrate your awesome power among the nations .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	▁Man dat ariak ▁bidaltzen ▁ditu N il on ▁barrena , ih izko ▁txalu petan , ▁uretan ▁zehar . Zoazte , ▁mandatari ▁bizkorrak , ▁itzul ih erri ▁ler den ▁eta ▁bel tzar an ▁horretara , edon on ▁beldurra ▁sortzen ▁duen jende arengana , ib aiz ▁ureztatu riko ▁lurraldean bizi ▁den herri ▁gogor ▁eta ▁mendera tzail era !
PRED:	When the messengers comes to Egypt , he will send his messengers into the land of the sea . When you go down to the sea , you will fall into the land of the sea , you will fall into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	that sends ambassadorsin swift boats down the river.Go , swift messengers ! Take a message to a tall , smooth-skinned people , who are feared far and widefor their conquests and destruction , and whose land is divided by rivers .

ID:	2523
INPUT:	▁esan ▁zien ▁Josuek : ▁« Ab eras tasun ▁handiak ▁harturik ▁zoazte ▁etxera : ▁abere - talde ▁ugari , ▁zilarra ▁eta ▁urrea , ▁brontzea , ▁burdina ▁eta ▁jan zki ▁asko . ▁B ana ▁itzazue ▁senideen ▁artean ▁etsaiei ▁kendu tako ▁harrapakin ok ».
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ Take some of your flocks and gold , silver , gold , and gold , gold , and gold , and gold , and gold , and bronze , and bronze , and bronze , and your enemies . ”
GOLD:	he said to them , “ Go back to your homes with the great wealth you have taken from your enemies — the vast herds of livestock , the silver , gold , bronze , and iron , and the large supply of clothing . Share the plunder with your relatives . ”

ID:	2524
INPUT:	▁« A k azia - zurezko ▁kutxa ▁egin , ▁lehen goak ▁bezalako ▁bi ▁harlauza ▁ebaki ▁eta , ▁harlauzak ▁eskuetan ▁nituela , ▁mendira ▁igo ▁nintzen .
PRED:	“ You made two gold rings on the Ark of the two stone tablets inscribed with two stone tablets inscribed with two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant .
GOLD:	“ So I made an Ark of acacia wood and cut two stone tablets like the first two . Then I went up the mountain with the tablets in my hand .

ID:	2525
INPUT:	▁Abrahamek ▁Jainkoari ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁eta ▁Jainkoak ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁Abimelek , ▁honen ▁emaztea ▁eta ▁mira beak , ▁berriro ▁seme - alabak ▁izan ▁ahal ▁zitzaten .
PRED:	Then Abraham prayed to God , and he healed his wife , and he healed his wife and his sons and children .
GOLD:	Then Abraham prayed to God , and God healed Abimelech , his wife , and his female servants , so they could have children .

ID:	2526
INPUT:	▁Judaren ▁leinua ▁aukeratu ▁zuen , Sion ▁mendia , ▁bere ▁maitea .
PRED:	He chose his unfailing love , O God ; his unfailing love endures forever .
GOLD:	He chose instead the tribe of Judah , and Mount Zion , which he loved .

ID:	2527
INPUT:	▁Ek aitza ▁pasa , ▁eta ▁kito ▁gaiztoa ! Baina ▁betiko ▁oinarriak ▁ditu ▁zintzoak .
PRED:	The wicked will disappear , but the wicked will disappear .
GOLD:	When the storms of life come , the wicked are whirled away , but the godly have a lasting foundation .

ID:	2528
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jesusek ▁ez ▁baitzion ▁gehiago ▁erantzun , ▁harriturik ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁Pilato .
PRED:	But Jesus said to him , “ He did n't be amazed . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said nothing , much to Pilate 's surprise .

ID:	2529
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Ira garriak ▁ditudan ▁zoritxar ▁guztiak ▁bidaliko ▁ditut ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagun on ▁gainera , ▁hitz ▁egindako an ▁aditu ▁ez ▁eta ▁dei ▁egindako an ▁erantzun ▁ez ▁didazu elako ».
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will send disaster upon them , and I will bring disaster upon them . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Because you refuse to listen or answer when I call , I will send upon Judah and Jerusalem all the disasters I have threatened . ' ”

ID:	2530
INPUT:	▁Paulo , ▁Agri paren ▁eta ▁Beren iz eren ▁aurrean
PRED:	Paul and Silas before Paul
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to Agrippa

ID:	2531
INPUT:	▁Ore in arenak ▁bezain ▁arin ▁dizkit ▁oinak ▁egin , eta ▁neure ▁tont orretan ▁sendo ▁nau ▁ezarri .
PRED:	He has made me as surefooted as surefooted as a deer , enabling me to hide me .
GOLD:	He trains my hands for battle ; he strengthens my arm to draw a bronze bow .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	▁Beero tarrak ▁ihesi ▁joanak ▁ziren ▁G ita im era , ▁eta ▁han ▁bizi ▁dira ▁etorkin ▁gisa ▁gaurdaino .
PRED:	They fled to Seir , where the foreigners living among the foreigners living there .
GOLD:	because the original people of Beeroth fled to Gittaim , where they still live as foreigners .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	▁Gizakiak ▁egitasmoak , ▁Jaunak ▁azken ▁hitza .
PRED:	People do n't understand what the Lord says :
GOLD:	We can make our own plans , but the Lord gives the right answer .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁hartantxe , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁atera ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁Egiptotik ▁israeldarrak , ▁gudaroste ▁baten ▁gisa ▁lerro turik .
PRED:	At that time the Lord brought out out of Egypt , as the Lord had brought them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	On that very day the Lord brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt like an army .

ID:	2535
INPUT:	▁Atz eman ▁zuten , ▁bada , ▁Atalia ▁eta ▁jauregira , ▁zaldien ▁atera , ▁heldu ▁zenean , ▁bertan ▁hil ▁zuten .
PRED:	So they brought her back to the gate , and she went out to the gate .
GOLD:	So they seized her and led her out to the entrance of the Horse Gate on the palace grounds , and they killed her there .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	▁« J aso ▁begiak ▁muino etara : zein etan ▁ez ▁zar amai tak eri atan ▁ibil ia ? Bide - bazter retan ▁egoten ▁zinen , ar abi ar ▁lapurrak basamortuan ▁bezala , zer ▁harrapatuko ▁zain . Kuts atu ▁egin ▁duzu ▁lurraldeaz eure ▁prostituzio ▁eta ▁gaiztakeriaz .
PRED:	“ Look at the mountains , ” says the Lord . “ In the sky , how long you are in the desert ? You were scattered in the desert , but you were scattered in the desert .
GOLD:	“ Look at the shrines on every hilltop.Is there any place you have not been defiledby your adultery with other gods ? You sit like a prostitute beside the road waiting for a customer.You sit alone like a nomad in the desert.You have polluted the land with your prostitutionand your wickedness .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁jendea ▁tx u tx u - mu tx uka ▁ari ▁zen ▁hartaz ; ▁batzuek ▁zioten : ▁« Gizon ▁ona ▁da ». ▁Beste ▁batzuek , ▁ordea : ▁« Ez , ▁herria ▁engainatzen ▁ari ▁da ».
PRED:	But the people thought , “ You are gone ! ” But some of the people said , “ You are not a man ! ”
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	2538
INPUT:	▁Biok ▁elkarri ▁eman ▁diogun ▁hitzaz , ▁berriz , ▁izan ▁bedi ▁Jauna ▁gu ▁bion ▁artean ▁testigu ▁betierean ».
PRED:	When our ancestors heard this , the Lord said to each other , “ Let us tell us that we have been the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	And may the Lord make us keep our promises to each other , for he has witnessed them . ”

ID:	2539
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« B aditu t ▁dagoeneko ▁ehun ▁eta ▁hogei ▁urte ▁eta ▁ez ▁naiz ▁gauza ▁daukadan ▁kar gur ako ; ▁gainera , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁dit : ▁“ Ez ▁duzu ▁hor ko ▁Jordan ▁hori ▁igaroko ”.
PRED:	He said to them , “ Do n't let me go to the Jordan River . I do n't know that the Lord has commanded me , ‘ Do n't let me go to the Jordan River . '
GOLD:	he said , “ I am now 120 years old , and I am no longer able to lead you . The Lord has told me , ‘ You will not cross the Jordan River . '

ID:	2540
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁ez ▁dute ▁hildako ek ▁goresten , herio - isil pera ▁jaitsi ▁direnek .
PRED:	The Lord protects those who are dead , for they have come to death .
GOLD:	The dead can not sing praises to the Lord , for they have gone into the silence of the grave .

ID:	2541
INPUT:	▁Edom ▁konkis tatuko ▁du , beronen ▁Seir ▁lurraldeaz ▁jabetuko : Israelek ▁garaipena ▁lortuko ▁du .
PRED:	The king of Edom will come to Egypt , and he will destroy them .
GOLD:	Edom will be taken over , and Seir , its enemy , will be conquered , while Israel marches on in triumph .

ID:	2542
INPUT:	▁« Zeuen ▁begiz ▁ikusi ▁dituzue ▁Jaunak ▁burutu ▁dituen ▁egintza ▁handi ▁guztiok .
PRED:	“ When you see your wonderful deeds , the Lord your God has seen all your wonderful deeds .
GOLD:	But you have seen the Lord perform all these mighty deeds with your own eyes !

ID:	2543
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zion , ▁beraz , ▁Jaunak ▁Abrahami : ▁« Izu garria ▁da ▁Sodoma ▁eta ▁Gomorraren ▁aurkako ▁salakuntza . ▁Larri egia ▁da ▁hiri ▁horien ▁bekatua .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Abraham , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ Sodom and Gomorrah , Sodom , Sodom , Gomorrah , Gomorrah , and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	So the Lord told Abraham , “ I have heard a great outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah , because their sin is so flagrant .

ID:	2544
INPUT:	▁hurbil ▁g ak izkion ▁bihotz ▁zintz oz ▁eta ▁sinesmen ▁osoz , ▁barrua ▁bekatu - kon tzi <unk> ▁guztitik ▁garbi turik ▁eta ▁gorputza ▁ur ▁garbiz ▁tx uk undu rik .
PRED:	As a result , the spirit of faith is filled with faith , and your faith is pure with Christ .
GOLD:	let us go right into the presence of God with sincere hearts fully trusting him . For our guilty consciences have been sprinkled with Christ 's blood to make us clean , and our bodies have been washed with pure water .

ID:	2545
INPUT:	▁« Utzi ▁armak ! ▁Aitor ▁ezazue ▁Jainkoa ▁naizela , herrien ▁gain ▁eta ▁lurraren ▁gain ▁nagoela ».
PRED:	“ Get up ! ” he said , “ May God come to you . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is here among us ; the God of Israel is our fortress.Interlude

ID:	2546
INPUT:	▁Agin te keria
PRED:	The Most Important Commandment
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	2547
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zaiteztela ▁nagi ▁bihur , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁jarraitu ▁f edez ▁eta ▁eroa penez ▁Jainkoaren ▁agintzariak ▁jasotzen ▁ari ▁direnen ▁ets enpl uari .
PRED:	Do n't be patient with wine , but do n't be baptized by God . Instead , we know that we are building the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Then you will not become spiritually dull and indifferent . Instead , you will follow the example of those who are going to inherit God 's promises because of their faith and endurance .

ID:	2548
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁omen ▁dute ▁gorpua ▁aurkitu ; ▁gainera , ▁Jesus ▁bizi ▁dela ▁esan ▁dieten ▁aingeru ▁batzuk ▁agertu ▁zaizki ela ▁esanez ▁etorri ▁zaizkigu .
PRED:	But they say , ‘ They are n't looking for the body of Jesus , so that some of the angels have come to us . '
GOLD:	They said his body was missing , and they had seen angels who told them Jesus is alive !

ID:	2549
INPUT:	▁Israeldar ▁leinu ▁bateko ▁ondare - zati ▁bat ▁heren tzian ▁hartzen ▁duen ▁emakumea ▁ez ▁daiteke ▁ezkon ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁leinuko ▁ez ▁den ▁gizon arekin ; ▁horrela , ▁israeldarrek ▁nork ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁ondare ari ▁eutsiko ▁diote ,
PRED:	The people of Israel belong to the tribe of Israel who belong to the clans of the tribe of Levi . It is no one of the tribe of Israel who has been given to the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	The daughters throughout the tribes of Israel who are in line to inherit property must marry within their tribe , so that all the Israelites will keep their ancestral property .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ikasleak ▁bakarrean ▁harturik , ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Zorionekoak ▁zuek ▁ikusten ▁duzuena ▁ikusten ▁duten ▁begiak !
PRED:	Then he took the disciples into the boat , and he said to them , “ Let them see what you see . ”
GOLD:	Then when they were alone , he turned to the disciples and said , “ Blessed are the eyes that see what you have seen .

ID:	2551
INPUT:	▁Erei teko ▁garaian , ▁nekaz ariak beti ▁gol dak etan ▁eta ▁lurra ▁ur ratzen eta ▁ar ea tzen ▁jardun ▁ohi ▁ote ▁du ?
PRED:	But whenever he gets up to his own country , he will give you his own strength ?
GOLD:	Does a farmer always plow and never sow ? Is he forever cultivating the soil and never planting ?

ID:	2552
INPUT:	▁Alde ▁bi etatik ▁nago ▁erak arria : ▁alde ▁batetik , ▁hil ▁egin ▁nahi ▁nuke , ▁Kristorekin ▁egoteko , ▁hau ▁asko gatik ▁onena ▁delarik ;
PRED:	So I have been brought to the crowd , so I wanted to kill him .
GOLD:	I 'm torn between two desires : I long to go and be with Christ , which would be far better for me .

ID:	2553
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁ziren ▁ru ben dar ▁senitarteak : ▁ 43 . <unk> ▁gizonezko ▁guztira .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of the clans of the clans .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	2554
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Bad atoz ▁egunak : hazia ▁erein ▁orduko uzta ▁biltzeko ▁garaia ▁izango ▁da , mahats a ▁zapaldu ▁orduko ber riz ▁biltzeko ▁garaia ▁izango ▁da . Mendi ek ▁eta ▁muino ekar doa ▁isuriko ▁dute .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The time will come down to the ground , ” says the Lord. “ The time will be cut down to the mountain , and the people of Israel will be cut down on the mountain .
GOLD:	“ The time will come , ” says the Lord , “ when the grain and grapes will grow fasterthan they can be harvested.Then the terraced vineyards on the hills of Israelwill drip with sweet wine !

ID:	2555
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zuen , ▁orduan : ▁« Gaur ▁Jaunari ▁sagaratuak ▁izan ▁zarete , ▁ez bai rik ▁gabe ▁semea ▁nahiz ▁senidea ▁hil ▁duzuelako . ▁Jaunak , ▁beraz , ▁bedeinkatu ▁egin ▁zaituzte ▁gaur ».
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ You are a holy covenant with you , and you have died without a single day . You have blessed you today . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses told the Levites , “ Today you have ordained yourselves for the service of the Lord , for you obeyed him even though it meant killing your own sons and brothers . Today you have earned a blessing . ”

ID:	2556
INPUT:	▁H ag ab , ▁Sal mai ▁eta ▁Hanan enak ;
PRED:	Shecaniah , Adullam , and Adullam .
GOLD:	Hagab , Shalmai , Hanan ,

ID:	2557
INPUT:	▁egoitzako ▁zap iak , ▁elkarketa - etxola , ▁honen ▁gaineko ▁larru ▁finezko ▁estaldura , ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarrerako ▁oihala ,
PRED:	Parable of the Tabernacle , the tent covering of the Tabernacle , and the curtain to the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	They must carry the curtains of the Tabernacle , the Tabernacle itself with its coverings , the outer covering of fine goatskin leather , and the curtain for the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	2558
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Benetan ▁diotsut : ▁Gaur ▁nirekin ▁izango ▁zara ▁para disu an .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I will give you the truth , ” Jesus replied .
GOLD:	And Jesus replied , “ I assure you , today you will be with me in paradise . ”

ID:	2559
INPUT:	▁Azarias , ▁Judako ▁errege
PRED:	Azariah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	2560
INPUT:	▁bere ▁eskuz ▁eramango ▁du ▁Jaunari ▁sagaratu ▁beharrekoa : ▁gantzak ▁eta ▁bularra . ▁Bul arra ▁Jaunari ▁eskainiko ▁dio , ▁errituzko ▁aurkezpen - keinua ▁eginez .
PRED:	“ If you present the offering to the Lord , give it as a special offering to the Lord . He will present them as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present it to the Lord with your own hands as a special gift to the Lord . Bring the fat of the animal , together with the breast , and lift up the breast as a special offering to the Lord .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	▁ubide ek ▁kira tsa ▁botako ▁dute , N il oren ▁adarrak ▁agor tzeraino jai tsiko ▁dira , kan abera ▁eta ▁ih iak ▁zimel duko .
PRED:	The seeds of the dead will grow down , and the branches of the seven branches will be filled with fruit .
GOLD:	The canals of the Nile will dry up , and the streams of Egypt will stinkwith rotting reeds and rushes .

ID:	2562
INPUT:	▁ardoa ▁kopa ▁handi tan ▁edaten ▁duzue , olio ▁usaintsu ▁onen ezi gur zten ▁zarete . Eta ▁ez ▁zaizue ▁axola Israel ▁herriaren ▁hondamendia !
PRED:	Your wine is full of wine , and your unfailing love is filled with oil . It is not pleased with the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You drink wine by the bowlfuland perfume yourselves with fragrant lotions.You care nothing about the ruin of your nation .

ID:	2563
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zien ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :« Hau ▁da ▁Pazko - jai aren ▁arau dia :« In ongo ▁atzerritarrak ▁ezin ▁izango ▁du ▁oparigai rik ▁jan .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says : “ This is what the Lord says : It will not eat from your decrees .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ These are the instructions for the festival of Passover . No outsiders are allowed to eat the Passover meal .

ID:	2564
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁ikasleak ▁ez ▁ziren ▁orduan ▁profezia ▁honetaz ▁jabetu , ▁baina ▁gero , ▁Jesusen ▁Jainko - aintza ▁azaldu ▁zenean , ▁konturatu ▁ziren ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁zioen ▁huraxe ▁egin ▁ziotela ▁Jesusi .
PRED:	But the disciples did n't realize that his disciples had been speaking to him . But when he learned that Jesus was the Scriptures , he said , “ The man of the dead . ”
GOLD:	His disciples did n't understand at the time that this was a fulfillment of prophecy . But after Jesus entered into his glory , they remembered what had happened and realized that these things had been written about him .

ID:	2565
INPUT:	▁Argi ▁egin ▁digu ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁egiaz . Egin ▁pro z es ioa , ▁ab arrak ▁eskuetan , ▁aldarearen ▁ertz etaraino .
PRED:	For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Make sure you have set up your hands on the altar of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The Lord is God , shining upon us.Take the sacrifice and bind it with cords on the altar .

ID:	2566
INPUT:	▁Galileatik ▁Jesusekin ▁etorritako ▁emakumeek , ▁Joseren ▁atzetik ▁joanik , ▁hilobia ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁eta ▁Jesusen ▁gorpua ▁nola ▁ezartzen ▁zuten ▁begiratu .
PRED:	When the women saw Jesus , they saw him in the tomb of Galilee , they saw him and saw him there .
GOLD:	As his body was taken away , the women from Galilee followed and saw the tomb where his body was placed .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	▁Noren ▁bila ▁zabiltza , ▁zu , ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁hori ? ▁Noren ▁atzetik ▁zoaz ? ▁Zak ur ▁akabatu aren ▁atzetik ? ▁Ar kak us oren ▁baten ▁atzetik ?
PRED:	Why are you looking for you ? Why are you looking for me ? Why are you so angry ? Why are you looking for me ? ”
GOLD:	May the Lord therefore judge which of us is right and punish the guilty one . He is my advocate , and he will rescue me from your power ! ”

ID:	2568
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁Moisesen ▁bidez ▁eman ▁zuen ▁legean ▁agindu ▁hau ▁aurkitu ▁zuten : ▁israeldarrek ▁etxoletan ▁bizi ▁behar ▁zutela ▁zazpigarren ▁hileko ▁jai etan ,
PRED:	So the Lord gave this message to Moses : “ This is what the Lord had commanded by the people of Israel . In this way , the people of Israel had commanded the Lord .
GOLD:	As they studied the Law , they discovered that the Lord had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should live in shelters during the festival to be held that month .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁egunean , ▁gorpu tzeko ▁ile ▁guztia ▁moztuko ▁du ▁— buru koa , ▁aurpegi koa , ▁bek ain ekoa ▁eta ▁gainerako ▁guztia —, ▁arropak ▁eta ▁gorputza ▁garbituko ▁ditu ▁eta ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest must burn their hair on the altar . He must wash their clothes and bathe yourself in his clothing , and he must wash his clothes .
GOLD:	On the seventh day they must again shave all the hair from their heads , including the hair of the beard and eyebrows . They must also wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water . Then they will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	2570
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Asiria ▁suntsituko
PRED:	Blessings for the Lord 's People
GOLD:	A Message about Philistia

ID:	2571
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁zorionak ▁eta ▁leialtasunak ▁inguratuko ▁naute bizitz ako ▁egun ▁guztietan ; Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁biziko ▁naiz ▁amai gabeko ▁egunetan .
PRED:	Yes , I will punish those who live in the house of the Lord , and I will live there .
GOLD:	Surely your goodness and unfailing love will pursue meall the days of my life , and I will live in the house of the Lordforever .

ID:	2572
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁egin ▁du ▁zin Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak :« Nire ▁egitasmoak buru tu ▁egingo ▁dira , nire ▁erabakiak ▁bete .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says :
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sworn this oath : “ It will all happen as I have planned.It will be as I have decided .

ID:	2573
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁bake - bal d intzak ▁onartu ▁ez ▁eta ▁gerra ▁d ek lara tzen ▁badizu ete , ▁setiatu ▁egingo ▁duzue ▁hiria ,
PRED:	But if the Lord says , “ Do n't let the battle fight against you , the city will come to fight against you .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to make peace and prepare to fight , you must attack the town .

ID:	2574
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁eraztuna ▁bere ▁behatz etik ▁atera ▁eta ▁juduen ▁etsai ▁zen ▁Ham ani , ▁Ham ed ataren ▁seme ▁eta ▁Agag en ▁jatorriko ari , ▁eman ▁zion ,
PRED:	Then the king summoned his signet ring from the Jews and grandson of the Jews . The king gave birth to the Jews , king of Susa .
GOLD:	The king agreed , confirming his decision by removing his signet ring from his finger and giving it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , the enemy of the Jews .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁ez ▁duzu ▁ene ▁errebeldia ▁barkatzen eta ▁nire ▁errua ▁ahazten ? Ber ehala ▁nauzu ▁hautsetan ▁etzanda . Ene ▁bila ▁ibiliko ▁zara , baina ▁ordurako ▁ez ▁naiz ▁munduan ▁izango ».
PRED:	Why do n't you turn my heart , O Lord , my prayer ? I will search for you , ” says the Lord . “ I will search for you , but I will not find you . ”
GOLD:	Why not just forgive my sinand take away my guilt ? For soon I will lie down in the dust and die.When you look for me , I will be gone . ”

ID:	2576
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁irainez ▁bete ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Zeu ▁zara , ▁zu , ▁haren ▁ikasle ; ▁gu ▁Moisesen ▁ikasle ▁gara .
PRED:	They said to them , “ You are your brothers and sisters , we are with us . ”
GOLD:	Then they cursed him and said , “ You are his disciple , but we are disciples of Moses !

ID:	2577
INPUT:	▁Joben ▁hiru ▁lagunek ▁— T emango ▁Elifaz ek , ▁Xuah eko ▁Bil dadek ▁eta ▁Naam ako ▁Tz of arrek —, ▁Joben ▁zoritxarraren ▁berri ▁izan ▁zutelarik , ▁bis ita ▁egitea ▁erabaki ▁zuten ▁atsekabean ▁lagundu ▁eta ▁kontsola tzeko .
PRED:	Job spoke again : Eliphaz the Temanite , Eliphaz the Temanite replied ,
GOLD:	When three of Job 's friends heard of the tragedy he had suffered , they got together and traveled from their homes to comfort and console him . Their names were Eliphaz the Temanite , Bildad the Shuhite , and Zophar the Naamathite .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁esan ▁zien :— Era baki ▁hau ▁hartu ▁dut : ▁ametsa ▁eta ▁beronen ▁esanahia ▁argitzen ▁eta ▁azaltzen ▁ez ▁badizki dazue , ▁txiki - txiki ▁egingo ▁zaituztet ▁eta ▁zuen ▁etxeak ▁zabor tegi ▁bihurtuko .
PRED:	Then the king said to them , “ I will give you a dream , and I will give you whatever I say , ‘ I will give you a wall . '
GOLD:	But the king said to the astrologers , “ I am serious about this . If you do n't tell me what my dream was and what it means , you will be torn limb from limb , and your houses will be turned into heaps of rubble !

ID:	2579
INPUT:	▁« Ez tei etara ▁gonbidatzen ▁zaituzten ean , ▁ez ▁jarri ▁mahai buru an , ▁zu ▁baino ▁gonbidatu ▁ospetsu ag oren ▁bat ▁izan ▁daiteke ▁eta ;
PRED:	“ Do n't weep for someone else , for you are not worthy of honor .
GOLD:	“ When you are invited to a wedding feast , do n't sit in the seat of honor . What if someone who is more distinguished than you has also been invited ?

ID:	2580
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁esan ▁zioten ▁elkarri : ▁« Ea , ▁adre iluak ▁egin ▁eta ▁sutan ▁erre ▁ditzagun ». ▁Honela , ▁harri aren ▁ordez ▁adre ilua ▁erabili ▁zuten ▁eta ▁kar e - ore aren ▁ordez ▁bik ea .
PRED:	They said to each other , “ Get up ! Get up ! Get out of the fire and make them ceremonially unclean . ”
GOLD:	They began saying to each other , “ Let 's make bricks and harden them with fire. ” ( In this region bricks were used instead of stone , and tar was used for mortar . )

ID:	2581
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean ▁eskainiko ▁ditu , ▁amaren ▁aldeko ▁garbikuntza - ohikunea ▁eginez , ▁eta ▁hura ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da ▁bere ▁odol jario tik .« Horra ▁hor ▁semea ▁nahiz ▁alaba ▁izaten ▁duen ▁emakumeari ▁buruzko ▁legea .
PRED:	The priest will purify the woman in the presence of the Lord , and he will purify the woman with her husband , and she will be ceremonially unclean for her husband .
GOLD:	The priest will then present them to the Lord to purify her . Then she will be ceremonially clean again after her bleeding at childbirth . These are the instructions for a woman after the birth of a son or a daughter .

ID:	2582
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain , ▁joan ▁eta ▁nire ▁nagusiari : ▁« Hemen ▁da ▁Elias » ▁adierazteko ▁esango ▁didazu , ▁bada ?
PRED:	Now go to my master and said , “ Where is the one ? ”
GOLD:	And now you say , ‘ Go and tell your master , “ Elijah is here . ” '

ID:	2583
INPUT:	▁Hauxe ▁da ▁lapur retan ▁dabilen ari ▁gertatzen ▁zaiona : lap ur rari ▁berari ▁kentzen ▁dio ▁bizia .
PRED:	It is better to be a fool , and he is a fool .
GOLD:	Such is the fate of all who are greedy for money ; it robs them of life .

ID:	2584
INPUT:	▁nagusiak ▁Jainkoaren ▁aitzinera ▁eramango ▁du , ▁atera ▁edo ▁ate - uzta ira ▁hurbil araziko ▁eta ▁ziri ▁batez ▁belarria ▁zulatuko ▁dio . ▁Eta ▁esklabo ▁izango ▁du ▁betiko .
PRED:	The high priest will bring him back to the house of God , and it will be taken into a house . And it will be a slave , and it will be a slave .
GOLD:	If he does this , his master must present him before God . Then his master must take him to the door or doorpost and publicly pierce his ear with an awl . After that , the slave will serve his master for life .

ID:	2585
INPUT:	▁Orain ▁aipatzen ▁ari ▁garen ▁etorkizun eko ▁mundu ▁hau ▁ez ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁aingeruen ▁menpe ▁jarri .
PRED:	That is why we are not talking about all the world .
GOLD:	And furthermore , it is not angels who will control the future world we are talking about .

ID:	2586
INPUT:	▁Bedeinkatua ▁Jauna , ▁nire ▁erregu - oihua ▁entzun ▁du ▁eta !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , who is my prayer ; he hears my prayer .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! For he has heard my cry for mercy .

ID:	2587
INPUT:	▁bigarren ▁hilaren ▁hamalau ko ▁ilunabarrean ▁ospatuko ▁du . ▁Bel ar ▁mingo ts ez ▁eta ▁legamia ▁gabeko ▁ogiz ▁lagundurik ▁jango ▁du ▁bildotsa ;
PRED:	On the second day of the second month , during the second month , the second day of the second month , and it is no food .
GOLD:	They must offer the Passover sacrifice one month later , at twilight on the fourteenth day of the second month . They must eat the Passover lamb at that time with bitter salad greens and bread made without yeast .

ID:	2588
INPUT:	▁giza ▁grinen ▁menpeko ▁izaten ▁jarraitzen ▁baituzue . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bekaiz keriak ▁eta ▁eztabaidak ▁dituzuen ▁bitartean , ▁ez ▁ote ▁zarete ▁giza ▁grinen ▁menpeko ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁duzue ▁giza ▁irizpide ▁hutsez ▁jokatzen ?
PRED:	Of course , how sinful are you corrupt , sinful desires are sinful and sinful things that are evil in human hands ? Do n't you think about human desires ? Do n't you think about human deeds ?
GOLD:	for you are still controlled by your sinful nature . You are jealous of one another and quarrel with each other . Does n't that prove you are controlled by your sinful nature ? Are n't you living like people of the world ?

ID:	2589
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁bazkal ti arrak ▁beren ▁artean ▁hasi ▁ziren ▁esaten : ▁« Nor ▁ote ▁dugu ▁bekatuak ▁barkatu ▁ere ▁egiten ▁dituen ▁hau ?»
PRED:	Then the other table began to ask , “ Who is our sins ? ”
GOLD:	The men at the table said among themselves , “ Who is this man , that he goes around forgiving sins ? ”

ID:	2590
INPUT:	▁Z uz enak ▁bide ▁tx arretik ▁eramaten ▁dituena , berak ▁prestatu tako ▁tran pan ▁jausiko ▁da ; baina ▁prestu ek ▁zoriona ▁izango ▁dute ▁sari .
PRED:	There is a way to be caught up , but it will be a reward for you .
GOLD:	Those who lead good people along an evil pathwill fall into their own trap , but the honest will inherit good things .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁Kristo ▁Jesusengan ▁gure kiko ▁hain ▁ona ▁izanez ▁agertu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁die ▁datozen ▁gizaldi ei ▁zein ▁ugaria ▁eta ▁eskuz abala ▁den ▁bere ▁onginahia .
PRED:	In this way , Christ has revealed to us , so you can know that you are good to all the good things you do .
GOLD:	So God can point to us in all future ages as examples of the incredible wealth of his grace and kindness toward us , as shown in all he has done for us who are united with Christ Jesus .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	▁garb ik etarako ▁ontzia ▁Moab ; o ina ▁ezarriko ▁diot ▁gainean ▁Edom i , garaipen - oihu ▁egingo ▁ F iliste ari ».
PRED:	Have you rejected us , O Lord , Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Who will bring me into the fortified city ? Who will bring me victory over Edom ?

ID:	2593
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁etorrer arekin ▁bakearen ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egin ▁zigun : ▁bakea ▁zuei , ▁urruti ▁zineten oi , ▁eta ▁bakea ▁hurbil ▁zirenei .
PRED:	When he heard this , he said to you , “ May you go to the other side of peace and peace with peace . ”
GOLD:	He brought this Good News of peace to you Gentiles who were far away from him , and peace to the Jews who were near .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	▁Alabaina , ▁emakumea ▁haurdun ▁gertatu ▁zen ▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁urtean , ▁garai ▁berean , ▁semea ▁izan ▁zuen , ▁Eliseok ▁esana ▁zion ez .
PRED:	But when she was pregnant , she became pregnant and gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	But sure enough , the woman soon became pregnant . And at that time the following year she had a son , just as Elisha had said .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	▁I datzi , ▁beraz , ▁ez ▁nizuen ▁idatzi ▁iraina ▁egin ▁zuenarengatik , ▁ezta ▁hartu ▁zuenarengatik ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁nitaz ▁duzuen ▁ardura ▁agertzeko ▁aukera ▁zuei ▁emateko ▁baizik .
PRED:	That is why I wanted to write on you , so I would not obey the word of God . Instead , I would bring you back to you .
GOLD:	My purpose , then , was not to write about who did the wrong or who was wronged . I wrote to you so that in the sight of God you could see for yourselves how loyal you are to us .

ID:	2596
INPUT:	▁Ara henak ▁ <unk> ;
PRED:	The citizens of Moab
GOLD:	The family of Arah652

ID:	2597
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁madiandarren gatik , ▁erabat ▁pobre tu ▁ziren ▁israeldarrak ; ▁orduan , ▁dei ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	So the people of Israel attacked the Egyptians , and they called the Lord to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Israel was reduced to starvation by the Midianites . Then the Israelites cried out to the Lord for help .

ID:	2598
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁lagundu ▁egin ▁behar ▁diegu ▁horrelako ei , ▁egiaren ▁zerbitzuan ▁berorien ▁lankide ▁bihur ▁gaitezen .
PRED:	So we can speak to the truth , and we can stand before the truth .
GOLD:	So we ourselves should support them so that we can be their partners as they teach the truth .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁prestatzen ▁dio ▁bel eari ▁jatekoa , beraren ▁kume ek , ▁goseak ▁noraezean ▁dabil tzal arik , Jainkoari ▁tx io ▁egiten ▁dioten ean ?
PRED:	Who is those who search for those who search for those who search for themselves ? The godly will prosper in the field ?
GOLD:	Who provides food for the ravenswhen their young cry out to Godand wander about in hunger ?

ID:	2600
INPUT:	▁Gu ri ▁ere ▁berri ▁ona ▁eman ▁zaigu ▁gure ▁arbasoei ▁bezala ; ▁baina ▁hauei ▁ez ▁zien ▁ezertarako ▁balio ▁izan ▁mezua ▁entzu teak , ▁entzun ▁sinetsi ▁gabe ▁entzun ▁zuten ▁eta .
PRED:	We heard the Good News to our ancestors , just as we heard about our ancestors . But the word of our ancestors did n't believe it .
GOLD:	For this good news — that God has prepared this rest — has been announced to us just as it was to them . But it did them no good because they did n't share the faith of those who listened to God .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁nazazu ▁egin ▁bekatarien ▁zori ▁bereko , ez ▁nazazu ▁bihur ▁hiltzaileen ▁kideko ,
PRED:	Do n't be ashamed of the wicked , for I have not turned away from the wicked .
GOLD:	Do n't let me suffer the fate of sinners.Do n't condemn me along with murderers .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	▁Zorion tasunak ▁eta ▁madarikazioak
PRED:	The Lord 's Call to Job
GOLD:	The Beatitudes

ID:	2603
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jesusi : ▁« Maisu , ▁zein ▁ederki ▁gauden ▁hemen ! ▁Zergatik ▁ez ▁egin ▁hiru ▁etxola : ▁bata ▁zuretzat , ▁bestea ▁Moises entzat ▁eta ▁bestea ▁Eliasen tzat ?»
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Teacher , Teacher ! Why have you done to us ? ”
GOLD:	Peter exclaimed , “ Rabbi , it 's wonderful for us to be here ! Let 's make three shelters as memorials — one for you , one for Moses , and one for Elijah . ”

ID:	2604
INPUT:	▁Hurbildu ▁eta ▁zauriak ▁lotu ▁zizkion , ▁olioz ▁eta ▁ardoz ▁igurtzi ▁ondoren ; ▁gero , ▁bere ▁asto ▁gainean ▁ezarri , ▁ostatu ra ▁eraman ▁eta ▁bere ▁ardurapean ▁hartu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then he went to the palace and put her back to the palace . Then he took him back to his palace , and he took him back to his palace .
GOLD:	Going over to him , the Samaritan soothed his wounds with olive oil and wine and bandaged them . Then he put the man on his own donkey and took him to an inn , where he took care of him .

ID:	2605
INPUT:	▁Santiago ▁eta ▁Joanek , ▁Zebedeoren ▁semeek , ▁Jesusengana ▁hurbildu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Maisu , ▁eskatuko ▁dizu guna ▁zuk ▁ematea ▁nahi ▁genuke .
PRED:	John and John the sons of Zebedee , James and John came to Jesus . “ Teacher , ” they said . “ Yes , we 'll ask you . ”
GOLD:	Then James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came over and spoke to him . “ Teacher , ” they said , “ we want you to do us a favor . ”

ID:	2606
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien :— Etorri ▁eta ▁ikusi . Joan , ▁non ▁bizi ▁zen ▁ikusi ▁eta ▁berarekin ▁gelditu ▁ziren ▁egun ▁hartan . ▁Arrats aldeko ▁laurak ▁aldea ▁zen .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Come , ” he said . “ Go and see the same day , ” they saw that the same day .
GOLD:	“ Come and see , ” he said . It was about four o'clock in the afternoon when they went with him to the place where he was staying , and they remained with him the rest of the day .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	▁Lebitarren ▁hiriak <unk> , 1 ▁Lebitarren ▁hiriak : ▁Ik . ▁L b ▁ 25 , 32 ▁oh .
PRED:	The towns of the Levites were responsible for the towns of Mizpah .
GOLD:	Towns for the Levites

ID:	2608
INPUT:	▁Eskain tzaren ▁gainerakoa ▁Aaron ▁eta ▁beronen ▁ondorengoentzat ▁izango ▁da ; ▁guztiz ▁sakratua ▁da , ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁opari aren ▁parte ▁baita .
PRED:	The rest of Aaron and his sons will be given to Aaron and his descendants . It is a special gift to the Lord .
GOLD:	The rest of the grain offering will then be given to Aaron and his sons as their food . This offering will be considered a most holy part of the special gifts presented to the Lord .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	▁Herria ▁begira ▁zegoen . ▁Agintariek , ▁berriz , ▁Jesusi ▁burla ▁egiten ▁zioten , ▁esanez : ▁« Besteak ▁salbatu ▁di tik ; ▁salba ▁dezala ▁bere ▁burua , ▁Jainkoaren ▁Mesias , ▁hautatua , ▁baldin ▁bada ».
PRED:	When the people saw Jesus , they said , “ Where is the Messiah ? ” And they said , “ He is the Messiah ! ”
GOLD:	The crowd watched and the leaders scoffed . “ He saved others , ” they said , “ let him save himself if he is really God 's Messiah , the Chosen One . ”

ID:	2610
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁esan ▁zion :— Hona ▁argi bidea . ▁Hiru ▁saski ok ▁hiru ▁egun ▁adierazten ▁dute .
PRED:	But Joseph said to Joseph , “ Here is three days ! ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph told him . “ The three baskets also represent three days .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁utzi ▁behar ▁gaituzu ▁hiltzen ▁geure ▁lur ▁eta ▁guzti ? ▁Eros ▁gaitzazu ▁gu ▁geu ▁eta ▁gure ▁lurrak ▁janari ▁truke , ▁eta ▁faraoiaren ▁esklabo ▁bihurtuko ▁gara , ▁geure ▁lur rekin ▁batera . ▁Emaguzu ▁hazia ▁bizirik ▁iraun ▁dezagun ▁eta ▁gure ▁lurrak ▁eremu ▁bihur ▁ez ▁daitezen ».
PRED:	Why do we die with us ? Why let us give us food ? We will give us food to the land of Egypt , and we will live in the land of Egypt , and we will live in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Why should we die before your very eyes ? Buy us and our land in exchange for food ; we offer our land and ourselves as slaves for Pharaoh . Just give us grain so we may live and not die , and so the land does not become empty and desolate . ”

ID:	2612
INPUT:	▁Gauza ▁bera ▁gertatzen ▁da ▁musika - tresn ekin ▁ere , ▁txirula ▁edota ▁zitar arekin , ▁adi bidez : ▁no tak ▁argi ▁eta ▁garbi ▁ematen ▁ez ▁badituzte , ▁nola ▁jakin ▁zer ▁jotzen ▁duten ?
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits you ? Why do you understand ? ”
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	2613
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁herriak ▁Pazkoa ▁ospatu
PRED:	Passover and Passover
GOLD:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah

ID:	2614
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jordanez ▁ekialdeko ▁bi ▁errege ▁amortarrei ▁— Hexb ongo ▁errege ▁Sih oni ▁eta ▁Ax tar oten ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Baxango ▁errege ▁Ogi — ▁egin ▁diena .
PRED:	So King Sihon of the Jordan River , along with the Jordan River , along with the Jordan River , and King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	We have also heard what he did to the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River — King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan ( who lived in Ashtaroth ) .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁egin ▁zion ▁kontsulta ▁Davidek ▁Jaunari :— Joango ▁al ▁naiz ▁lapur - talde ▁horren ▁ondoren ? ▁Harra patuko ▁ote ▁ditut ? Jaunak ▁erantzun :— Zoaz ▁ondoren ! ▁Horixe ▁harrapatuko ▁dituzula ▁eta ▁askatuko ▁zu tarrak !
PRED:	But David asked the Lord , “ Should I come to fight against the Lord ? ” And David replied , “ I will give you victory ! ”
GOLD:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Should I chase after this band of raiders ? Will I catch them ? ” And the Lord told him , “ Yes , go after them . You will surely recover everything that was taken from you ! ”

ID:	2616
INPUT:	▁beren ▁jainkoen ▁ohorez ▁egiten ▁dituzten ▁higuingarri tasunak ▁irakats ▁ez ▁diez azkizu eten ▁eta , ▁horrela , ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurka ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁ez ▁dezazuen .
PRED:	These are detestable to you who are detestable to the gods of the Lord your God . Do not be angry with you , for you have sinned against you .
GOLD:	This will prevent the people of the land from teaching you to imitate their detestable customs in the worship of their gods , which would cause you to sin deeply against the Lord your God .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	▁Apaizen ▁sagara pena
PRED:	The True Family of the Priests
GOLD:	Dedication of the Priests

ID:	2618
INPUT:	▁Dedan goak ▁ere ▁bez ero ▁zenituen ; ▁itsas ▁herri ▁askok ▁zurekin ▁egiten ▁zituen ▁tratu ak , ▁b ol iz ▁eta ▁e ban oz ▁ordainduz .
PRED:	You gave them a vast amount of cattle , and many people in the sea .
GOLD:	Merchants came to you from Dedan . Numerous coastlands were your captive markets ; they brought payment in ivory tusks and ebony wood .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	▁Opari a ▁borondatez koa ▁bada , ▁zilegi ▁da ▁gorputz - atal ak ▁oker ▁dituen ▁zekorra ▁nahiz ▁aharia ▁eskaintzea ; ▁baina ▁botoa ▁betetzeko ▁egina ▁bada , ▁ez ▁dizue ▁Jaunak ▁horrelakorik ▁onartuko .
PRED:	“ This is a permanent law for a sin offering , whether it is a young bull or a young bull or a young bull or a burnt offering to you , but it is no defects .
GOLD:	If a bull or lamb has a leg that is too long or too short , it may be offered as a voluntary offering , but it may not be offered to fulfill a vow .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁herria ▁harrigarri ro ▁hautatu
PRED:	Parable of the Lord 's Judgment
GOLD:	Eastern Cities of Refuge

ID:	2621
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zien ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2622
INPUT:	▁« Hala ▁ere ▁obeditu ▁ez ▁eta ▁aurka ▁egiten ▁badidazue ,
PRED:	But if you refuse to obey me , then if you refuse to obey me .
GOLD:	“ If in spite of all this you still refuse to listen and still remain hostile toward me ,

ID:	2623
INPUT:	▁Eskain tzaileak ▁eskua ▁ezarriko ▁dio ▁buruan , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁bekatuen ▁ordain tzat ▁onartuko ▁dio .
PRED:	But if the Lord says to his hand , he must take a hand for his sins .
GOLD:	Lay your hand on the animal 's head , and the Lord will accept its death in your place to purify you , making you right with him .

ID:	2624
INPUT:	▁Espirituak ▁mirariak ▁egiten ▁zituzten ▁deabruak ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁mundu ▁osoko ▁errege engana ▁jo ▁zuten , ▁Jainko ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁egun ▁handiko ▁borrokara ▁biltzeko .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of the Spirit of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	They are demonic spirits who work miracles and go out to all the rulers of the world to gather them for battle against the Lord on that great judgment day of God the Almighty .

ID:	2625
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁honela ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zidan : ▁Laugarren ▁piztia ▁lur ▁gainean ▁izango ▁den ▁laugarren ▁erreinua ▁da , ▁beste ▁hirurak ▁ez ▁bezalakoa . ▁Mundu ▁osoa ▁irentsiko ▁du , ▁hanka ▁azpian ▁hartuko ▁eta ▁txiki tuko .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ This is what the fourth beast says : The fourth beast will not be like three of the earth , and the earth will be like three of the earth .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ This fourth beast is the fourth world power that will rule the earth . It will be different from all the others . It will devour the whole world , trampling and crushing everything in its path .

ID:	2626
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁zati tan ▁banatuko ▁dute ▁lurraldea , ▁Judaren ▁leinuak ▁bere ▁lurraldean , ▁hegoaldean , ▁jarraituko ▁duelarik , ▁eta ▁Joseren ▁ondorengoek ▁beren ean , ▁iparraldean .
PRED:	Each of the land will be given to the clans of the tribe of Judah , and the descendants of Joseph will be given to the north .
GOLD:	Let them divide the land into seven sections , excluding Judah 's territory in the south and Joseph 's territory in the north .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	▁« Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldeko ▁hiriren ▁batean ▁zuen ▁herritarren ▁bat ▁behartsu ▁bada , ▁ez ▁izan ▁bihoz gabe , ▁ez ▁laguntzarik ▁ukatu ▁senide ▁behartsuari ;
PRED:	“ When the Lord your God says , ‘ If you are poor , you will not stop a poor person in the land of the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	“ But if there are any poor Israelites in your towns when you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you , do not be hard-hearted or tightfisted toward them .

ID:	2628
INPUT:	▁eta ▁beteko ▁dut ▁zuen ▁gurasoei ▁zin ▁egindakoa , ▁alegia , ▁esnea ▁eta ▁eztia ▁darizkion ▁lurraldea ▁emango ▁niela ”. ▁Lurralde ▁hori ▁orain ▁daukazu ena ▁da , ▁hain ▁zuzen ». Nik ▁erantzun ▁nion : ▁« Bai , ▁Jauna ».
PRED:	I will make this covenant with your ancestors , just as he promised . I will give you a land flowing with milk and honey , a land flowing with milk and honey . I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	I said this so I could keep my promise to your ancestors to give you a land flowing with milk and honey — the land you live in today . ' ” Then I replied , “ Amen , Lord ! May it be so . ”

ID:	2629
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁zerbitzariek ▁gurdi ▁batean ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Jerusalemera ▁eraman ▁zuten , ▁bere ▁hilobian , ▁arbasoen ▁ondoan , ▁lur ▁emateko .
PRED:	They took his chariot and brought his servants to Jerusalem . They took him to the grave in the tomb of his ancestors .
GOLD:	His servants took him by chariot to Jerusalem , where they buried him with his ancestors in the City of David .

ID:	2630
INPUT:	▁Jeftek ▁mezulariak ▁bidali ▁amondarren ▁erregeari
PRED:	Jephthah sent messengers to the Ammonites
GOLD:	Jephthah 's Vow

ID:	2631
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁itsas alde al arre - toki ▁bihurtuko ▁da , artz ainen ▁putzu - ▁eta ▁eskor ta - leku .
PRED:	Your servants will be terrified by the sea , and your servants will be cursed .
GOLD:	The Philistine coast will become a wilderness pasture , a place of shepherd campsand enclosures for sheep and goats .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	▁Neriasen ▁seme ▁Barukek ▁Jeremias ▁profetak ▁agindutako ▁guztia ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁tenplura ▁joan ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁mezua ▁irakurri ▁zuen ▁liburutik .
PRED:	Jeremiah spoke to Baruch and read everything the word of the Lord had commanded Moses . He said ,
GOLD:	Baruch did as Jeremiah told him and read these messages from the Lord to the people at the Temple .

ID:	2633
INPUT:	▁L abe ▁gori ra ▁botako ▁dituzu , ▁zure ▁haserrea ▁agertzean ; bere ▁suminaz ▁irentsiko ▁ditu ▁Jaunak , ▁suaz ▁kiskal iko .
PRED:	Your fierce anger will rise against you , and your fierce anger will burn them with fire .
GOLD:	You will wipe their children from the face of the earth ; they will never have descendants .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	▁Bedeinkatua ▁zu , ▁Jauna ! ▁I rakats ▁niri ▁zeure ▁arauak .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , O Lord , you have obeyed my decrees .
GOLD:	I praise you , O Lord ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	2635
INPUT:	▁Bihotz ▁zuhur rekoak ▁onartzen ▁ditu ▁aginduak , mihi ▁tx oro koa ▁hondamendi rantz ▁abiatzen .
PRED:	A wise person detests words ; a tongue follows its mouth .
GOLD:	The wise are glad to be instructed , but babbling fools fall flat on their faces .

ID:	2636
INPUT:	▁Hirurogeita <unk> iak ▁bidali
PRED:	The Most Important Commandment
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out His Disciples

ID:	2637
INPUT:	▁Ber orien ▁jokabidea ▁eta ▁egintzak ▁ikusi ▁ondoren , ▁gutxiago ▁sufri tuko ▁duzue , ▁konturatuko ▁baitzarete ▁ez ▁nuela ▁hirian ▁egindako ▁guztia ▁arrazoirik ▁gabe ▁egin . ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	When you see what the Lord says , “ If you have seen , you are saying , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have spoken ! '
GOLD:	When you meet them and see their behavior , you will understand that these things are not being done to Israel without cause . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2638
INPUT:	▁moztu ▁egingo ▁diote ▁eskua . ▁Ez ▁izan ▁gupidarik !
PRED:	He will not pity on his head , for he has not mercy on them .
GOLD:	you must cut off her hand . Show her no pity .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jaunak ▁beraien ▁aurretik ▁bota ▁zituen ▁herrien ▁ohiturak ▁eta ▁Israelgo ▁erregeek ▁ezarritako ▁arauak ▁hartu ▁zituzten ▁israeldarrek .
PRED:	For the Lord did not drive them out from the pagan shrines , and he burned them in the land of Israel .
GOLD:	They had followed the practices of the pagan nations the Lord had driven from the land ahead of them , as well as the practices the kings of Israel had introduced .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordan ▁ondoan , ▁Jeriko ▁parean , ▁etxol aturik ▁zeuden ▁Moisesi , ▁Eleazar ▁apaizari ▁eta ▁israeldarren ▁elkarte ▁osoari ▁eraman ▁zieten .
PRED:	So the people of Moab came to the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the camp of the Jordan River , and the entire community of Israel .
GOLD:	they brought them all to Moses and Eleazar the priest , and to the whole community of Israel , which was camped on the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River , across from Jericho .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁saia ▁zaitezte ▁gogoz ▁zeuen ▁fede arekin ▁batera ▁ber tu tea ▁izaten , ▁ber tu te arekin ▁ezagu tza ,
PRED:	Therefore , be patient with your faith , so that you will understand what is right with knowledge .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	2642
INPUT:	▁« Agindu , ▁lege ▁eta ▁erabak iok ▁zuen ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁zuei ▁irakasteko ▁emanak ▁dira , ▁jabetzan ▁hartzera ▁zoazten ▁lurraldean ▁bete ▁ditzazuen .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord your God has commanded you to teach you to teach you to teach you the land you are doing .
GOLD:	“ These are the commands , decrees , and regulations that the Lord your God commanded me to teach you . You must obey them in the land you are about to enter and occupy ,

ID:	2643
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁odol ▁horrekin ▁elkarketa - etxolan ▁dagoen ▁aldare - ertzeko ▁adarrak ▁igurtziko ▁ditu ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁zekorraren ▁gainerako ▁odola ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ▁dagoen ▁erre - oparien ▁aldare - oinean ▁isuriko .
PRED:	The rest of the blood of the Tabernacle on the altar at the altar of the Lord 's presence . He will pour out the rest of the altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle . He will pour out the rest of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar for fragrant incense that stands in the Lord 's presence inside the Tabernacle . He will pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar for burnt offerings at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	▁Bat ▁bakarra ▁epai lea
PRED:	Living by God 's Power
GOLD:	Warning against Judging Others

ID:	2645
INPUT:	▁Itzuli tako ▁guztiak ▁ 42 . 360 ▁ziren .
PRED:	So all the people returned to Judah .
GOLD:	So a total of 42,360 people returned to Judah ,

ID:	2646
INPUT:	▁Bide buru ▁eta ▁plaza ▁guztietan ▁prostituzio - lekuak ▁eraiki ▁zenituen ; ▁baina ▁ez ▁zenuen ▁emagaldu ek ▁ohi ▁bezala ▁jokatu , ▁baztertu ▁egiten ▁baitzen uen ▁lansaria .
PRED:	You have built a pagan shrine and built a prostitute in every square . But you did not forget your prostitution . But you have not abandoned her .
GOLD:	You build your pagan shrines on every street corner and your altars to idols in every square . In fact , you have been worse than a prostitute , so eager for sin that you have not even demanded payment .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	▁Al txatu ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁Moisesek ▁eskua ▁zerurantz ▁eta ▁Egipto ▁osoa ▁ilundu ▁zen ; ▁hain ▁zen ▁itxia ▁ilunpea ,
PRED:	So Moses left the place of Egypt , and all the people of Egypt came down to heaven .
GOLD:	So Moses lifted his hand to the sky , and a deep darkness covered the entire land of Egypt for three days .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁gizonezkoek ▁toki ▁guztietan ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁dezaten ▁nahi ▁dut , ▁zerurantz ▁esku ▁garbiak ▁jas oz , ▁haser rerik ▁eta ▁eztabai darik ▁gabe .
PRED:	“ So I pray to you , and I must pray to you , and it is made of wood and burn incense .
GOLD:	In every place of worship , I want men to pray with holy hands lifted up to God , free from anger and controversy .

ID:	2649
INPUT:	▁« Jose , ▁ubide ▁ondoan lan dare ▁emankor , honen ▁adarrak ▁harresian ▁gora .
PRED:	“ The seeds of the field is as beautiful as the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is the foal of a wild donkey , the foal of a wild donkey at a spring — one of the wild donkeys on the ridge .

ID:	2650
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁erregeen ▁jokabideari ▁baizik : ▁Juda ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendeari ▁sasijainkoak ▁gurtzera ▁eragin ▁diozu , ▁Akaben ▁senitarteko ek ▁bezala . ▁Gainera , ▁zu ▁baino ▁hobeak ▁ziren ▁zeure ▁anaiak , ▁zeure ▁aitaren ▁etxekoak , ▁hilarazi ▁dituzu .
PRED:	For the kings of Israel did not worship the kings of the kings of the kings of Judah . You have not abandoned the daughters of Ahab 's daughters .
GOLD:	Instead , you have been as evil as the kings of Israel . You have led the people of Jerusalem and Judah to worship idols , just as King Ahab did in Israel . And you have even killed your own brothers , men who were better than you .

ID:	2651
INPUT:	▁Abrahamek , ▁Isaak ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁izena ▁Sar arengandik ▁izandako ▁semeari .
PRED:	Abraham placed his name in the name of Isaac , the son of Abraham .
GOLD:	And Abraham named their son Isaac .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	It will put them all to the test.What chance do they have ? says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	▁A ta bak an ▁diru ▁asko ▁zegoela ▁ikustean , ▁erregearen ▁idazkaria ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁nagusia ▁etorri ▁ohi ▁ziren ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁bildu riko ▁dirua ▁zen ba tzera .
PRED:	When they saw the money to the king 's money , the high priest came to the Temple of the Lord , the high priest went to the palace .
GOLD:	Then they gave the money to the construction supervisors , who used it to pay the people working on the Lord 's Temple — the carpenters , the builders ,

ID:	2654
INPUT:	▁Era maten ▁badituzu , ▁zeu ▁borrokatu ▁eta ▁ahalegindu ▁arren , ▁Jainkoak ▁estropezu ▁egin araziko ▁dizu ▁etsaien ▁aurrean ; ▁lagun ▁baitez ake ▁Jainkoak , ▁baina ▁hondatu ▁ere ▁bai .
PRED:	When you come to help them , God will send them into the dust , and he will help you . But God will help you , too , for he will help you .
GOLD:	If you let them go with your troops into battle , you will be defeated by the enemy no matter how well you fight . God will overthrow you , for he has the power to help you or to trip you up . ”

ID:	2655
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁hostoak ▁ihartu riko hari tzaren ▁antzeko izango ▁zarete , urik ▁gabeko ▁bara tzearen ▁pareko .
PRED:	For you are like fruit , and your fruit will be like fruit .
GOLD:	You will be like a great tree with withered leaves , like a garden without water .

ID:	2656
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁harri tzar ▁batzuk ▁eta ▁sartu ▁faraoiaren ▁Tafnes ko ▁jauregi ▁aurrean ▁dagoen ▁buztinezko ▁zor uan ; ▁egin ▁hori ▁judatarren ▁aurrean ,
PRED:	“ Take some of the stones in your presence and put a clay jar in the palace of Pharaoh 's palace in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	2657
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁prestatzen ▁dizkio ▁ibil bideak ▁euri - j as ari , nork ▁egiten ▁bidea ▁tximista ▁eta ▁trumoi ari ,
PRED:	Who gives the rain to the rain ; the lightning lightning flashed through the thunder and thunder .
GOLD:	“ Who created a channel for the torrents of rain ? Who laid out the path for the lightning ?

ID:	2658
INPUT:	▁Gar agar - tal oaren ▁antzeko ▁opilak ▁egin ▁eta ▁jendaurrean ▁giza ▁gor o tzaren ▁gainean ▁erreko ▁dituzu ».
PRED:	You are like gold and gold ; you will burn them on their mouths . ”
GOLD:	Prepare and eat this food as you would barley cakes . While all the people are watching , bake it over a fire using dried human dung as fuel and then eat the bread . ”

ID:	2659
INPUT:	▁Jesusi ▁jende - taldea ▁bildu
PRED:	Parable of Jesus
GOLD:	Crowds Follow Jesus

ID:	2660
INPUT:	▁Ziur tatu ▁zeure ▁ogi bidea , l ortu ▁eta ▁hasi ▁lantzen ▁zeure ▁sor oak , eta ▁gero ▁eraikiko ▁duzu ▁etxea .
PRED:	So you will be cursed , and you will rebuild the house of your house .
GOLD:	Do your planning and prepare your fieldsbefore building your house .

ID:	2661
INPUT:	▁ez ▁dut ▁begi rik ▁itxiko , ▁ez ▁loak ▁hartzen ▁utziko ,
PRED:	I will never wake up to the light , and he will never wake up .
GOLD:	I will not let my eyes sleepnor close my eyelids in slumber

ID:	2662
INPUT:	▁Gu duan ▁harrapatu ▁zuten etik ▁gelditzen ▁zena ▁hauxe ▁zen : ▁ardiak ▁ 675 . 000 ,
PRED:	So all the people had captured him , and there was a shepherd .
GOLD:	The plunder remaining from everything the fighting men had taken totaled 675,000 sheep and goats ,

ID:	2663
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Pilatok :— Zer ▁oker ▁egin ▁du , ▁bada ? Haiek , ▁are ▁eta ▁oihu ▁handiagoz :— Guru tzera ▁hori !
PRED:	Pilate asked , “ What is he done ? ” Pilate asked . “ Crucify him ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why ? ” Pilate demanded . “ What crime has he committed ? ” But the mob roared even louder , “ Crucify him ! ”

ID:	2664
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁galdetuko ▁diote : ▁“ Zer ▁dituk , ▁bada , ▁soinean ▁darama tza an ▁zauri ▁horiek ?” ▁Eta ▁hark ▁erantzungo : ▁“ Neure ▁maitaleen ▁etxean ▁zauritu ▁naute ”».
PRED:	Then they will say , ‘ What sorrow awaits me , ' they say , ‘ What sorrow awaits me ? '
GOLD:	And if someone asks , ‘ Then what about those wounds on your chest ? ' he will say , ‘ I was wounded at my friends ' house ! '

ID:	2665
INPUT:	▁Akazen ▁erregealdia
PRED:	Ahaz Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Ahaz Rules in Judah

ID:	2666
INPUT:	▁bestela , ▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea ▁piztuko ▁da ▁zuen ▁aurka , ▁zerua ▁itxiko ▁du ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁euririk ▁gehiago ▁izango ; ▁lurrak ▁ez ▁du ▁uztarik ▁emango ▁eta ▁berehala ▁desagertuko ▁zarete ▁Jaunak ▁ematen ▁dizuen ▁lurralde ▁eder ▁horretatik .
PRED:	But if the Lord is angry , the heavens will rise up to the heavens and the earth will be filled with no rain , and the earth will be filled with fruit , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If you do , the Lord 's anger will burn against you . He will shut up the sky and hold back the rain , and the ground will fail to produce its harvests . Then you will quickly die in that good land the Lord is giving you .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁esan ▁zuen :— Etor rarazi ▁bizkor ▁Haman , ▁Ester ren ▁nahia ▁bete ▁dadin . Horrela , ▁bada , ▁Esterrek ▁prestatua ▁zien ▁otordura ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Haman ▁eta ▁biak .
PRED:	So the king said to Haman , “ If the king has done to Esther , he went to Esther and prepared a banquet for the banquet . ” So Haman went to Haman and prepared the banquet .
GOLD:	The king turned to his attendants and said , “ Tell Haman to come quickly to a banquet , as Esther has requested. ” So the king and Haman went to Esther 's banquet .

ID:	2668
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁izan ▁zen ▁Moisesek ▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldera , ▁Jeriko tik ▁ekialdera , ▁egin ▁zuen ▁ondare - ban aketa .
PRED:	This is what Moses had happened to the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River .
GOLD:	These are the allotments Moses had made while he was on the plains of Moab , across the Jordan River , east of Jericho .

ID:	2669
INPUT:	▁Simonen ▁amaginarreba ▁ohera tua ▁zegoen ▁suk arrez ; ▁berehala , ▁hartaz ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jesusi .
PRED:	When she was sick with her , they would speak to him .
GOLD:	Now Simon 's mother-in-law was sick in bed with a high fever . They told Jesus about her right away .

ID:	2670
INPUT:	▁Grazia ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jauna ▁maitasun ▁iraunkor rez ▁maite ▁duten ▁guztiekin .
PRED:	May the Lord Jesus love us with your unfailing love .
GOLD:	May God 's grace be eternally upon all who love our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	▁Harri ▁gaineko ▁hazia ▁bezalakoak , ▁hauek ▁dira : ▁mezua ▁entzutean , ▁pozik ▁onartzen ▁dutenak ; ▁baina , ▁sustrairik ▁gabeak ▁izanik , ▁denboraldi ▁batean ▁sinesten ▁dute , ▁baina ▁tentaldi - garaian ▁huts ▁egiten .
PRED:	When the seeds of the seeds saw that they are right , they do n't believe what they believe . But they do n't believe that they believe in a long time .
GOLD:	The seeds on the rocky soil represent those who hear the message and receive it with joy . But since they do n't have deep roots , they believe for a while , then they fall away when they face temptation .

ID:	2672
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁grin ari ▁eutsi ▁ezin ▁badiote , ▁ezkon ▁daitezela ; ▁hobe ▁da ▁ezkontzea ▁sutan ▁egotea ▁baino .
PRED:	But if it is not right , it is better to eat it , it is better than it .
GOLD:	But if they ca n't control themselves , they should go ahead and marry . It 's better to marry than to burn with lust .

ID:	2673
INPUT:	▁Horeb ▁mendiko ▁itunaren ▁oroitzapena
PRED:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed
GOLD:	Ten Commandments for the Covenant Community

ID:	2674
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Neure ▁haserre - sum inean ▁ekaitz - haizea ▁sorraraziko ▁dut , ▁uholde - eu riak ▁eta ▁harri ▁suntsitzailea ▁bidaliko .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy all the nations of the earth . I will send them into the wind .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will sweep away your whitewashed wall with a storm of indignation , with a great flood of anger , and with hailstones of fury .

ID:	2675
INPUT:	▁Tx ori ak , ▁hegoak ▁zabaldurik , h ab ia ▁zaindu ▁ohi ▁duen ▁bezala , halaxe ▁zainduko ▁du ▁Jerusalem Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ; zain duko ▁du ▁eta ▁askatuko , bar katu ▁eta ▁salbatuko ».
PRED:	The wings of the wicked will be cut off as a result , and it will be able to save you . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will hover over Jerusalemand protect it like a bird protecting its nest.He will defend and save the city ; he will pass over it and rescue it . ”

ID:	2676
INPUT:	▁Josafat ▁gero ▁eta ▁indartsuago ▁egiten ▁ari ▁zen . ▁Go tor lekuak ▁eta ▁janari - bil tegi ▁izateko ▁hiriak ▁eraiki ▁zituen ▁Judan .
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat became strong and powerful enough to work in Judah . He built their towns and fortified towns and fortified towns in Judah .
GOLD:	So Jehoshaphat became more and more powerful and built fortresses and storage cities throughout Judah .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	▁Jakinduri az ▁edo ▁indarraz ▁hornitua ▁izanda ▁ere , nork ▁egingo ▁dio ▁aurre ▁eta ▁kalte gabe ▁gelditu ?
PRED:	Who will punish you ? Who will punish you ? Who will stand against you ?
GOLD:	For God is so wise and so mighty.Who has ever challenged him successfully ?

ID:	2678
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Boozek ▁Ruti :— Adizu ! ▁Ez ▁zaitez ▁joan ▁soro ▁honetatik ▁beste ▁inora ▁garagarburuak ▁biltzera . ▁J arrai ▁hemen ▁lanean ▁nire ▁morroiekin .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Do n't go out to the field , ” Boaz told her . “ Do n't go out to the threshing floor . ”
GOLD:	Boaz went over and said to Ruth , “ Listen , my daughter . Stay right here with us when you gather grain ; do n't go to any other fields . Stay right behind the young women working in my field .

ID:	2679
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁lehen - semea ▁munduan ▁sar r araz tean , ▁berriz , ▁honela ▁esaten ▁du : ▁Ado ra ▁dezatela ▁bera ▁Jainkoaren ▁aingeru ▁guztiek .
PRED:	In the first first way , God will enter his oldest son . But if you say to him , ‘ Let the first of God . '
GOLD:	And when he brought his supreme Son into the world , God said , “ Let all of God 's angels worship him . ”

ID:	2680
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁inoren ▁alde ▁jarriko , ez ▁dut ▁inor ▁lausen g atuko .
PRED:	I will not turn to anyone , but no one will answer them .
GOLD:	I wo n't play favoritesor try to flatter anyone .

ID:	2681
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁ondoren , ▁beste ▁erreinu ▁bat ▁sortuko ▁da , ▁zurea ▁baino ▁txik iagoa . ▁Gero ▁hirugarren ▁bat , ▁brontzez koa , ▁mundu ▁osoa ▁menderatuko ▁duena .
PRED:	After this , you will become a ruler over the kingdoms of the earth , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ But after your kingdom comes to an end , another kingdom , inferior to yours , will rise to take your place . After that kingdom has fallen , yet a third kingdom , represented by bronze , will rise to rule the world .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	▁Eliseok , ▁itzulirik , ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁madarikatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean . ▁Orduan , ▁bi ▁hartz ek ▁oihan etik ▁atera ▁eta ▁mutiko ▁haietarik ▁berrogeita ▁bi ▁txikitu rik ▁utzi ▁zituzten .
PRED:	When Elisha heard the voice of the Lord and told them , “ The boy is left in the name of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Elisha turned around and looked at them , and he cursed them in the name of the Lord . Then two bears came out of the woods and mauled forty-two of them .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁erantzun :— Haur ra ▁bizi ▁zen ▁bitartean , ▁berarengatik ▁egiten ▁nuen ▁barau ▁eta ▁negar . ▁Neure ▁baitan ▁nioen : ▁« Ea ▁errukitzen ▁zaidan ▁Jauna ▁eta ▁bizirik ▁gelditzen ▁den ▁haurra ».
PRED:	David replied , “ Get up , ” David replied . “ Get up and weep , and weep for me . I am the Lord , the child who is alive ! ”
GOLD:	David replied , “ I fasted and wept while the child was alive , for I said , ‘ Perhaps the Lord will be gracious to me and let the child live . '

ID:	2684
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁ene , ▁desegin a ▁da ▁Moab ! ▁Egin ▁intziri ! ▁Lots aren ▁lotsaz ▁bizkarra ▁eman ▁du ! ▁Auzoko en ▁izu ▁eta ▁iseka - gai ▁bihurtu ▁da .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits me , O Lord , O God , ” says the Lord. “ O Lord , O God , all your backs are crushed . ”
GOLD:	How it is shattered ! Hear the wailing ! See the shame of Moab ! It has become an object of ridicule , an example of ruin to all its neighbors . ”

ID:	2685
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herriak ▁berriro ▁desobedi tu
PRED:	Hope for Israel
GOLD:	The Lord Punishes the Israelites

ID:	2686
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁inguruko ▁guztiei ▁haserre ▁begiratu rik ▁eta ▁beraien ▁s etak eriaz ▁min durik , ▁honela ▁esan ▁zion ▁gizonari :— Luzatu ▁beso ▁hori . Hark ▁luzatu , ▁eta ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus looked up and looked up and saw everything he had done , and he said to him , “ Let the man come to the man ! ”
GOLD:	He looked around at them angrily and was deeply saddened by their hard hearts . Then he said to the man , “ Hold out your hand. ” So the man held out his hand , and it was restored !

ID:	2687
INPUT:	▁Gizakiak ▁ez ▁du ▁jakinduriaren ▁berririk
PRED:	People can not find understanding
GOLD:	Job Speaks of Wisdom and Understanding

ID:	2688
INPUT:	▁Bera ▁ere ▁neke etan ▁prob atua ▁izan ▁delako , ▁gauza ▁da ▁orain ▁prob aldian ▁dauden ei ▁laguntzeko .
PRED:	And so he can know that God has been sent , and he has come to others .
GOLD:	Since he himself has gone through suffering and testing , he is able to help us when we are being tested .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁garai ▁batean ▁ilunpetan ▁bizi ▁zineten ; ▁orain , ▁aldiz , ▁argitan ▁bizi ▁zarete , ▁Jaunarekin ▁bat ▁eginik . ▁Jok atu , ▁beraz , ▁argiaren ▁partaide ▁zaretenez ;
PRED:	You lived in the darkness , while you live in the darkness , you live in the light of the Lord . So you are living in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	For once you were full of darkness , but now you have light from the Lord . So live as people of light !

ID:	2690
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁beteko ▁duzue ▁santutegiko ▁eta ▁aldareko ▁zerbitzu ▁sakratua ; ▁honela , ▁ez ▁da ▁nire ▁haserrea ▁israeldarren ▁aurka ▁piztuko .
PRED:	You will break the sanctuary of the sanctuary , and you will break my anger against me .
GOLD:	“ You yourselves must perform the sacred duties inside the sanctuary and at the altar . If you follow these instructions , the Lord 's anger will never again blaze against the people of Israel .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	▁Davidena . ▁Abimeleken ▁aurrean ▁ero arena ▁egin ▁zuelarik , ▁hark ▁David ▁bota ▁eta ▁honek ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuen ekoa ▁.
PRED:	Oh , my lord the king , the king of Israel , and he rescued me .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord at all times.I will constantly speak his praises .

ID:	2692
INPUT:	▁ F ariseu ▁eta ▁saduze arrak ▁mirarizko ▁seinale ▁eske
PRED:	Parable of the Pharisees
GOLD:	Leaders Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	2693
INPUT:	▁Aurp egia ▁uretan ▁is latzen ▁da , gizakia ▁gizakiaren ▁bihotzean .
PRED:	Their hearts are filled with violence , and their hearts are filled with violence .
GOLD:	As a face is reflected in water , so the heart reflects the real person .

ID:	2694
INPUT:	▁Buka ▁ezazu ▁Learen ▁eztei - as tea ▁eta , ▁gero , ▁Rakel ▁ere ▁emango ▁dizut ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁lanaren ▁truke .
PRED:	She will ask her for her for her husband , for she will give her seven years .
GOLD:	“ But wait until the bridal week is over ; then we 'll give you Rachel , too — provided you promise to work another seven years for me . ”

ID:	2695
INPUT:	▁horregatik ▁piztu ▁zen ▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea ▁herrialde ▁horren ▁kontra , ▁horregatik ▁bidali ▁zizkion ▁liburu ▁honetan ▁idatzitako ▁madarikazio ▁guztiak .
PRED:	So the anger of the Lord came upon his anger , and he sent everyone on this scroll .
GOLD:	Instead , they turned away to serve and worship gods they had not known before , gods that were not from the Lord .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	▁Deabru ei ▁eskaini ▁zizkieten sakrifizioak , ez agutzen ▁ez ▁zituzten ▁sasijainkoei , ar es tian ▁etorritako ▁jainko ▁berri ei , ar baso ek ▁inoiz ▁gurtu ▁ez ▁zituzten ei .
PRED:	That 's why they offered sacrifices to idols . They were not offered sacrifices to those who had been offered to idols . They did n't worship idols or worship idols .
GOLD:	They offered sacrifices to demons , which are not God , to gods they had not known before , to new gods only recently arrived , to gods their ancestors had never feared .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	▁Itzul ▁belarria ▁niregana , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁entzun . ▁Zab al ▁begiak , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁ikusi . ▁Entzun ▁nolako ▁irainak ▁zuzendu ▁dizkizun ▁Senakeribek ▁zuri , ▁Jainko ▁bizi ▁horri .
PRED:	Come and listen to me , Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , and he heard that you have seen what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	2698
INPUT:	▁Josue ▁eta ▁ezpata dun ▁gizona
PRED:	The True Family of Jeshua
GOLD:	The Lord 's Commander Confronts Joshua

ID:	2699
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Zuetako ▁zeinek , ▁ardi ▁bakarra ▁eduki ▁eta ▁larunbatez ▁zulora ▁erortzen ▁bazaio , ▁ez ▁du ▁hartu ▁eta ▁aterako ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do you realize that you are not right , ” he asked . “ If you do n't turn away on the Sabbath , do n't even touch the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	And he answered , “ If you had a sheep that fell into a well on the Sabbath , would n't you work to pull it out ? Of course you would .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	▁Jesusen ▁genealo gia
PRED:	The Authority of Jesus
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Jesus the Messiah

ID:	2701
INPUT:	▁leinu ▁bakoitzetik ▁familiaburu ▁bat ▁lagun ▁duzu elarik .
PRED:	You were one of the tribe of Levi in the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	and you will be assisted by one family leader from each tribe .

ID:	2702
INPUT:	▁Zintzoaren ▁bidea ▁zuzena ▁da : zuk ▁egiten ▁duzu , ▁Jauna , zintz oaren ▁bidea ▁zuzen .
PRED:	The godly walk through the path of the godly , but the godly are the godly .
GOLD:	But for those who are righteous , the way is not steep and rough.You are a God who does what is right , and you smooth out the path ahead of them .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	▁Zel atari ek ▁eraso ▁zioten ▁oldar ka ▁Gib eari , ▁zabaldu ▁ziren ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁jende ▁guztia ▁hil ▁zuten ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	When the watchman heard that the watchman had gathered in the city , they sent everyone out to kill everyone .
GOLD:	Then those who were hiding rushed in from all sides and killed everyone in the town .

ID:	2704
INPUT:	▁Ananias ▁izeneko ▁gizon ▁batek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁emazte ▁S af i rak ▁soro ▁bat ▁saldu ▁zuten .
PRED:	Next a man named Ananias , who lived another man named Ananias .
GOLD:	But there was a certain man named Ananias who , with his wife , Sapphira , sold some property .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	▁Herrialde ▁horretako ▁igarle ▁batek , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁hauxe ▁esan ▁zuen : K re tarrak ▁beti ▁gezurti , piz tia ▁txar ▁eta ▁trip azain ▁alfer .
PRED:	The people of Judah said to the Church in the streets , “ Look , you are living among you , and you are detestable to her .
GOLD:	Even one of their own men , a prophet from Crete , has said about them , “ The people of Crete are all liars , cruel animals , and lazy gluttons . ”

ID:	2706
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁inolako ▁bide ▁tx arretatik ▁abiatzen , zure ▁hitza ▁gorde tzearren .
PRED:	Do not forget your word , for I have refused to obey your word .
GOLD:	I have refused to walk on any evil path , so that I may remain obedient to your word .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	▁Josafat , ▁Par u ahen ▁semea , ▁Isakarren ;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat son of Ner
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat son of Paruah , in Issachar .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁lurralde ▁honetan gizon ▁leial ik ▁gelditzen , ezta ▁giz artean ▁gizon ▁zuzen ik ▁ere : denak ▁odol - e garriz ▁daude , sar ea ▁jartzen ▁dio ▁batak ▁besteari ;
PRED:	It is not a foreigner in this land , so he can not stop at the place of fire . They must not stop at the place of fire .
GOLD:	The godly people have all disappeared ; not one honest person is left on the earth.They are all murderers , setting traps even for their own brothers .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	▁« On artu ▁eta ▁bete ▁ematen ▁dizkizuedan ▁agindu ▁guztiok , ▁beti ▁zoriontsu ▁izan ▁zaitezten , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁ondorengoak , ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ▁on ▁eta ▁zuzen ▁iruditzen ▁zaiona ▁egiteagatik .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey the commands I am giving you the Lord your God , and all you are doing good to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Be careful to obey all my commands , so that all will go well with you and your children after you , because you will be doing what is good and pleasing to the Lord your God .

ID:	2710
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁esan ▁zion :— Baina ▁emadazu ▁honako ▁hau : ▁bi ▁hilabetez ▁men diz ▁mendi ▁neure ▁lagunekin ▁negarrez ▁ibiltzea , ▁ezkondu ▁baino ▁lehen ▁hil ▁behar ▁dudalako .
PRED:	But he said to him , “ But you must not be with me , for I would not die in the hill country . ”
GOLD:	But first let me do this one thing : Let me go up and roam in the hills and weep with my friends for two months , because I will die a virgin . ”

ID:	2711
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁sen arrek ▁ere ▁beren ▁gorputza ▁bezalaxe ▁maitatu ▁behar ▁dituzte ▁emazteak . ▁Emaztea ▁maite ▁duenak ▁bere ▁burua ▁maite ▁du .
PRED:	And those who love their husband must love their husband , just as she loves his wife .
GOLD:	In the same way , husbands ought to love their wives as they love their own bodies . For a man who loves his wife actually shows love for himself .

ID:	2712
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁berak ▁jo ▁zituen , ▁kanpalekutik ▁erabat ▁desagerrarazi ▁arte .
PRED:	He removed all the camp in the camp until the Lord has destroyed them .
GOLD:	The Lord struck them down until they had all been eliminated from the community .

ID:	2713
INPUT:	▁zuhur tzi ari ▁kasu ▁egineta ▁zentzu ▁onari ▁jaramon ▁egiten ▁badiozu ,
PRED:	Listen to the wise person ; listen to understanding .
GOLD:	Tune your ears to wisdom , and concentrate on understanding .

ID:	2714
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁semeek , ▁gizakien ▁alabak ▁ederrak ▁zirela ▁ikusirik , ▁haien ▁artetik ▁hautatu ▁eta ▁emaztetzat ▁hartu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	When the sons of God saw them , they were given to the daughters of God .
GOLD:	The sons of God saw the beautiful women and took any they wanted as their wives .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	▁Kristo ▁Jesusengan ▁sorkari ▁berri
PRED:	Christ Is Christ
GOLD:	New Bodies

ID:	2716
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁kenduko ▁dio ▁bere ▁larru - jantzia , zu la ezineko ▁os kol ▁biko itza ▁bezalakoa ▁dena ?
PRED:	Who will turn away from human society ? Who else else else else with its lust ?
GOLD:	Can you make it a pet like a bird , or give it to your little girls to play with ?

ID:	2717
INPUT:	▁eta ▁norbaitek , ▁txiki ▁nahiz ▁handi , ▁gizaseme ▁nahiz ▁emakume , ▁Jaunarengana , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoarengana , ▁jotzen ▁ez ▁bazuen , ▁hil ▁egingo ▁zutela .
PRED:	If you are a small man or a great woman , a woman , he would not kill the Lord , he would not kill him .
GOLD:	They agreed that anyone who refused to seek the Lord , the God of Israel , would be put to death — whether young or old , man or woman .

ID:	2718
INPUT:	▁Susa ▁hirian ▁bostehun ▁gizaseme ▁hil ▁eta ▁garbitu ▁zituzten ,
PRED:	The first of the family of Levi died , including the fortress of Susa .
GOLD:	In the fortress of Susa itself , the Jews killed 500 men .

ID:	2719
INPUT:	▁Biho tza ▁kez kaz ▁betea ▁izan ▁arren , zeure ▁kontsol amendu az ▁gozatzen ▁nauzu .
PRED:	My heart is filled with joy , but your unfailing love is filled with joy .
GOLD:	When doubts filled my mind , your comfort gave me renewed hope and cheer .

ID:	2720
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁emakumea ▁abere ▁batekin ▁elkar ▁ba tzen ▁bada , ▁heriotzara ▁emango ▁dituzte ▁emakumea ▁eta ▁aberea . ▁Ber ena ▁izango ▁dute ▁heriotzaren ▁errua .
PRED:	“ If a woman is married to the woman , the woman must be put to death , the woman must be put to death . The woman must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a woman presents herself to a male animal to have intercourse with it , she and the animal must both be put to death . You must kill both , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	▁Harekin ▁ibil tzeak ▁herio tzarantz ▁eramaten ▁zaitu , Hildakoen ▁Egoitzara ▁doaz ▁haren ▁urratsak .
PRED:	But if he goes out into the grave , he would n't let him die .
GOLD:	Her feet go down to death ; her steps lead straight to the grave .

ID:	2722
INPUT:	▁« Zuek ▁niregana ▁etorri ▁eta ▁esan ▁zenidaten : ▁Bidal ▁ditzagun ▁aurretik ▁zenbait ▁gizon ▁lurraldea ▁ikertzera , ▁zein ▁bide tatik ▁joan ▁eta ▁zein ▁hiri tara ▁sartu ▁jakin araz ▁diez agu ten .
PRED:	“ You came to me to me , ” he said . “ If you go out to me , let us go out to the town where you are going to go . ”
GOLD:	“ But you all came to me and said , ‘ First , let 's send out scouts to explore the land for us . They will advise us on the best route to take and which towns we should enter . '

ID:	2723
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁igo ▁Jaunaren ▁mendira ? Nor ▁egon ▁hark ▁sagaraturiko ▁tokian ?
PRED:	Who is the Lord ? Who is my place ? Who is my place ? ”
GOLD:	Who may climb the mountain of the Lord ? Who may stand in his holy place ?

ID:	2724
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁horren ▁ondoren , ▁errukitu ▁egingo ▁natzai e , ▁eta ▁herri ▁bakoitza , ▁nor ▁bere ▁ondar era ▁eta ▁lurraldera ▁itzuliko ▁dut .
PRED:	But after this way , I will return to his own land . I will return to their own land .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	2725
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁filistearrek ▁galdetu ▁zuten :— Nork ▁egin ▁du ▁hori ? Erantzun ▁zieten :— Samsonek , ▁ tim n arraren ▁su h iak , ▁zeren ▁eta ▁hark ▁Samsonen ▁emaztea ▁hartu ▁eta ▁beraren ▁lagunari ▁eman ▁baitio . Orduan , ▁filistearrek ▁joan ▁eta ▁erre ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁aita - alabak .
PRED:	So the Philistines asked him , “ Who is this man ? ” So the Philistines asked . “ He has taken his father and his wife , ” the Philistines and his father and mother .
GOLD:	“ Who did this ? ” the Philistines demanded. “ Samson , ” was the reply , “ because his father-in-law from Timnah gave Samson 's wife to be married to his best man. ” So the Philistines went and got the woman and her father and burned them to death .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	▁Absalomek , ▁bere ▁anaiak , ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Am non ▁egon ▁al ▁dun ▁hi rekin ? ▁Isil ▁hadi , ▁ene ▁arreba , ▁heure ▁anaia ▁dun ▁eta . ▁Ez ▁kezkatu ▁horregatik . T amar , ▁hala ▁ere , ▁atsekabetua ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Absalomen ▁etxean .
PRED:	So Absalom asked his brothers , “ Why do you have you done ? ” So Absalom asked . “ You have n't done this to us , my brother , and we have n't been here ! ” So Absalom went back to Absalom 's home .
GOLD:	Her brother Absalom saw her and asked , “ Is it true that Amnon has been with you ? Well , my sister , keep quiet for now , since he 's your brother . Do n't you worry about it. ” So Tamar lived as a desolate woman in her brother Absalom 's house .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁hau , ▁zuek , behar tsuak ▁zapaldu eta ▁jende ▁errukarri ahon datzen ▁duzuenok .
PRED:	Listen to those who are wise , O God , and those who are wise .
GOLD:	Listen to this , you who rob the poorand trample down the needy !

ID:	2728
INPUT:	▁lurrean ▁arrastaka ▁dabiltzan ▁narrasti - ▁nahiz ▁lur ▁azpiko ▁uretan ▁dabiltzan ▁arrain - irudiak .
PRED:	along the ground and birds in the sky , birds , reptiles , and birds .
GOLD:	a small animal that scurries along the ground , or a fish in the deepest sea .

ID:	2729
INPUT:	▁I bar ▁lehorra ▁igarotzean , ▁iturburu tik ▁edaten ▁dute : lehen ▁euri ek ▁ur - b egiz ▁baitute ▁estaltzen .
PRED:	When the waters come out from the spring , the water flowing with water .
GOLD:	They will continue to grow stronger , and each of them will appear before God in Jerusalem .

ID:	2730
INPUT:	▁mahaia ▁bere ▁tresnekin , ▁argimutila ▁bere ▁tresnekin , ▁intsentsu - aldarea ,
PRED:	the table table ; its utensils ; its utensils ; its utensils ; all its utensils ;
GOLD:	the table and all its utensils , the lampstand and all its accessories , the incense altar ,

ID:	2731
INPUT:	▁Gertatua ▁ikusi ▁zutenek ▁deabruduna ▁nola ▁sendatua ▁izan ▁zen ▁kontatu ▁zioten ▁jendeari .
PRED:	When the crowd heard what had happened , they told everyone about the crowd .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	▁Israelen ▁begira leak ▁itsu ▁daude , ez ▁da ▁inor ▁ezer taz ▁ohartzen . Z aun karik ▁egin ▁ezin ▁duten tx akur ▁mu tuak ▁dira ; hor ▁daude ▁etzanda , ▁ametsetan , beti ▁lo gura .
PRED:	The people of Israel are blind to see that no one can stand against you . They will not be able to fall into a dream , so they can not be able to fall into the sea .
GOLD:	For the leaders of my people — the Lord 's watchmen , his shepherds — are blind and ignorant.They are like silent watchdogsthat give no warning when danger comes.They love to lie around , sleeping and dreaming .

ID:	2733
INPUT:	▁G reko - hizk un tzako ▁judu ekin ▁ere ▁hizketan ▁eta ▁eztabaidan ▁jarduten ▁zuen ; ▁baina ▁haiek ▁Saulo ▁hiltzeko ▁asmotan ▁zebiltzan .
PRED:	Instead , the Jewish leaders and the Jews met with the Jews . But Saul 's men were trying to kill him .
GOLD:	He debated with some Greek-speaking Jews , but they tried to murder him .

ID:	2734
INPUT:	▁Saia ▁zaitezte ▁guztiekin ▁bakean ▁bizitzen , ▁eta ▁izan ▁santu ; ▁bestela , ▁ez ▁baitu ▁inork ▁Jauna ▁ikusiko .
PRED:	Be careful to live in peace and live in peace , for no one will see the Lord .
GOLD:	Work at living in peace with everyone , and work at living a holy life , for those who are not holy will not see the Lord .

ID:	2735
INPUT:	▁Samuelek ▁Sauli :— Aski ▁da ! ▁Gaur ▁gauean ▁Jaunak ▁adierazi ▁didana ▁jakinarazi ▁behar ▁dizut . Eta ▁Saulek :— Mintza ▁zaitez .
PRED:	So Samuel said to Saul , “ That is what the Lord says : I will tell you what the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ Stop ! Listen to what the Lord told me last night ! ” “ What did he tell you ? ” Saul asked .

ID:	2736
INPUT:	▁Hel io pol is ▁eta ▁B u bas <unk> eko ▁gazteak ▁gerran ▁hilko ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁emakumeak ▁gatibu ▁eramango .
PRED:	They will die in the fields , and the young women will be killed by the sword .
GOLD:	The young men of Heliopolis and Bubastis will die in battle , and the women will be taken away as slaves .

ID:	2737
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁barruko ▁hala ▁kanpoko ▁hormetan , ▁inguru ▁guztian , ▁hegaldun ▁izaki - irudiak , ▁palmondo ▁eta ▁lore - sor ten ▁irudiak ▁zizelkatu ▁zituen .
PRED:	Then it looked at the entrance of the Temple , and it looked at the center of the cherubim . There were four cherubim and palm trees .
GOLD:	He decorated all the walls of the inner sanctuary and the main room with carvings of cherubim , palm trees , and open flowers .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁erabakiak ▁irakasten ▁dizkiote Israel i , ▁zure ▁legea ▁Jakoben ▁herriari ; intsentsua ▁aurkez ten ▁dute zure ▁aurrean , erre - opariak ▁zure ▁aldarean .
PRED:	They teach your instructions to the people of Israel , for they are your instructions . They are your special gifts on your altar .
GOLD:	They teach your regulations to Jacob ; they give your instructions to Israel.They present incense before youand offer whole burnt offerings on the altar .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	▁Beldur - ikarak ▁joko ▁ditu , eta ▁hain ▁estua ▁eta ▁larri aizango ▁da ▁egoera , ezen ▁erdiminetan ▁dagoen emakumea ▁bezalab ih urri tuko ▁baitira . Harri ▁eta ▁zur ▁eginik begira tuko ▁diote ▁elkarri , aurpegi ak ▁lotsaz ▁gorri ▁dituztela .
PRED:	They will lie down in terror , and there will be no more valuable than gold . They will be filled with gold , and their backs will be filled with gold .
GOLD:	and people are terrified.Pangs of anguish grip them , like those of a woman in labor.They look helplessly at one another , their faces aflame with fear .

ID:	2740
INPUT:	▁Alabaina , ene ▁herri ▁hori , zuri ▁bidea ▁zabaltzeko nik ▁suntsitu ▁nuen ▁amortar ra , z ed roa ▁bezain ▁tan tai eta ▁ar tea ▁bezain ▁sendo ▁zena ; bota ▁nizkion ▁fruituak ▁gainetik , eta ▁atera ▁sustraiak ▁azpitik .
PRED:	But I will destroy you , my people , and I will be destroyed , and I will destroy the nations .
GOLD:	“ But as my people watched , I destroyed the Amorites , though they were as tall as cedarsand as strong as oaks.I destroyed the fruit on their branchesand dug out their roots .

ID:	2741
INPUT:	▁ F ariseu ▁eta ▁lege - maisuek , ▁ordea , ▁huts ▁eragin ▁zioten ▁Jainkoak ▁beraien tzat ▁zeukan ▁asmo ari , ▁ez ▁baitzuten ▁Joanen ▁bataioa ▁hartu .
PRED:	But the Pharisees and teachers of religious law were baptized by the teachers of religious law . But God did n't believe the law of John .
GOLD:	But the Pharisees and experts in religious law rejected God 's plan for them , for they had refused John 's baptism .

ID:	2742
INPUT:	▁ F ilistearrek ▁Geb an ▁zuten ▁gudari - taldea ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jonatanek , ▁eta ▁jakin ▁zuten ▁hori ▁filistearrek . ▁Saulek , ▁orduan , ▁adarrak ▁joarazi ▁zituen ▁lurralde ▁osoan , ▁esanez : ▁« Adi , ▁hebre arrak !»
PRED:	When the Philistines heard that the Philistines had killed him , they killed the Philistines and killed the Philistines . When they heard that the Philistines had been killed , they said , “ The Philistines ! ”
GOLD:	Soon after this , Jonathan attacked and defeated the garrison of Philistines at Geba . The news spread quickly among the Philistines . So Saul blew the ram 's horn throughout the land , saying , “ Hebrews , hear this ! Rise up in revolt ! ”

ID:	2743
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁gudariek ▁buruzagien ▁eta ▁batzarraren ▁esku ▁utzi ▁zituzten ▁presoak ▁eta ▁harrapakinak .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel left the town and captured the men of Israel .
GOLD:	So the warriors released the prisoners and handed over the plunder in the sight of the leaders and all the people .

ID:	2744
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Sih onek ▁ez ▁zion ▁Israel ▁herriari ▁lurraldea ▁zehar katzen ▁utzi ; ▁aitzitik , ▁bere ▁herria ▁bildu ▁eta ▁bidera ▁atera ▁zitzaion ▁basamortuan ▁eta , ▁Jah tzara ▁etorri rik , ▁eraso ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	But King Sihon of Israel did not go through the land of King Sihon of Israel . He went out to meet his people and attacked his people in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But King Sihon refused to let them cross his territory . Instead , he mobilized his entire army and attacked Israel in the wilderness , engaging them in battle at Jahaz .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Jauna , ▁Jainko ▁handia , ▁goretsi ▁zuen ▁Esdras ek , ▁eta ▁herriak ▁« Amen ! ▁Amen !» ▁erantzun ▁zuen , ▁eskuak ▁jasorik ; ▁ondoren , ▁makurtu ▁eta ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁ziren ▁Jauna ▁gurtzeko .
PRED:	Then the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the people of Jerusalem , said to him , “ Amen . Amen , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	Then Ezra praised the Lord , the great God , and all the people chanted , “ Amen ! Amen ! ” as they lifted their hands . Then they bowed down and worshiped the Lord with their faces to the ground .

ID:	2746
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁otoi , ▁entzun ▁zuk ▁ere ▁mirabe ▁honen ▁hitza . ▁Ogi - puska ▁bat ▁ekarriko ▁dizut ; ▁jan ▁ezazu , ▁indarrak ▁hartzeko ▁eta ▁bideari ▁ekin ▁ahal ▁izateko .
PRED:	Now I have heard this message to you , too , and I have a gift to you . Instead , I will bring you back to your home .
GOLD:	Now do what I say , and let me give you a little something to eat so you can regain your strength for the trip back . ”

ID:	2747
INPUT:	▁Estal ▁beza , ▁beraz , ▁soinekoak ▁bezala , l ot ▁beza ▁etengabe ▁gerri koak ▁bezala !
PRED:	Let the linen linen linen linen linen clothing , just as he returns .
GOLD:	Now may his curses return and cling to him like clothing ; may they be tied around him like a belt . ”

ID:	2748
INPUT:	▁Zorionekoak , ▁haren ▁xedapenak ▁betez , bihotz - bihotzez ▁harengana ▁jotzen ▁dutenak !
PRED:	All right , obey his commandments , and all who obey him .
GOLD:	Joyful are those who obey his lawsand search for him with all their hearts .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁bidali ▁ninduen ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendeari ▁bere ▁mezu ▁hau ▁hots ▁egitera :« Gogoan ▁dut , ▁Israel , nola ▁maite ▁ninduzun ▁gazte ▁zinen ean , gogoan ▁zure ▁ezkon gai etako maite - laztan a : nola ▁ibili ▁zinen ▁nire ▁ondoren basamortuan , ▁erein ▁gabeko ▁lurrean .
PRED:	This is what the Lord sent me to Jerusalem : “ This is what the Lord says : I loved you , O Israel , I loved you , but I loved you .
GOLD:	The Lord gave me another message . He said ,

ID:	2750
INPUT:	▁L iz tor tzarrak ▁bidaliko ▁ditu ▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁haien ▁kontra , ▁ezkutuan ▁gordeta ▁bizirik ▁gelditutako ▁azkenak ▁ere ▁garbitu ▁arte .
PRED:	The Lord will send all the good deeds of the earth , and he will save them from the end of judgment .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	2751
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁guda - gurdia ▁bi ratu ▁eta ▁ihesi ▁abiatu ▁zen ▁Joram , ▁esanez :— Tra izioa , ▁Akazias !
PRED:	When the chariot chariot chariot chariot chariot and ran to the chariot of King Joram , he said , “ It is how much to be ? ”
GOLD:	Then King Joram turned the horses around and fled , shouting to King Ahaziah , “ Treason , Ahaziah ! ”

ID:	2752
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁eguzkia ez ▁da ▁behin ▁ere ▁jaitsiko , ezta ▁zure ▁ilargia ▁gordeko ▁ere , ni , ▁Jauna , ▁izango ▁bainau zuzeure ▁argi ▁betiko , eta ▁amai tuak ▁izango ▁dirazure ▁negar - egunak .
PRED:	For the sun will come to you ; no more will come to you , O Lord , for your unfailing love will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Your sun will never set ; your moon will not go down.For the Lord will be your everlasting light.Your days of mourning will come to an end .

ID:	2753
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁nuen ▁hartu ▁janari ▁gox orik , ▁ez ▁haragirik , ▁ez ▁ardorik , ▁eta ▁ez ▁nuen ▁erabili ▁usain ▁gozoko ▁lurrin ik ▁ere , ▁hiru ▁as teak ▁amaitu ▁arte .
PRED:	So I did not forget the meat of the meat that was not offered to you . I was not with the spices , the spices of spices , and the spices of spices .
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	2754
INPUT:	▁Seigarren ▁egunean ▁bi ▁halako ▁bildu ▁ohi ▁zuten , ▁bederatzi ▁bat ▁litro ▁lagun ▁bakoitzeko ; ▁orduan , ▁elkarte - arduradunak ▁horren ▁berri ▁ematera ▁joan ▁zitzaizkion ▁Moisesi .
PRED:	On the eighth day the harvest of the harvest was harvested for seven years . Then they went to the whole community . Then they went to Moses and went to Moses .
GOLD:	On the sixth day , they gathered twice as much as usual — four quarts for each person instead of two . Then all the leaders of the community came and asked Moses for an explanation .

ID:	2755
INPUT:	▁Ho dei ▁beltz - ilun ak ▁haren ▁inguruan , justizia ▁eta ▁zuzenbidea ▁haren ▁tronu - oin arri .
PRED:	Listen to the sound of the darkness ; his throne proclaim his throne .
GOLD:	Dark clouds surround him.Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne .

ID:	2756
INPUT:	▁Judaren ▁eta ▁Israelen ▁zoria ▁aldatuko ▁dut , ▁eta ▁behin olako ▁egoeran ▁ezarriko ▁ditut ▁berriro ;
PRED:	I will restore the fortunes of Israel , and I will restore the fortunes of Judah .
GOLD:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel and rebuild their towns .

ID:	2757
INPUT:	▁« Orduan , ▁herrien ▁ezpainak garbi ▁bihurtuko ▁ditut , denek ▁niri , ▁Jaun ▁honi , dei ▁egin ▁diezadaten eta ▁denek ▁bat ▁eginik zer b itza ▁nazaten .
PRED:	“ Then I will punish you with good deeds , and I will make you angry with your heart , and I will make you angry with your actions .
GOLD:	“ Then I will purify the speech of all people , so that everyone can worship the Lord together .

ID:	2758
INPUT:	▁Etx egin tzan ▁ari ▁direnen ▁izenak ▁eman ▁behar ▁dizki guz ue ».
PRED:	Give your names to all the names of the prophets to tell you what you have done . ”
GOLD:	They also asked for the names of all the men working on the Temple .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	▁« Zein ▁alde tatik ▁barre iatzen ▁da ▁argia ? Nondik ▁sartzen ▁ekialdeko ▁haizea ▁lurrera ?
PRED:	“ Where is the light of the wicked ? Where is the wind ? Who is the wind ?
GOLD:	Where is the path to the source of light ? Where is the home of the east wind ?

ID:	2760
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁erregeak , ▁buruzagiek ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendeak , ▁batzar turik , ▁Pazkoa ▁bigarren ▁hilabetean ▁ospa tzea ▁erabakia ▁zuten .
PRED:	For the king of Jerusalem , the priests and Jerusalem , the people of Jerusalem , and the people of Jerusalem had been dedicated to the Lord .
GOLD:	The king , his officials , and all the community of Jerusalem decided to celebrate Passover a month later than usual .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	▁Niri , ▁berriz , ▁egia ▁dio dalako , ▁ez ▁didazue ▁sinesten .
PRED:	But I am speaking to you , and I believe you .
GOLD:	So when I tell the truth , you just naturally do n't believe me !

ID:	2762
INPUT:	▁Nire tzat ▁zatirik ▁hoberena ▁bereiz iz ▁gero , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁errudun ▁bihurtuko , ▁ez ▁dituzue ▁israeldarren ▁opari ▁sakratuak ▁profan atuko , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zarete ▁hilko ».
PRED:	You must not defile the gifts of the Lord , for you are not guilty of the Lord your God . You will not die with the sacred offerings and the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	You will not be considered guilty for accepting the Lord 's tithes if you give the best portion to the priests . But be careful not to treat the holy gifts of the people of Israel as though they were common . If you do , you will die . ”

ID:	2763
INPUT:	▁orain ▁poztu ▁egiten ▁naiz ; ▁ez , ▁noski , ▁eman ▁nizuen ▁nahigabe agatik , ▁nahigabe ▁horrek ▁zeuen ▁jarrera ▁alda tzera ▁eraman ▁zintuzte lako ▁baizik . ▁Zuen ▁nahigabea ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁bezalakoa ▁izan ▁zen ; ▁beraz , ▁ez ▁nizuen ▁inolako ▁kalterik ▁egin .
PRED:	So I was glad when I was glad , I gave you this message to you . Instead , I gave you this message to you . Instead , I would not forget you .
GOLD:	Now I am glad I sent it , not because it hurt you , but because the pain caused you to repent and change your ways . It was the kind of sorrow God wants his people to have , so you were not harmed by us in any way .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁senarrari ▁desleial ▁izan ▁baz atzaizki o ▁eta , ▁zeurea ▁ez ▁den ▁beste ▁gizon ▁batekin ▁harremanak ▁izanik , ▁desohoratu ▁bazara
PRED:	But if we have sexual intercourse with her husband , let her marry her .
GOLD:	But if you have gone astray by being unfaithful to your husband , and have defiled yourself by having sex with another man — '

ID:	2765
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Hiri tik ▁atera ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁eskuak ▁altxatuko ▁dizkiot ▁Jaunari ▁otoitz ▁egiteko . ▁Orduan ▁ater tuko ▁du ▁kazkabar - erauntsia ▁eta ▁ez ▁da ▁gehiago ▁trumo irik ▁izango , ▁jakin ▁dezazun ▁Jaunaren a ▁dela ▁mundua .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ I will bring you out of the city and pray to the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Moses replied . “ As soon as I leave the city , I will lift my hands and pray to the Lord . Then the thunder and hail will stop , and you will know that the earth belongs to the Lord .

ID:	2766
INPUT:	▁— Zoaz ▁Hilkias ▁apaiz ▁nagusiagana . ▁Zenbatu ▁dezala , ▁herriak ▁Jaunaren ▁etxera ▁eraman ▁eta ▁atezain ek ▁bildu ▁duten ▁dirua .
PRED:	“ Get up to the high priest , ” the high priest said to the Lord . “ Let the people go home to the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Go to Hilkiah the high priest and have him count the money the gatekeepers have collected from the people at the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	2767
INPUT:	▁Apolo , ▁bada , ▁sinagogan ▁ausar ki ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁hasi ▁zen . ▁Pris z ilak ▁eta ▁Ak ilak ▁entzun ▁ziotenean , ▁berekin ▁hartu ▁zuten ▁eta ▁are ▁xeh ek iago ▁azaldu ▁zioten ▁Jainkoaren ▁bidea .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Apollos , the Jew began to speak in the synagogue . When they heard the synagogue , they heard the word of God . But when they heard the way of God .
GOLD:	When Priscilla and Aquila heard him preaching boldly in the synagogue , they took him aside and explained the way of God even more accurately .

ID:	2768
INPUT:	▁Paulo ▁eta ▁sasia p ostol uak
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer of Praise
GOLD:	Paul and the False Apostles

ID:	2769
INPUT:	▁Jobek ▁bere ▁burua ▁errugabe ▁aitortu
PRED:	Job 's Response to Job
GOLD:	Job 's Final Protest of Innocence

ID:	2770
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak , ▁egin ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁eta ▁haren ▁jakinduria ▁« S <unk> onen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Solomon 's reign and everything he had done . He said , “ The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Solomon 's reign , including all his deeds and his wisdom , are recorded in The Book of the Acts of Solomon .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	▁Bada , ▁hori ▁bezain ▁egia ▁da ▁ez ▁ditudala ▁baztertuko ▁Jakoben ▁ondorengoak ▁eta ▁David ▁neure ▁zerbitzaria . ▁Nola ▁ez ▁ditut , ▁bada , ▁horien ▁jatorritik ▁aukeratuko ▁Abraham , ▁Isaak ▁eta ▁Jakoben ▁ondorengoen ▁buruzagiak ? ▁Bai , ▁aldatu ▁egingo ▁dut ▁haien ▁zoria , ▁errukitu ▁egin ▁naiz ▁eta ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am not as his servant David , his servant David , the descendants of Jacob , the descendants of Jacob , the descendants of Jacob , the descendants of Jacob , Jacob , the descendants of Jacob . ”
GOLD:	I will never abandon the descendants of Jacob or David , my servant , or change the plan that David 's descendants will rule the descendants of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . Instead , I will restore them to their land and have mercy on them . ”

ID:	2772
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean , ▁berak ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁lekuan ▁jango ▁dituzue , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁eta ▁morroi - mirabe ek , ▁baita ▁zuekin ▁hiri ▁berean ▁bizi ▁den ▁lebitarrak ▁ere . ▁ F esta ▁ospatuko ▁duzue ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean , ▁zeuen ▁lanaren ▁emaitzen gatik ▁eskerrak ▁emanez .
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says : “ You must eat the place where you must be eaten in the place of worship the Lord your God and your servant , and all your livestock .
GOLD:	You must eat these in the presence of the Lord your God at the place he will choose . Eat them there with your children , your servants , and the Levites who live in your towns , celebrating in the presence of the Lord your God in all you do .

ID:	2773
INPUT:	▁Gaizto ▁horien ▁artetik ▁bizirik ▁geldituko ▁direnek ▁nahiago ▁izango ▁dute ▁heriotza ▁bizia ▁baino , ▁nik ▁sakabanatuko ▁ditudan ▁edonon . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	The wicked will be cut off from the wicked , and they will be cut off from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	And the people of this evil nation who survive will wish to die rather than live where I will send them . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !

ID:	2774
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁aurrez ▁aurre ▁egiten ▁zuen ▁hitz ▁Moisesekin , ▁lagunak ▁lagun arekin ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁duen ▁bezala . ▁Ondoren , ▁Moises ▁kanpalekura ▁itzultzen ▁zen ; ▁baina ▁haren ▁laguntzaile ▁Josue , ▁Nunen ▁semea , ▁ez ▁zen ▁etxola ▁barrutik ▁aldentzen .
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to Moses , just as the Lord spoke to Moses . Then Moses spoke to Moses . Then he spoke to Moses and spoke to Moses in the camp .
GOLD:	Inside the Tent of Meeting , the Lord would speak to Moses face to face , as one speaks to a friend . Afterward Moses would return to the camp , but the young man who assisted him , Joshua son of Nun , would remain behind in the Tent of Meeting .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	▁Handik , ▁kos tarik ▁kos ta ▁R egi ora ▁heldu ▁ginen . ▁Biharamunean ▁hego - haizeak ▁jo ▁zuen ▁eta ▁bi ▁egunetan ▁P o tzu ol ira ▁iritsi ▁ginen .
PRED:	From the next day we learned that we were rebuilding the wall of the Dead Sea , and we went down to the wall .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	▁Gau erdi ▁aldera , ▁Paulo ▁eta ▁Silas ▁otoitzean ▁ari ▁ziren , ▁Jainkoari ▁gorespenak ▁kantatzen ; ▁beste ▁presoak ▁entzuten ▁zeuden .
PRED:	On the night , Paul and all the other places of praise to God . They were praying to the other places of praise .
GOLD:	Around midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God , and the other prisoners were listening .

ID:	2777
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁isilean ▁mezulariak ▁igorri ▁zizkion ▁Abimeleki , ▁esatera : ▁« E beden ▁seme ▁Gaal ▁bere ▁senideekin ▁Sikemera ▁etorri ▁eta ▁hiri ▁hau ▁zure ▁kontra ▁asal datzen ▁ari ▁da .
PRED:	Then Jephthah sent messengers to Abimelech , saying , “ This is what your brothers and sisters , your brothers and sisters , your brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	He sent messengers to Abimelech in Arumah , telling him , “ Gaal son of Ebed and his brothers have come to live in Shechem , and now they are inciting the city to rebel against you .

ID:	2778
INPUT:	▁Hanan , ▁Gi del ▁eta ▁G ah arrenak ;
PRED:	Eltolad , Giddel ,
GOLD:	Hanan , Giddel , Gahar ,

ID:	2779
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁gelditu ▁zara , ▁bada , es kor tetan , ▁Ruben , artzain - tx is tuak ▁entzuten ? Ruben darren ▁famili etan han diak ▁erabakiak !
PRED:	Why are you looking for the Lord ? Why are you like a shepherd ? You heard the ancestor of the tribe of Levi ?
GOLD:	Why did you sit at home among the sheepfolds — to hear the shepherds whistle for their flocks ? Yes , in the tribe of Reubenthere was great indecision .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	▁Onartu ▁zuen ▁Ben - Hadadek ▁Asa ▁erregeak ▁esana , ▁eta ▁bere ▁gudarosteko ▁ofizi alak ▁Israelgo ▁hiriei ▁erasotzera ▁bidali ▁zituen ; ▁I ion , ▁Dan , ▁Abel - Mai m ▁eta ▁Neftali ▁eskualdeko ▁bil tegi ▁ziren ▁hiri ▁guztiak ▁hondatu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Ben-hadad sent this message to King Asa of Israel , and he sent them to fight against the army of Israel . He sent them out to their towns , as far as far as far as their possession .
GOLD:	Ben-hadad agreed to King Asa 's request and sent the commanders of his army to attack the towns of Israel . They conquered the towns of Ijon , Dan , Abel-beth-maacah , and all the store cities in Naphtali .

ID:	2781
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Utzi ! ▁Aski ▁da !» Eta , ▁belarria ▁uki turik , ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	But Jesus said to them , “ Get ready ! Get ready ! ” And Jesus told him , “ Get up ! ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No more of this. ” And he touched the man 's ear and healed him .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	▁« Z or ob abelek ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁jarri ▁zituen ▁etxe ▁honen ▁oinarriak ▁eta ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁burutuko ▁du ▁etxea ». ▁Orduan ▁jakinen ▁duzue ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ▁bidali ▁nauela ▁zuengana .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : When he sees his own house , he will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent his hand to you . ”
GOLD:	“ Zerubbabel is the one who laid the foundation of this Temple , and he will complete it . Then you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent me .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	▁Zortzigarren ▁ikuskaria : ▁lau ▁gurdiak
PRED:	A Vision of the Covenant
GOLD:	Four Chariots

ID:	2784
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁itzuli ▁zion ▁Jainkoak ▁Abimeleki , ▁bere ▁hirurogeita ▁hamar ▁anaiak ▁hil ▁zituenean ▁aitari ▁eginiko ▁kaltea .
PRED:	When God returned to Nazareth , he restored his brothers to his father , he had seventy sons .
GOLD:	In this way , God punished Abimelech for the evil he had done against his father by murdering his seventy brothers .

ID:	2785
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁eroapena ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁dudan ▁bitartean , eta ▁amaitzean , ▁egin ▁iseka , ▁nahi ▁baduzue .
PRED:	When you speak , you want to write your mind , and if you want it .
GOLD:	Bear with me , and let me speak.After I have spoken , you may resume mocking me .

ID:	2786
INPUT:	▁Apol ok ▁Efeson ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egin
PRED:	Paul Preaches in Ephesus
GOLD:	Apollos Instructed at Ephesus

ID:	2787
INPUT:	▁Ongi ▁ikusia ▁dutneure ▁herriaren ▁atsekabea ▁Egipton ▁eta ▁entzun ak ▁ditut ▁haren ▁intziri ak . ▁Haiek ▁salbatzera ▁etorri ▁naiz . ▁Orain , ▁zatoz ▁hona , ▁Egiptora ▁bidali ▁behar ▁zaitut ▁eta .
PRED:	I have seen my misery in Egypt , and I have heard my prayer . I sent you to come to Egypt , and I sent you to come to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	I have certainly seen the oppression of my people in Egypt . I have heard their groans and have come down to rescue them . Now go , for I am sending you back to Egypt . '

ID:	2788
INPUT:	▁Biltzar ▁osoak ▁ontzat ▁eman ▁zuen ▁proposamena , ▁eta ▁Esteban ▁— f edez ▁eta ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaz ▁betea ▁zegoen ▁gizona —, ▁ F elipe , ▁Pro ko ro , ▁Nik an or , ▁Tim on , ▁P armen as ▁eta <unk> las , ▁Antioki ako ▁judu berri a , ▁hautatu ▁zituzten ;
PRED:	Then all the elders of the high council were baptized by the Holy Spirit , who had been baptized with you . He said to them , “ This is the one of the people who had chosen to come to Antioch of Syria . ”
GOLD:	Everyone liked this idea , and they chose the following : Stephen ( a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit ) , Philip , Procorus , Nicanor , Timon , Parmenas , and Nicolas of Antioch ( an earlier convert to the Jewish faith ) .

ID:	2789
INPUT:	▁Roboam ▁erregeak ▁oso ▁zakar ▁erantzun ▁zien , ▁kontseil ariek ▁emana ▁zioten ▁aholkua ▁aintzat ▁hartu ▁gabe
PRED:	When Rehoboam spoke to him and asked him ,
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to them , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	2790
INPUT:	▁Egiten ▁al ▁du ▁bas as toak ▁ar r antza ▁belarraren ▁aurrean edo ▁idiak ▁marru ma ▁zer ▁janik ▁baldin ▁badu ?
PRED:	But if they think we are rich , how can you ask ? If you think they are caught in the fields ?
GOLD:	Do n't I have a right to complain ? Do n't wild donkeys bray when they find no grass , and oxen bellow when they have no food ?

ID:	2791
INPUT:	▁Gantz ▁guztia ▁kenduko ▁dio ▁zekor rari ▁eta ▁aldarean ▁erreko ,
PRED:	He will remove all the bull and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	Then the priest must remove all the animal 's fat and burn it on the altar ,

ID:	2792
INPUT:	▁Harengan ▁sinetsiko ▁zutenek ▁hartuko ▁zuten ▁Espiritu az ▁esan ▁zuen ▁hori ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zen ▁artean ▁Es <unk> turik , ▁Jesusen ▁jainko zko ▁aintza ▁ez ▁zelako ▁oraindik ▁azaldu .
PRED:	Then they will believe the Spirit of the Holy Spirit , and he said to him , “ There is no one who had been called to the gods of Jesus . ”
GOLD:	( When he said “ living water , ” he was speaking of the Spirit , who would be given to everyone believing in him . But the Spirit had not yet been given , because Jesus had not yet entered into his glory . )

ID:	2793
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁libre ▁eginak ; poz - oihuka ▁etorriko ▁dira ▁Sion era : amai gabeko ▁alaitasun ah aien ▁aurpegi an ! Zori ona ▁eta ▁alaitasun aizango ▁dituzte ▁lagun ; nahi gabeak ▁eta ▁negarra ▁kito !
PRED:	The Lord will bless those who obey the Lord will come with joy , and they will be filled with joy . They will be filled with joy and gladness and gladness .
GOLD:	Those who have been ransomed by the Lord will return.They will enter Jerusalem singing , crowned with everlasting joy.Sorrow and mourning will disappear , and they will be filled with joy and gladness .

ID:	2794
INPUT:	▁Hon d akin ▁artean ▁dabiltzan ▁az eriak ▁dira ▁zure ▁profetak , ▁Israel .
PRED:	The people of Israel are saying , “ Your prophets are prophets . ”
GOLD:	“ O people of Israel , these prophets of yours are like jackals digging in the ruins .

ID:	2795
INPUT:	▁B ela ▁Be orren ▁semea , ▁D <unk> aba ▁hiri koa ;
PRED:	Shecaniah son of Ammihud
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁ospetsua , ▁Jainkoaren ▁hiri , ▁Jaunak ▁zutaz ▁dioena :
PRED:	For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	O city of God , what glorious things are said of you ! Interlude

ID:	2797
INPUT:	▁Esku alde etako ▁buruzagiak , ▁errege orde ak , ▁gobernariak ▁eta ▁errege - funtzionari oak ▁juduen ▁alde ▁jarri ▁ziren , ▁Mardokeo ganako ▁beldur - ikaraz .
PRED:	The nobles of the governor 's officers and all the nobles of the Jews and all the Jews were afraid of the Jews . They were afraid to fear the Jews .
GOLD:	And all the nobles of the provinces , the highest officers , the governors , and the royal officials helped the Jews for fear of Mordecai .

ID:	2798
INPUT:	▁Gizon ▁horrek , ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁ez ▁bal etor , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁luke ▁ezer ▁ere ▁egin .
PRED:	For they do n't realize that God would not be able to save them .
GOLD:	If this man were not from God , he could n't have done it . ”

ID:	2799
INPUT:	▁— Maisu , ▁Moisesek ▁idatzi ▁zigun : ▁Nor baiti ▁anaia ▁ezkondu ▁bat ▁seme - alabarik ▁gabe ▁hiltzen ▁bazaio , ▁ezkon ▁bedi ▁alarguntsarekin , ▁anaiari ▁ondorengoa ▁emateko .
PRED:	“ Teacher , ” Moses said to his brother , “ If anyone has married a brother or a widow or a widow or a brother , he must be married to his brother . ”
GOLD:	They posed this question : “ Teacher , Moses gave us a law that if a man dies , leaving a wife but no children , his brother should marry the widow and have a child who will carry on the brother 's name .

ID:	2800
INPUT:	▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁hauek ▁dira ▁Egiptoko ▁errege ▁faraoiari ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaizkion ak , ▁israeldarrei ▁lurralde ▁hartatik ▁irteten ▁uzteko ▁esanez .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron said to Moses , “ These are the king of Egypt , the land of Egypt , ‘ Let them go into the land of Egypt . '
GOLD:	It was Moses and Aaron who spoke to Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , about leading the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	2801
INPUT:	▁Ahik amek , ▁Xafanen ▁semeak , ▁bere ▁babespean ▁hartua ▁zuen ▁Jeremias ▁eta , ▁horri ▁esker , ▁ez ▁zen ▁erori ▁hil ▁nahi ▁zuen ▁jendearen ▁eskuetan .
PRED:	Shaphan son of Hilkiah , his sons , and Jeremiah followed him . He refused to kill him , so he would not kill him . He would not kill him .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Ahikam son of Shaphan stood up for Jeremiah and persuaded the court not to turn him over to the mob to be killed .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	▁Lege - maisu ▁eta ▁fariseuak ▁zelatan ▁zegozkion ▁ea ▁larunbatez ▁sendatzen ▁ote ▁zuen , ▁zertan ▁salatu ▁izateko .
PRED:	The teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law asked , “ Do n't let them go out to the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely . If he healed the man 's hand , they planned to accuse him of working on the Sabbath .

ID:	2803
INPUT:	▁tenplu arengatik ▁zin ▁egiten ▁duenak , ▁tenplu arengatik ▁eta ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁den ▁Jainkoarengatik ▁egiten ▁du ▁zin ;
PRED:	And if it is an altar , it is a place in the Temple of God .
GOLD:	And when you swear ‘ by the Temple , ' you are swearing by it and by God , who lives in it .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	▁« M ezu ▁bat ▁etorri ▁zait ▁isilpean , haren ▁zurrumurru a ▁entzun ▁dut .
PRED:	“ My words come to me , and I hear my words .
GOLD:	“ This truth was given to me in secret , as though whispered in my ear .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁erregeak , ▁begiztatu ▁zituenean , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Eliseori :— Ene ▁aita , ▁hilko ▁al ▁ditut ?
PRED:	When the king of Israel arrived , the king of Israel asked him , “ Why do I die ? ”
GOLD:	When the king of Israel saw them , he shouted to Elisha , “ My father , should I kill them ? Should I kill them ? ”

ID:	2806
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁bere ▁gizonekin ▁eraso aldiak ▁egin ▁ohi ▁zizkien ▁gexur tarrei , ▁ger ez tarrei ▁eta ▁amalek tarrei ; ▁aspaldi danik ▁Xur ▁aldera ▁eta ▁Egipto ▁lurralderaino ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁herriei , ▁alegia .
PRED:	David and his men went to the towns of Egypt , and he led them into a distant lands to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	David and his men spent their time raiding the Geshurites , the Girzites , and the Amalekites — people who had lived near Shur , toward the land of Egypt , since ancient times .

ID:	2807
INPUT:	▁Sasi - i rakaspen en ▁kontrako ▁oharpena
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	Warnings against False Teachings

ID:	2808
INPUT:	▁A ker raren ▁odola ▁santutegi ▁barrura ▁eramana ▁izan ▁denez ▁gero , ▁toki ▁sakratuan ▁jan ▁behar ▁zenuten , ▁agindu ▁nizuen ▁bezala .
PRED:	When the blood of the blood came out of the altar , I gave it to the place where you had commanded .
GOLD:	Since the animal 's blood was not brought into the Holy Place , you should have eaten the meat in the sacred area as I ordered you . ”

ID:	2809
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Bihar ▁goizean ▁goiz ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁faraoiari ▁esatera : ▁Hala ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁hebrearren ▁Jainkoak : ▁Utziozu ▁ene ▁herriari ▁ni ▁gurtzera ▁joaten ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early the next morning , go up to Pharaoh and tell them , ‘ Let me worship the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	2810
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁eskua ▁bikain , ▁Jaunaren ▁eskua ▁garaile ».
PRED:	Then the Lord will hand over his hand , and he will hand his hand to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The strong right arm of the Lord is raised in triumph.The strong right arm of the Lord has done glorious things !

ID:	2811
INPUT:	▁Erantzun ▁zioten :— Gu ▁Abrahamen ▁haziko ak ▁gara , ▁eta ▁ez ▁gara ▁inoiz ▁inoren ▁esklabo ▁izan . ▁Nola ▁diozu ▁aske ▁izango ▁garela ?
PRED:	They replied , “ We will never be slaves , and we will never be slaves . We will not be slaves to anyone else ? ”
GOLD:	“ But we are descendants of Abraham , ” they said . “ We have never been slaves to anyone . What do you mean , ‘ You will be set free ' ? ”

ID:	2812
INPUT:	▁Hara , ▁erregeek ▁elkar ▁hartu ▁zuten eta ▁denak ▁batera ▁haren ▁aurka ▁oldartu .
PRED:	Look , the kings of the kings of the kings were fighting against him , and they rebelled against him .
GOLD:	But when they saw it , they were stunned ; they were terrified and ran away .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	▁Lehen biziko ▁gizakia ▁lurreko ▁hauts etik ▁hartua ▁izan ▁zen ; ▁bigarrena , ▁berriz , ▁zerutik ▁dator .
PRED:	The first first first time came to dust , but the first first first came from heaven .
GOLD:	Adam , the first man , was made from the dust of the earth , while Christ , the second man , came from heaven .

ID:	2814
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁igo ▁behar ▁dute ▁leinuek , ▁Jaunaren ▁leinuek , Israelen ▁lege ▁denez , ▁Jaunaren ▁izena ▁gorestera ;
PRED:	This is what the tribes of Israel , the Levites , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	All the tribes of Israel — the Lord 's people — make their pilgrimage here.They come to give thanks to the name of the Lord , as the law requires of Israel .

ID:	2815
INPUT:	▁I tsuak ▁atera ▁orduko , ▁deabruaren ▁menpe ▁zegoen ▁mutu ▁bat ▁ekarri ▁zioten ▁Jesusi .
PRED:	When the devil saw a demon , they brought a demon from the devil .
GOLD:	When they left , a demon-possessed man who could n't speak was brought to Jesus .

ID:	2816
INPUT:	▁Mazedonia ▁aldera ▁joan ▁nintzenean , ▁Efeson ▁gelditzeko ▁eskatu ▁nizun ; ▁jarraitu , ▁otoi , ▁bertan , ▁eta ▁zentzatu ▁doktrina ▁arrotzak ▁irakasten ▁ari ▁direnak ;
PRED:	When I went to Macedonia , I asked you to go to the region of Ephesus , and I went to the region of Ephesus .
GOLD:	When I left for Macedonia , I urged you to stay there in Ephesus and stop those whose teaching is contrary to the truth .

ID:	2817
INPUT:	▁On ▁du ▁gizakiak ▁gaztetandik ▁uztar pean ▁oh itzea .
PRED:	A field field field is a permanent home , and it is a permanent home .
GOLD:	And it is good for people to submit at an early ageto the yoke of his discipline :

ID:	2818
INPUT:	▁Aho ▁betean ▁emango ▁dizkiot ▁eskerrak ▁Jaunari , jende tzaren ▁erdian ▁goretsiko ▁dut ,
PRED:	I will thank the Lord , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	But I will give repeated thanks to the Lord , praising him to everyone .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	▁arran oaren ▁bidea ▁or tzian , ▁suge aren ▁bidea ▁hai tzean , ontzi aren ▁bidea ▁itsaso ▁zabalean eta ▁gizonaren ▁bidea ▁emakumearen ▁baitan .
PRED:	When the man saw that the road , he covered the road , the road to the sea , the road to the sea .
GOLD:	how an eagle glides through the sky , how a snake slithers on a rock , how a ship navigates the ocean , how a man loves a woman .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Israelgo ▁erregeak ▁agindu ▁zuen :— Heldu ▁Mike asi ! ▁Eraman ▁hiri - go bern ari ▁Amonen gana ▁eta ▁Joax ▁printze arengana .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to him , “ Bring him back to the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	2821
INPUT:	▁« Ur rundu a ▁dut ▁haiengandik ▁haserrea »
PRED:	“ The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	Healing for the Repentant

ID:	2822
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁jakinaren ▁gainean ▁bekatu ▁egiten ▁duenak ▁— ber takoa ▁izan ▁nahiz ▁etorkina — ▁iraindu ▁egiten ▁nau . ▁Horrelako ▁hori ▁bota ▁egingo ▁dute ▁herritik .
PRED:	“ But if you have sinned against me , you must pay attention to foreigners . They must be cut off from the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	“ But those who brazenly violate the Lord 's will , whether native-born Israelites or foreigners , have blasphemed the Lord , and they must be cut off from the community .

ID:	2823
INPUT:	▁Hexbonen ▁bizi ▁zen ▁amortarren ▁errege ▁Sihon ▁eta ▁Ax tarot - en ▁eta ▁Edrei - n ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Baxango ▁errege ▁Og ▁garaitu ▁eta ▁gero .
PRED:	King Og of Bashan lived in the land of King Sihon of Bashan , and Edrei . He lived in Bashan , and he lived in Bashan .
GOLD:	This took place after he had defeated King Sihon of the Amorites , who ruled in Heshbon , and at Edrei had defeated King Og of Bashan , who ruled in Ashtaroth .

ID:	2824
INPUT:	▁« Gizaseme , ▁Israel ▁herriaren ▁jagole ▁izendatzen ▁zaitut ; ▁nik ▁esandakoa ▁entzutean , ▁ohartarazi ▁egin ▁behar ▁dituzu ▁nire ▁izenean .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to the people of Israel , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , I have appointed you as a watchman for Israel . Whenever you receive a message from me , warn people immediately .

ID:	2825
INPUT:	▁Hurrengo , ▁merkatari en ▁herrialdean , ▁Babilonian , ▁saiatu ▁zinen ▁prostituzioan ; ▁halere , ▁ez ▁zinen ▁ase .
PRED:	The next morning you were in the land of Babylon . You did not remember your lovers , too , and you did not remember your prostitution .
GOLD:	You added to your lovers by embracing Babylonia , the land of merchants , but you still were n't satisfied .

ID:	2826
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Gorro to ▁eta ▁higuin ▁ditu tzuen ▁jaiak , ez ▁ditut ▁atsegin zuen ▁kultu - ba tzarrak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish you for your burnt offerings and your detestable sins .
GOLD:	“ I hate all your show and pretense — the hypocrisy of your religious festivals and solemn assemblies .

ID:	2827
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁eskua ▁kenduko ▁dut , ▁eta ▁bizk arralde a ▁ikusi ▁ahal ▁izango ▁didazu ; ▁baina ▁ene ▁aurpegia ▁ez ▁daiteke ▁ikus .
PRED:	Then I will turn my hand and cut off its face . But I will see the face of my face .
GOLD:	Then I will remove my hand and let you see me from behind . But my face will not be seen . ”

ID:	2828
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁gogoan , ▁beraz , ▁nondik ▁erori ▁zaren ; ▁damu ▁zaitez ▁eta ▁itzuli ▁lehengo ▁jokabi dera . ▁Bestela , ▁zuregana ▁joan ▁eta ▁bere ▁lekutik ▁kendu ▁egingo ▁dut ▁zure ▁argimutila .
PRED:	When you see what you do , you will turn away from your sins and turn to you . I will turn away from your place , and I will turn you from your place .
GOLD:	Look how far you have fallen ! Turn back to me and do the works you did at first . If you do n't repent , I will come and remove your lampstand from its place among the churches .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	▁Biziki ▁poztu ▁zen ▁Herodes ▁Jesus ▁ikus teaz , ▁as p aldian ▁baitzuen ▁hura ▁ezagutzeko ▁gogoa , ▁hartaz ▁entzuten ▁zituen engatik ; ▁mirari ren ▁bat ▁egiten ▁ikusiko ▁zuela ▁ere ▁espero ▁zuen .
PRED:	When Herod saw that he was glad , he knew what he had done to him . When he heard about him , he saw how much he could see him .
GOLD:	Herod was delighted at the opportunity to see Jesus , because he had heard about him and had been hoping for a long time to see him perform a miracle .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	▁Barau ▁eginez ▁pena tzen ▁banaiz , irain a ▁besterik ▁ez ▁dut ▁jasotzen ;
PRED:	If I give my arguments to poverty , I wo n't hide it .
GOLD:	When I dress in burlap to show sorrow , they make fun of me .

ID:	2831
INPUT:	▁An aiek ▁esan ▁zioten :— Geure ▁errege ▁edo ▁mendera tzaile ▁izan ▁behar ▁ote ▁zaitugu ? Eta ▁are ▁gehiago ▁gorrotatu ▁zuten ▁bere ▁amets ▁eta ▁esan engatik .
PRED:	“ What is we ? ” the king replied . “ We have you been with us ? ” And the king replied .
GOLD:	His brothers responded , “ So you think you will be our king , do you ? Do you actually think you will reign over us ? ” And they hated him all the more because of his dreams and the way he talked about them .

ID:	2832
INPUT:	▁Zortzi ▁zentimetro ▁zabaleko ▁uztai ▁batez ▁hornitu ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁urrezko ▁ertza ▁egin ▁uzta iari .
PRED:	Make a gold molding along with a gold molding along the border of the Lord .
GOLD:	He decorated it with a 3-inch border all around , and he ran a gold molding along the border .

ID:	2833
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁honela ▁esango ▁dute ▁kos talde ▁honetako ▁guztiek : ▁“ Horra ▁hor ▁geure ▁itxaro bide ▁genuen aren ▁a tar ramen tua ! ▁Horra ▁hor ▁noren gana ▁jo ▁dugun , ▁Asiriako ▁errege agandik ▁askatzeko ▁laguntza ▁eske ! ▁Nola ▁onik ▁atera ▁gu ▁orain ?” ▁»
PRED:	Then all the people will say , ‘ This is what we have done to us ! We have done to the king of Assyria ! How can we go to the king of Assyria ? '
GOLD:	They will say , ‘ If this can happen to Egypt , what chance do we have ? We were counting on Egypt to protect us from the king of Assyria . ' ”

ID:	2834
INPUT:	▁Ber ez ▁hazten ▁den ▁hazi aren ▁parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Ten Servants
GOLD:	Jesus Calms the Storm

ID:	2835
INPUT:	▁Ezta bai da ▁sortu ▁zen ▁ikasleen ▁artean , ▁nor ▁ote ▁zen ▁beraietan ▁handiena .
PRED:	He was in the crowd who had been baptized among the others .
GOLD:	Then his disciples began arguing about which of them was the greatest .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁ziren ▁muinoetako ▁kultu - lekuak ▁desagertu ; ▁jendeak ▁jarraitu ▁egiten ▁zuen ▁halako ▁muinoetan ▁opariak ▁eskaintzen ▁eta ▁intsentsua ▁erretzen .
PRED:	But the pagan shrines were not destroyed by the pagan shrines , and the people still burned incense at the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	One day King Joash said to the priests , “ Collect all the money brought as a sacred offering to the Lord 's Temple , whether it is a regular assessment , a payment of vows , or a voluntary gift .

ID:	2837
INPUT:	▁Aleluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! Goretsazue ▁Jaunaren ▁izena , gorets azue , ▁Jaunaren ▁zerbitzariok ,
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the name of the Lord ! Praise him , you who serve the Lord ,

ID:	2838
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁erregeak ▁Danieli , ▁Beltxatzar ▁ere ▁deitu ari :— Egia ▁al ▁da ▁ametsa ▁argitu ▁eta ▁esanahia ▁azalduko ▁didazu la ?
PRED:	Then Daniel asked the king , “ What is the dream ? ” And the king asked .
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	2839
INPUT:	▁Tam arri ▁esan ▁zioten ▁aitaginarreba ▁ardi - moz tera ▁zihoala ▁Timn ara .
PRED:	When she had returned to Capernaum , he went to Capernaum .
GOLD:	Someone told Tamar , “ Look , your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep . ”

ID:	2840
INPUT:	▁Josiasek ▁lege - liburua ▁aurkitu
PRED:	Josiah 's Prayer for the Law
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	2841
INPUT:	▁aurkeztu ▁zizkieten ▁apostoluei , ▁eta ▁hauek , ▁otoitz ▁eginez , ▁eskuak ▁buruan ▁ezarri ▁zizkieten .
PRED:	These were the words of the people and their hands on their hands .
GOLD:	These seven were presented to the apostles , who prayed for them as they laid their hands on them .

ID:	2842
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁esan ▁nuen :— Ene ▁Jainko ▁Jauna , ▁zaude ▁geldi ! ▁Nola ▁eutsiko ▁dio , ▁bada , ▁Israel ▁herriak ▁bere ▁biziari , ▁hain ▁txikia ▁izanik ?
PRED:	I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , O God , how are you going to see ? How can you look for us ? How can the people of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , please stop or we will not survive , for Israel is so small . ”

ID:	2843
INPUT:	▁Judan ▁gelditu ▁ziren ▁gudalburuak , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregeak ▁Go dal ias ▁gobernari ▁ezarri ▁zuela ▁jakitean , ▁honen gana ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Mitzpara ▁beren ▁gizon ▁guztiekin . ▁Hauek ▁ziren ▁gudalburuak : ▁Netaniasen ▁seme ▁Ismael , ▁Kareahen ▁seme ▁Johanan , ▁Netof ako ▁Tan h um eten ▁seme ▁Seraias , ▁eta ▁Ja az anias , ▁maak arra .
PRED:	When the king of Judah heard that the king of Judah had gathered at Mizpah , they went to Mizpah to Mizpah . They went to Mizpah to Mizpah , Johanan son of Nethaniah , Johanan son of Kareah and the other leaders of Mizpah .
GOLD:	When all the army commanders and their men learned that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah as governor , they went to see him at Mizpah . These included Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan son of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	2844
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Josafat ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁zen ; ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jende ▁guztia ▁ere ▁makurtu ▁egin ▁zen ▁Jauna ▁gurtzeko .
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat bowed down to the ground and worshiped the ground in Jerusalem . He bowed down to worship the ground and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	Then King Jehoshaphat bowed low with his face to the ground . And all the people of Judah and Jerusalem did the same , worshiping the Lord .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	▁horrela ▁bada , ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁laguntzaz ▁lurraldea ▁menderatu ▁baino ▁lehen ▁itzultzen ▁ez ▁bazarete , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁inolako ▁errurik ▁izango , ▁ez ▁Jaunaren , ▁ez ▁Israelen ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁zeuen ▁jabetza ▁izango ▁duzue , ▁Jaunaren ▁on iri tziaz .
PRED:	When you return to the Lord , you will be with a solemn oath to the Lord , you will not be able to stand before the Lord your God .
GOLD:	then you may return when the Lord has conquered the land . You will have fulfilled your duty to the Lord and to the rest of the people of Israel . And the land on the east side of the Jordan will be your property from the Lord .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁agintariek ▁inguratu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Noiz ▁arte ▁eduki ▁behar ▁gaituzu ▁zalantzan ? ▁Zu ▁bazara ▁Mesias , ▁es aguzu ▁argi ▁eta ▁garbi .
PRED:	Then they said to them , “ How long will you come to you ? How long will you be the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	The people surrounded him and asked , “ How long are you going to keep us in suspense ? If you are the Messiah , tell us plainly . ”

ID:	2847
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Aaroni : ▁« Hartu ▁zeure ▁errautsontzia , ▁ipini ▁bertan ▁aldareko ▁txingar rak ▁eta ▁bota ▁gainean ▁intsentsua ; ▁zoaz ▁arin ▁elkar tera ▁eta ▁egizu ▁haien ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea , ▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea ▁piztu ▁baita ▁eta ▁hasia ▁da ▁izurria ».
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Take your fat on your altar and burn incense on your altar , and go down to the Lord your God , and go down to the Lord , and go to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded him .

ID:	2848
INPUT:	▁Oro tan ▁erakutsi ▁izan ▁dizuet , ▁horrela ▁behar ▁dela ▁lanean ▁saiatu ▁gauza ▁ez ▁direnei ▁laguntzeko , ▁Jesus ▁Jaunaren ▁hitz ▁haiek ▁gogoratuz : ▁“ Zorion ▁gehiago ▁du ▁em ateak ▁har tzeak ▁baino ”».
PRED:	I gave you this message to the Lord , so I can do not know the Lord Jesus . He said , ‘ He is greater than all who obey him . ' ”
GOLD:	And I have been a constant example of how you can help those in need by working hard . You should remember the words of the Lord Jesus : ‘ It is more blessed to give than to receive . ' ”

ID:	2849
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haurtxoak ▁magal ean ▁hartu ▁eta ▁bedeinkatu ▁egiten ▁zituen , ▁eskuak ▁ezarriz .
PRED:	Then he took his arms and bless them , and he put them into his hands .
GOLD:	Then he took the children in his arms and placed his hands on their heads and blessed them .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	▁Behar tsuaren ▁deiadar rei ▁ez ▁entzun arena ▁egiten ▁dien ari , ez ▁diote ▁berari ▁ere ▁entzungo , ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁dei ▁egitean .
PRED:	The poor will not listen to the poor , for they will listen to him .
GOLD:	Those who shut their ears to the cries of the poorwill be ignored in their own time of need .

ID:	2851
INPUT:	▁Miktam ▁. ▁Davidena Gorde ▁nazazu , ▁Jauna , ▁zuregan ▁baitut ▁babesa .
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let me be my refuge , for I am my refuge .
GOLD:	Keep me safe , O God , for I have come to you for refuge .

ID:	2852
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁guztia ▁guretzat ▁ikas bide ▁izateko ▁gertatu ▁zen , ▁gaiztakeriarik ▁irrika ▁ez ▁dezagun , ▁haiek ▁irrik atu ▁zuten ▁bezala .
PRED:	All this happened to us , just as we had done .
GOLD:	These things happened as a warning to us , so that we would not crave evil things as they did ,

ID:	2853
INPUT:	▁« Zorionekoa ▁ni , ▁Agripa ▁erregea , ▁juduek ▁leporatzen ▁dizkidaten ▁erru ▁guztiez ▁gaur ▁neure ▁burua ▁zure ▁aurrean ▁zuri tzeko ▁aukera ▁dudalako ;
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits King Agrippa , Jewish leaders , Jewish leaders , and I have done to you before you .
GOLD:	“ I am fortunate , King Agrippa , that you are the one hearing my defense today against all these accusations made by the Jewish leaders ,

ID:	2854
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁lekuan ▁egosi ▁eta ▁jango ▁duzue ▁opari gaia , ▁eta ▁biharamun ▁goizean ▁etxera ▁itzuliko ▁zarete .
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says : You must be eaten in the place where the next morning you must return to the next morning .
GOLD:	Roast the lamb and eat it in the place the Lord your God chooses . Then you may go back to your tents the next morning .

ID:	2855
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁nahi ▁nuke ▁zuek ▁jaki tea , ▁gizon ▁ororen ▁buru ▁Kristo ▁dela , ▁emakumearen ▁buru ▁gizona , ▁eta ▁Kristoren ▁buru ▁Jainkoa .
PRED:	But I want you to know that Christ is a man of Christ . He is a man who is a man in Christ .
GOLD:	But there is one thing I want you to know : The head of every man is Christ , the head of woman is man , and the head of Christ is God .

ID:	2856
INPUT:	▁« Ai ▁zuek , ▁lege - maisu ▁eta ▁fariseu ▁itxurazaleok ! ▁Norbait ▁judu berri ▁egiteagatik ▁itsaso ▁eta ▁lehor ▁zabiltzate ▁eta , ▁egin ▁duzuenean , ▁zeuek ▁baino ▁gai ago ▁bihurtzen ▁duzue ▁infern urako !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law , you Pharisees and teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law , and you are better than you .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you cross land and sea to make one convert , and then you turn that person into twice the child of hell you yourselves are !

ID:	2857
INPUT:	▁Beh i ▁argal ▁eta ▁eskas ▁hauek , ▁ordea , ▁lehengo ▁zazpi ▁behi ▁guri ak ▁irentsi ▁zituzten .
PRED:	These are the seven heads of the seven stars , but the seven heads of the seven heads of the seven heads of the seven heads of their sins .
GOLD:	These thin , scrawny cows ate the seven fat cows .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	▁alegia , ▁besteak ▁gezurrez ▁salatzen , auzi tegian ▁defentsa ▁erago zten eta ▁errugabea ▁hondamendi ra eram aten ▁dutenak .
PRED:	A wise person starts fights ; a wise person leads to disgrace .
GOLD:	Those who convict the innocentby their false testimony will disappear.A similar fate awaits those who use trickery to pervert justiceand who tell lies to destroy the innocent .

ID:	2859
INPUT:	▁Elam darren tzat
PRED:	The Land Given to Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Elam

ID:	2860
INPUT:	▁ezik asi en ▁hez itz aile ▁eta ▁ezjakin en ▁irakasle tzat , ▁eta ▁hori , ▁ezagu tzaren ▁eta ▁egiaren ▁adieraz pena ▁legean ▁duzulako .
PRED:	But if you learn to teach the truth , you should understand the truth and knowledge of the truth .
GOLD:	You think you can instruct the ignorant and teach children the ways of God . For you are certain that God 's law gives you complete knowledge and truth .

ID:	2861
INPUT:	▁Bidal iak , ▁beraz , ▁Antiokiara ▁jaitsi ▁ziren ▁eta , ▁biltzarra ▁bildurik , ▁gutuna ▁eman ▁zieten .
PRED:	So some of the men went to Antioch , and they gave this message to the Lord .
GOLD:	The messengers went at once to Antioch , where they called a general meeting of the believers and delivered the letter .

ID:	2862
INPUT:	▁« Gero , ▁atearen ▁ondoko ▁sarreratik , ▁iparralderantz ▁dauden ▁apaizen ▁gela ▁sakratu etara ▁eraman ▁ninduen ▁gizonak . ▁B arren - barren ean ▁mendebaldera ▁zegoen ▁leku ▁bat ▁erak utsiz ,
PRED:	“ From the entrance to the inner courtyard , the priests , the priests , the priests , and the other priests were at the north side of the north .
GOLD:	In my vision , the man brought me through the entrance beside the gateway and led me to the sacred rooms assigned to the priests , which faced toward the north . He showed me a place at the extreme west end of these rooms .

ID:	2863
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen zer taz ▁ohartu ▁naizen ▁ni , ▁Koh elet , argi bide ▁bila , denak ▁banan - banan aztertu ▁ditudanean :
PRED:	This is what the Teacher says , “ Teacher , Teacher , the Teacher , I am going to find them , and I am sending them out .
GOLD:	“ This is my conclusion , ” says the Teacher . “ I discovered this after looking at the matter from every possible angle .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁zioten : ▁« Bedeinkatua ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁datorren ▁erregea ! ▁Bakea ▁zeruan ▁eta ▁aintza ▁Jainko ▁goren ari !»
PRED:	“ Praise the name of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies ! ”
GOLD:	“ Blessings on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ! Peace in heaven , and glory in highest heaven ! ”

ID:	2865
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁txalupara ▁igo , ▁aintziraz ▁beste ▁aldera ▁igaro ▁eta ▁bere ▁herrira ▁etorri ▁zen .
PRED:	Jesus got into the boat and crossed the lake to the lake .
GOLD:	Jesus climbed into a boat and went back across the lake to his own town .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	▁Betea ▁du ▁ahoa ▁madarikazio z , ▁maltzurkeriaz ▁eta ▁gogorkeriaz ; ok erra ▁eta ▁gaiztakeria ▁ditu ▁mih ian ▁gordeak .
PRED:	Your mouth is full of wickedness , and your mouth is filled with wickedness .
GOLD:	Their mouths are full of cursing , lies , and threats.Trouble and evil are on the tips of their tongues .

ID:	2867
INPUT:	▁Adiskide ▁maite , ▁espirituz ▁ongi ▁d oak izun ▁bezala , ▁beste ▁gauza ▁guztietan ▁ere ▁ongi ▁joan ▁dakizu la ▁eta ▁osasuna ▁izan ▁dezazula .
PRED:	Dear friends , if you love me , you know that God is with you . And you know how much you are doing .
GOLD:	Dear friend , I hope all is well with you and that you are as healthy in body as you are strong in spirit .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	▁Jainkoa ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Josueri ▁agertu
PRED:	The Lord 's Covenant to Joshua
GOLD:	Israel 's Disobedience Predicted

ID:	2869
INPUT:	▁« Norbaitek ▁bere ▁etxea ▁sagaratzen ▁badio ▁Jaunari , ▁apaizak ▁erabakiko ▁du ▁etxe arengatik ▁ordaindu ▁beharrekoa , ▁zer - nolako a ▁den ▁kontuan ▁harturik . ▁Apaiz aren ▁erabakia ▁atzera ezina ▁da .
PRED:	“ If a person is giving to the Lord 's family , he must pay the property of the Lord 's family . If it is a priest 's property , he must pay it to the priest .
GOLD:	“ If someone dedicates a house to the Lord , the priest will come to assess its value . The priest 's assessment will be final , whether high or low .

ID:	2870
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁dela , ▁zeuen ▁artean ▁auzitan ▁ibiltzea ▁bera ▁nahiko ▁pen agarria ▁da . ▁Zergatik ▁ez ▁bidegabekeria ▁jasan ▁eta ▁zeuen ▁buruak ▁larru tzen ▁utzi ?
PRED:	“ Why do you try to be silent ? Why do you turn to the wicked ? Why do n't you turn away from your sins ?
GOLD:	Even to have such lawsuits with one another is a defeat for you . Why not just accept the injustice and leave it at that ? Why not let yourselves be cheated ?

ID:	2871
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Abimelekek ▁esan ▁zion ▁bere ▁ezkutariari : ▁« Atera ▁ezpata ▁eta ▁hil ▁nazak ! ▁Ez ▁dezatela ▁esan ▁emakume ▁batek ▁hil ▁nauela ». ▁Ezku tariak ▁ezpata ▁sartu ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then Abimelech said to Abimelech , “ Come , let 's kill your sword and kill him ! Do n't kill him and kill him . ”
GOLD:	He quickly said to his young armor bearer , “ Draw your sword and kill me ! Do n't let it be said that a woman killed Abimelech ! ” So the young man ran him through with his sword , and he died .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁beren ▁ondasunetan ▁oinarritzen ▁diraeta ▁beren ▁aberastasun ▁handiaz ▁harrotzen .
PRED:	These are their trust in their trust in their tunics .
GOLD:	Yet they can not redeem themselves from deathby paying a ransom to God .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	▁Beren ▁ahaide ▁Bak buk iasek ▁eta ▁U nik ▁laguntzen ▁zieten ▁bete behar ▁horretan .
PRED:	Instead , he became proud and Silas .
GOLD:	Their associates , Bakbukiah and Unni , stood opposite them during the service .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	▁Akabek ▁esan ▁zuen :— Noren ▁bidez ? Prof etak ▁erantzun :— Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak : ▁« Esku alde buru en ▁laguntzaile ▁diren ▁gazteen ▁bidez ». Akab ek , ▁berriro :— Nork ▁ekingo ▁dio ▁borrokari ? Prof etak ▁erantzun :— Zuk .
PRED:	“ What is you ? ” Ahab asked . “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : ‘ Who is my master ? ' “ Who will come to me ? ”
GOLD:	Ahab asked , “ How will he do it ? ” And the prophet replied , “ This is what the Lord says : The troops of the provincial commanders will do it. ” “ Should we attack first ? ” Ahab asked. “ Yes , ” the prophet answered .

ID:	2875
INPUT:	▁« Tx arra , ▁txarra » ▁esaten ▁du ▁eros leak ; baina ▁hor ▁doa ▁gero , ▁pozik ▁asko ▁egindako ▁eros ketaz .
PRED:	“ The field field field is empty , but it becomes a field field field .
GOLD:	The buyer haggles over the price , saying , “ It 's worthless , ” then brags about getting a bargain !

ID:	2876
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jaunak ▁profeta ▁baten ▁bidez atera ▁zuen ▁Israel ▁Egiptotik eta ▁profeta ▁baten ▁bidez zuen ▁zaindu .
PRED:	But the Lord gave this message through the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	But the people of Israelhave bitterly provoked the Lord , so their Lord will now sentence them to deathin payment for their sins .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	▁Hau tsi ▁gaiztoaren ▁indarra , es katu ▁hari ▁gaiztakeriaren ▁kontu , ez ▁utzi ▁ezer ▁azter tz eke .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked become strong , for I have not given you anything .
GOLD:	Break the arms of these wicked , evil people ! Go after them until the last one is destroyed .

ID:	2878
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁egin , ▁bada , ▁inolako ▁lanik . ▁Betiko ▁lege ▁izango ▁duzue ▁hau ▁belaunez ▁belaun , ▁biziko ▁zareten ▁edonon .
PRED:	And do n't be able to work , for it will be a permanent law . This is from generation to generation to generation from generation .
GOLD:	You must not do any work at all ! This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁onginahia ▁ez ▁dela ▁amaitu , ▁haren ▁errukia ▁ez ▁dela ▁agortu .
PRED:	When the Lord has finished speaking , he is not able to enter his presence .
GOLD:	The faithful love of the Lord never ends ! His mercies never cease .

ID:	2880
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁Joseren ▁gain ▁utzi ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁Potif arrek ▁eta ▁aurrerantzean ▁ez ▁zen ▁ezer taz ▁arduratu , ▁berak ▁jaten ▁zuen az ▁izan ▁ezik . Itx ura ▁eder rekoa ▁zen ▁Jose .
PRED:	So Joseph left Joseph on Joseph 's table , where he was allowed to eat . So Joseph ate it .
GOLD:	So Potiphar gave Joseph complete administrative responsibility over everything he owned . With Joseph there , he did n't worry about a thing — except what kind of food to eat ! Joseph was a very handsome and well-built young man ,

ID:	2881
INPUT:	▁« Han , ▁burdinazko ▁tresn az ▁landu ▁gabeko ▁harriz ▁eginiko ▁aldarea ▁eraikiko ▁diozue ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ;
PRED:	“ You have made iron iron iron , bronze , bronze , bronze , and use it to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Then build an altar there to the Lord your God , using natural , uncut stones . You must not shape the stones with an iron tool .

ID:	2882
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁ikasleek ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Zergatik ▁diote , ▁bada , ▁lege - maisuek ▁lehenbizi ▁Eliasek ▁etorri ▁behar ▁duela ?
PRED:	Then the disciples asked him , “ Why do you come ? ”
GOLD:	Then his disciples asked him , “ Why do the teachers of religious law insist that Elijah must return before the Messiah comes ? ”

ID:	2883
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁haize - zurrunbil oan ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁Elias ▁zerura . ▁Hona ▁nola ▁gertatu ▁zen : ▁Elias ▁eta ▁Eliseo ▁Gilgal dik ▁abia tuak ▁zirelarik ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says : Elijah , Elijah , and Elijah was in Gilgal .
GOLD:	When the Lord was about to take Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind , Elijah and Elisha were traveling from Gilgal .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁tx arretan , ▁zergatik ▁izan ▁beldur ingu ratzen ▁nauten ▁maltzur ren ▁mal ezi ari ?
PRED:	Why are you ashamed of trouble ? Why are you ashamed of me ?
GOLD:	They trust in their wealthand boast of great riches .

ID:	2885
INPUT:	▁Hobe ▁duzu ▁« Igo ▁hona !» ▁entzun , han dia go ▁baten ▁aurrean ▁apal arazia ▁izan ▁baino . Zeure ▁begiez ▁ikusi ▁baduzu ▁ere ,
PRED:	It is better to be willing , and he said , “ Come and stand before the Lord , and he saw that he had seen with him . ”
GOLD:	It 's better to wait for an invitation to the head tablethan to be sent away in public disgrace.Just because you 've seen something ,

ID:	2886
INPUT:	▁Bor txatu ▁egin ▁dituzte ▁Siongo ▁emakumeak eta ▁Judako ▁hirietako ▁neskatxak .
PRED:	Listen to the women of Jerusalem , O women of Judah .
GOLD:	Our enemies rape the women in Jerusalemand the young girls in all the towns of Judah .

ID:	2887
INPUT:	▁Bizi ▁eta ▁mugitzen ▁den ▁guztitik ▁jan ▁dezakezue ; ▁lehenago ▁landareak ▁bezala , ▁den - dena ▁ematen ▁dizuet .
PRED:	Yes , you will eat everything you do . I am going to eat , and it is mine .
GOLD:	I have given them to you for food , just as I have given you grain and vegetables .

ID:	2888
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁hartu ▁beste ▁aharia . ▁Aaronek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeek ▁buruan ▁eskuak ▁ezarriko ▁dizkiote .
PRED:	“ Aaron and his sons must lay their hands on the ram 's head .
GOLD:	“ Now take the other ram , and have Aaron and his sons lay their hands on its head .

ID:	2889
INPUT:	▁Bizi ▁garen ▁bitartean , ▁beti ▁heriotzara ▁gar amatzate ▁Jesusengatik , ▁gure ▁izate ▁hilkor ▁honetan ▁Jesusen ▁bizia ▁ere ▁ager ▁dadin .
PRED:	While we are still alive , we are going to die in this way , we are allowed to die .
GOLD:	Yes , we live under constant danger of death because we serve Jesus , so that the life of Jesus will be evident in our dying bodies .

ID:	2890
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁ni ▁bezalako ▁profeta ▁sortuko ▁du ▁zuen ▁artetik , ▁herritarren ▁artetik . ▁Entzun ▁berari !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to me , “ I will bring you from the people from among you . ”
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your fellow Israelites . You must listen to him .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁artean ▁haietako ▁inoren gana ▁jaitsi ▁gabe ▁zegoen ▁Espiritua ; ▁Jesus ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁bataia turik ▁bakarrik ▁zeuden .
PRED:	For the Spirit of them came to anyone with them , and the Spirit of the Lord Jesus was with them .
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit had not yet come upon any of them , for they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁isats ez ▁zeruko ▁iz arren ▁herena ▁her res tan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁lurrera ▁jaurti ▁zuen . H erensuge a , ▁haurra ▁izateko ▁zegoen ▁emakumearen ▁aitzinean ▁gelditu ▁zen , ▁jaio ▁bezain ▁laster ▁semea ▁irensteko .
PRED:	He led his child into the sky , and he threw them into the dust into the sky , and he threw them into the dust .
GOLD:	His tail swept away one-third of the stars in the sky , and he threw them to the earth . He stood in front of the woman as she was about to give birth , ready to devour her baby as soon as it was born .

ID:	2893
INPUT:	▁Adiskide ak ▁bertako ▁jendeari ▁galdegin ▁zion :— Non ▁da ▁En ai men , ▁bide - bazterrean , ▁egon ▁ohi ▁zen ▁emagaldua ? Haiek ▁erantzun ▁zioten :— Hemen ▁ez ▁da ▁inoiz ▁emagaldu rik ▁egon .
PRED:	“ Where is your people ? ” they asked . “ Where is she ? ” But she replied , “ That is why she was still in the wilderness ? ” But she replied , “ That 's why she was a prostitute . ”
GOLD:	So he asked the men who lived there , “ Where can I find the shrine prostitute who was sitting beside the road at the entrance to Enaim ? ” “ We 've never had a shrine prostitute here , ” they replied .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁erantzun ▁nion :— Ene ▁Jauna , ▁zeuk ▁jakingo ▁duzu . Hark ▁esan ▁zidan :— Larri aldi ▁handi tik ▁datoz enak ▁dira ▁horiek ; ▁beren ▁soinekoak ▁Bildotsaren ▁odol ean ▁garbitu ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁zuritu .
PRED:	“ O Lord , ” I said , “ you know that you know the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , you have seen all their clothes and clothing . ”
GOLD:	And I said to him , “ Sir , you are the one who knows. ” Then he said to me , “ These are the ones who died in the great tribulation . They have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb and made them white .

ID:	2895
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitez ▁poztu , ▁Israel , ez ▁alaitu , ▁beste ▁herriak ▁bezala , pro stituzio an ▁ibili ▁baitzara , zeure ▁Jainkoa ▁utzirik . Atsegin ▁du zuzeure ▁prostituzio aren ▁sari ag ari - l arra in ▁guztietan ▁jaso tzea .
PRED:	Do n't rejoice , O Israel , just as you have done to your people , O Israel , your God , have abandoned your sins .
GOLD:	O people of Israel , do not rejoice as other nations do.For you have been unfaithful to your God , hiring yourselves out like prostitutes , worshiping other gods on every threshing floor .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	▁Jesus , ▁hori ▁jakitean , ▁Judea ▁utzi ▁eta ▁Galileara ▁joan ▁zen ▁berriro .
PRED:	When Jesus heard what he had happened to Galilee , he went to Galilee and returned to Galilee .
GOLD:	So he left Judea and returned to Galilee .

ID:	2897
INPUT:	▁“ Entzun , ▁israeldarrok ! ▁Gaur ▁etsaien ▁aurka ▁borrokatuko ▁zarete . ▁Ez ▁kikildu , ▁ez ▁izan ▁beldur ! ▁Ez ▁asaldatu , ▁ez ▁ikaratu ▁etsaien ▁aurrean !
PRED:	“ Listen to the people of Israel , O Israel ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid !
GOLD:	He will say to them , ‘ Listen to me , all you men of Israel ! Do not be afraid as you go out to fight your enemies today ! Do not lose heart or panic or tremble before them .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	▁Nirekin ▁auzitan ▁zebilela , morro i ▁nahiz ▁neskam eren ▁bati ▁eskubidea ▁ukatu ▁badiot ,
PRED:	I am sending my servant to my servant , and I will give him a servant to his servant .
GOLD:	“ If I have been unfair to my male or female servantswhen they brought their complaints to me ,

ID:	2899
INPUT:	▁Han ▁zegoen ▁Jakoben ▁putzua ▁delakoa . ▁Jesus , ▁bide az ▁nekatu rik , ▁putzu - ertzean ▁eseri ▁zen . ▁Egu erdi ▁inguru a ▁zen .
PRED:	There was a third day when he arrived , he sat down and sat down on the road .
GOLD:	Jacob 's well was there ; and Jesus , tired from the long walk , sat wearily beside the well about noontime .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	▁Sikemgo ▁batzarra
PRED:	The Death of Abimelech
GOLD:	The Northern Tribes Revolt

ID:	2901
INPUT:	▁Ezta bai da ▁luze aren ▁ondoren , ▁zutitu ▁zen ▁Pedro ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Anaiok , ▁dakizuen ez , ▁aspaldi ▁aukeratu ▁ninduen ▁Jainkoak ▁zuen ▁artetik , ▁jentilek ▁nire ▁ahotik ▁berri ▁onaren ▁mezua ▁entzun ▁zezaten ▁eta ▁sinetsi .
PRED:	After this , Peter stood up and said to Peter , “ I am sending you out from the land you have chosen me to follow me from the Good News .
GOLD:	At the meeting , after a long discussion , Peter stood and addressed them as follows : “ Brothers , you all know that God chose me from among you some time ago to preach to the Gentiles so that they could hear the Good News and believe .

ID:	2902
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁hitza ▁ezin ▁hobea : ▁gizakia ▁arnas berri tzen ▁du ; Jaunaren ▁man amendua ▁fidagarria : ▁heldu gabea ▁zuhur rarazten ▁du ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The breath of the Lord is sick , and those who are wise .
GOLD:	The commandments of the Lord are right , bringing joy to the heart.The commands of the Lord are clear , giving insight for living .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁isekaz ▁dar abiltzate , handik i ei ▁irri ▁egiten . Go tor leku ek ▁barre gura ematen ▁diete , ondoan ▁lur - pil ak ▁eginez har tzen ▁baitituzte .
PRED:	The king protects those who fear him ; the king of Heaven 's Armies protects those who pass through the sea .
GOLD:	They scoff at kings and princesand scorn all their fortresses.They simply pile ramps of earthagainst their walls and capture them !

ID:	2904
INPUT:	▁B ukatu ▁ziren ▁jadanik ▁haien tza ta mo dioa , ▁gorrotoa ▁eta ▁grinak . Ez ▁dute ▁aur rerako an ▁esku - har tzerik mundu ▁honetan egiten ▁diren ▁lanetan .
PRED:	They were eager to stir up their backs on their backs , and they ca n't stand against them . They will not attack them .
GOLD:	Whatever they did in their lifetime — loving , hating , envying — is all long gone . They no longer play a part in anything here on earth .

ID:	2905
INPUT:	▁Bel arria ▁zabaltzen ▁die ▁zen tza ▁daitezen , gaiztakeri atik ▁itzultzeko ▁agintzen .
PRED:	He turned away from the crowd , and he said to them .
GOLD:	He gets their attentionand commands that they turn from evil .

ID:	2906
INPUT:	▁Jakob ▁Egiptora ▁joan ▁eta ▁zuen ▁arbasoek ▁Jaunari ▁oihu ▁egin ▁ziotenean , ▁Jaunak ▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁igorri ▁zizkien ; ▁hauek ▁atera ▁zituzten ▁zuen ▁arbasoak ▁Egiptotik ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁honetan ▁ko karazi .
PRED:	When Jacob went to Egypt and went to the Lord , he sent Moses to the land of Egypt and sent them out to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ When the Israelites were in Egypt and cried out to the Lord , he sent Moses and Aaron to rescue them from Egypt and to bring them into this land .

ID:	2907
INPUT:	▁« Beste ▁batzuetan , ▁berriz , ▁nazio ▁edo ▁erreinu ▁bat ▁eraiki ▁eta ▁landa tzea ▁erabakitzen ▁dut .
PRED:	“ But I will send a kingdom into the fields , and I have built an iron pot .
GOLD:	And if I announce that I will plant and build up a certain nation or kingdom ,

ID:	2908
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zien :— Egizue ▁agindu ▁duzuena : ▁hartu ▁armak ▁Jaunaren ▁agindura ▁borrokatzeko ;
PRED:	Moses said to them , “ Do n't go with your weapons and fight against the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said , “ If you keep your word and arm yourselves for the Lord 's battles ,

ID:	2909
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁ohaide en ▁semeei ▁opariak ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁eta ▁Isaak engandik ▁urruti ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁ekialderantz , ▁bera ▁oraindik ▁bizi ▁zela .
PRED:	He gave birth to his sons and daughters to stay in the land of Canaan . He sent them to live in the east of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	But before he died , he gave gifts to the sons of his concubines and sent them off to a land in the east , away from Isaac .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	▁« Al di ▁hartan , ▁ni , ▁Daniel , ▁atsekabe turik ▁egon ▁nintzen ▁hiru ▁as tez .
PRED:	“ At that time I was deeply troubled , Daniel , and I was in three days .
GOLD:	When this vision came to me , I , Daniel , had been in mourning for three whole weeks .

ID:	2911
INPUT:	▁esatera :— Z ahar tua ▁zaude , ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeak ▁ez ▁dabiltza ▁zure ▁bidetik . ▁Izen da ▁iezaguzu , ▁bada , ▁errege ▁bat , ▁gida ▁gaitzan ; ▁horixe ▁egiten ▁dute ▁herrialde ▁guztietan .
PRED:	Then he said , “ Look , your sons and sisters , do n't be afraid of your ancestors . They are a king 's bodyguard . They are in all the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ Look , ” they told him , “ you are now old , and your sons are not like you . Give us a king to judge us like all the other nations have . ”

ID:	2912
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁indar ▁lilura garria ▁bidaltzen ▁die ▁horiei ▁Jainkoak , ▁gezur rari ▁sinets ▁diezai oten ,
PRED:	That is why the godless are honest , and those who believe him .
GOLD:	So God will cause them to be greatly deceived , and they will believe these lies .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	▁Herodes ▁hil ▁ondoren , ▁Joseri ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua ▁agertu ▁zitzaion ▁ametsetan ▁Egipton ,
PRED:	When Herod died , he was in Egypt , the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph .
GOLD:	When Herod died , an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt .

ID:	2914
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁genuen ▁aski ▁Peor - ko ▁bekatuaz ? ▁Oraindik ▁ere ▁bekatu ▁haren ▁ondorioak ▁jasaten ▁ari ▁gara , ▁Jaunaren ▁elkarteak ▁izurria ▁jasan ▁behar ▁izan ▁zuen ▁arren .
PRED:	But we were not trying to sin against me ? Even if we were trying to turn away from the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	Was our sin at Peor not enough ? To this day we are not fully cleansed of it , even after the plague that struck the entire community of the Lord .

ID:	2915
INPUT:	▁« Ezin ▁izango ▁duzue , ▁ordea , ▁jan ▁biziko ▁zareten ▁hirietan ▁Jaunari ▁eskaini ▁beharrekoa : ▁gari , ▁ardo ▁eta ▁olioaren ▁hamarrenak , ▁abere ▁handi ▁eta ▁txikien ▁lehen - kumeak , ▁botoa ▁betetzeko ▁nahiz ▁borondatez ▁eginiko ▁opariak ▁eta ▁gainerako ▁emaitzak .
PRED:	“ No , do not eat any of your grain offerings to the Lord your God , your God , your tithes , your tithes , and your tithes .
GOLD:	“ But you may not eat your offerings in your hometown — neither the tithe of your grain and new wine and olive oil , nor the firstborn of your flocks and herds , nor any offering to fulfill a vow , nor your voluntary offerings , nor your sacred offerings .

ID:	2916
INPUT:	▁ibarrera ▁jaisten ▁den abere - taldearen ▁antzera . Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁atseden era eraman ▁zituen ». Halaxe ▁eraman ▁zenuen , ▁Jauna , zeure ▁herria , izen ▁bikaina ▁zeure gan atuz ▁horrela .
PRED:	When the Spirit of the Lord came to the people of Israel , the Spirit of the Lord brought them out of the Lord , you have brought them out of your people .
GOLD:	As with cattle going down into a peaceful valley , the Spirit of the Lord gave them rest.You led your people , Lord , and gained a magnificent reputation . ”

ID:	2917
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁lagundu ▁egin ▁zien ▁em agin ei ▁beren ▁lanean : ▁herria ▁ugaldu ▁egin ▁zen ▁eta ▁biziki ▁indartu .
PRED:	For God created them , and he did not know that the people were in their own land .
GOLD:	So God was good to the midwives , and the Israelites continued to multiply , growing more and more powerful .

ID:	2918
INPUT:	▁« Behin ▁batez , ▁zuhaitzek ▁erregea ▁izendatu ▁nahi ▁zuten ▁berentzat . ▁Eta ▁esan ▁zioten ▁olibondo ari : ▁“ Izan ▁hadi ▁gure ▁errege !”
PRED:	“ Then the five kings of the five olive trees went to the five loaves of olive oil . Then they said to him , ‘ Come , and you are the kings of our kings ! '
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	2919
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion : ▁« Gizon ▁bat ▁afari ▁handi ▁bat ▁emateko a ▁zen ▁eta ▁jende ▁asko ▁gonbidatu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ A man had a great great great great great number and many people .
GOLD:	Jesus replied with this story : “ A man prepared a great feast and sent out many invitations .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	▁ez ▁erabili ▁asmo ▁txarrik elkar ren ▁aurka , ez ▁egin ▁gezurrezko ▁zinik , gorroto ▁baitut ▁hori ▁guztia . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Do n't tell them what the Lord says : “ I have spoken against you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Do n't scheme against each other . Stop your love of telling lies that you swear are the truth . I hate all these things , says the Lord . ”

ID:	2921
INPUT:	▁Sar aren ▁heriotza ▁eta ▁ehorz keta
PRED:	The Death of Christ
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	2922
INPUT:	▁« Beren ▁fruituetatik ▁antz emango ▁diezue »
PRED:	Moses and the People
GOLD:	The Narrow Gate

ID:	2923
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁Pedro ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁hilobira ▁joan ▁zen ▁lasterka ; ▁makurturik , ▁barrura ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁oihal - zerren dak ▁bakarrik ▁ikusi ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁etxera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁gertatu az ▁harriturik .
PRED:	So Peter got up and went to the tomb , and he went down to the palace . He saw everything he had seen , and he had seen .
GOLD:	However , Peter jumped up and ran to the tomb to look . Stooping , he peered in and saw the empty linen wrappings ; then he went home again , wondering what had happened .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁indarrak ▁apaldu ▁ditu ▁bere ▁ahalmenaz , nire ▁egunak ▁urri tu .
PRED:	He has humbled me , and he has made me strong .
GOLD:	But I cried to him , “ O my God , who lives forever , do n't take my life while I am so young !

ID:	2925
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁ote ▁duten ▁ihes ▁egingo ▁bere ▁nahi ra ▁makur tuak ▁dituen ▁deabruaren ▁sare etatik ?
PRED:	Do n't let them flee from the devil , who makes them stumble ?
GOLD:	Then they will come to their senses and escape from the devil 's trap . For they have been held captive by him to do whatever he wants .

ID:	2926
INPUT:	▁Hon tza ▁eta ▁ki rik in oa jabe tuko ▁dira ▁hartaz , hon tz ▁zuria ▁eta ▁bel ea jarriko ▁han ▁bizitzen . Nah as - mahas ▁eta ▁huts bihurtuko ▁du ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	It will be like a owl , and it will be empty and night , and it will be covered with an object of grain .
GOLD:	It will be haunted by the desert owl and the screech owl , the great owl and the raven.For God will measure that land carefully ; he will measure it for chaos and destruction .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	▁etxeko ▁nagusiak , ▁apaizarengana ▁joanik , ▁bere ▁etxeko ▁hormetan ▁lizuna ▁agertu ▁dela ▁adieraziko ▁dio .
PRED:	Then the high priest will speak to the priest , and he will tell his wife , ‘ This is what the contaminated area has happened . '
GOLD:	The owner of such a house must then go to the priest and say , ‘ It appears that my house has some kind of mildew . '

ID:	2928
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Orain ▁ekingo ▁diot , orain ▁altxatuko ▁naiz , orain ▁agertuko ▁handi .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will come to you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But the Lord says : “ Now I will stand up.Now I will show my power and might .

ID:	2929
INPUT:	▁bahituran ▁hartu takoa ▁bu el tatu , ▁ostu takoa ▁itzuli ▁eta , ▁bidegabekeria ▁egiteari ▁utziz , ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁duten ▁agindu etan ▁bad abil , ▁bizi ▁egingo ▁da , ▁bai , ▁eta ▁ez ▁da ▁hilko .
PRED:	Get security for your neighbor , sell a sheep and goats to live in your presence , for they are allowed to do what they do .
GOLD:	For instance , they might give back a debtor 's security , return what they have stolen , and obey my life-giving laws , no longer doing what is evil . If they do this , then they will surely live and not die .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Judas ▁Iskariote , ▁Jesus ▁saldu ▁zuena .
PRED:	Judas ( Judas ) to the family of Judas . )
GOLD:	Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	2931
INPUT:	▁Tx ikitu ▁ditut ▁zurekin gizon ▁eta ▁emakumeak , txikitu ▁zahar ▁eta ▁gazteak , txikitu ▁mutil ▁eta ▁neskak .
PRED:	I will make you strong men and young women , young men , young men , young men , and old , the young women , and young men .
GOLD:	With you I will shatter men and women , old people and children , young men and young women .

ID:	2932
INPUT:	▁bizi ▁dena ; ▁hilik ▁egon ▁nintzen , ▁baina ▁orain ▁bizirik ▁nago ▁menderen ▁mendetan , ▁eta ▁neure ▁menpe ▁ditut ▁Herio a ▁eta ▁Hildakoen ▁Egoitza .
PRED:	So I lived in the grave , but now now I will live forever and ever . I am the one who lives forever and ever .
GOLD:	I am the living one . I died , but look — I am alive forever and ever ! And I hold the keys of death and the grave .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	▁kri min alak ▁bezala ▁jendaurrean ▁zigortzen ;
PRED:	The words of the wicked are like words , and the words of the wicked .
GOLD:	He strikes them down because they are wicked , doing it openly for all to see .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	▁Ego era ▁horretan , ▁Ezekias ▁erregeak ▁eta ▁Amotzen ▁seme ▁Isaias ▁profetak ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁zerura ▁dei tuz .
PRED:	When Hezekiah heard this , the king of Amoz prayed to Isaiah son of Amoz ,
GOLD:	Then King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz cried out in prayer to God in heaven .

ID:	2935
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haiek :— Moisesek , ▁dibortzio - agiria ▁idatzi ▁eta ▁emaztea ▁uzteko ▁baimena ▁eman ▁zigun .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord has commanded us . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , he permitted it , ” they replied . “ He said a man can give his wife a written notice of divorce and send her away . ”

ID:	2936
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁berriro ▁galdetzen ▁dut : ▁Israelek ▁ez ▁ote ▁du , ▁bada , ▁ulertu ? ▁Lehenengo , ▁hona ▁Moisesek ▁dioena : ▁Herri ▁ez ▁den ▁batekin ▁min duko ▁zaituztet , ▁nazio ▁ergel ▁baten ▁bidez ▁haser raraziko .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the people of Israel ? ” Moses asked . “ Why do n't I say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make you an object of horror . '
GOLD:	But I ask , did the people of Israel really understand ? Yes , they did , for even in the time of Moses , God said , “ I will rouse your jealousy through people who are not even a nation.I will provoke your anger through the foolish Gentiles . ”

ID:	2937
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁esan aben etan ▁betetzen ▁baduzue , urruti ▁daudenak ▁ere ▁etorriko ▁dira Jaunaren ▁tenplua ▁jasotzera ». Orduan ▁jakingo ▁duzue Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak bidali ▁nauela ▁zuengana .
PRED:	Then you will know the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and you will know the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Then you will know that you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	People will come from distant lands to rebuild the Temple of the Lord . And when this happens , you will know that my messages have been from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . All this will happen if you carefully obey what the Lord your God says .

ID:	2938
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Judako ▁buruzagiek ▁esango ▁dute ▁beren ▁baitan : ▁“ Beren ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunari ▁esker , ▁indar ▁berriak ▁hartu ▁dituzte ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunek ”.
PRED:	Then the elders of Judah will say , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	And the clans of Judah will say to themselves , ‘ The people of Jerusalem have found strength in the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , their God . '

ID:	2939
INPUT:	▁Idol oak ▁baztertu
PRED:	Teaching about Idolatry
GOLD:	A Warning against Idolatry

ID:	2940
INPUT:	▁Or potik ▁burura , ez ▁duzue ▁atal ▁bat ▁ere ▁osorik : dena ▁zauri , ▁u bel dura ▁eta ▁ebaki ▁bizi , bat ere ▁garbitu , ▁lotu eta ▁olioz ▁gozatu ▁gabe .
PRED:	He has a part of the part of the field — a part of the field that has been covered with olive oil . He must wear it with olive oil , and olive oil .
GOLD:	You are battered from head to foot — covered with bruises , welts , and infected wounds — without any soothing ointments or bandages .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Zil pak , ▁Learen ▁neskameak , ▁bigarren ▁seme ▁bat ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jakobi .
PRED:	Then she gave her servant to Jacob , the servant of Jacob .
GOLD:	Then Zilpah gave Jacob a second son .

ID:	2942
INPUT:	▁santu tasun ▁eta ▁justiziaz , beraren ▁aurrean geure ▁bizitza ▁guztian .
PRED:	May your unfailing love and faithfulness be fulfilled in your presence .
GOLD:	in holiness and righteousnessfor as long as we live .

ID:	2943
INPUT:	▁Gol go ta ▁izeneko ▁tokira ▁iritsi ▁zirenean ▁ ( G ol go tak ▁« B urez ur » ▁esan ▁nahi ▁du ) ,
PRED:	When they arrived at the place of Eden , he said , “ It is the called the called to the named after the named after being called :
GOLD:	And they went out to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	▁bila tzeko ▁garaiaeta ▁galtzeko ▁garaia , gorde tzeko ▁garaiaeta ▁botatzeko ▁garaia ,
PRED:	A time to get a time for a time , and a time to turn to you .
GOLD:	A time to search and a time to quit searching.A time to keep and a time to throw away .

ID:	2945
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁beharrezko ▁da ▁agintarien ▁menpeko ▁izatea , ▁baina ▁zigorraren ▁beldurrez ▁ez ▁ezik , ▁baita ▁kontzientzi aren ▁eraginez ▁ere .
PRED:	That is why the Jewish leaders are not trying to be afraid of the Jews .
GOLD:	So you must submit to them , not only to avoid punishment , but also to keep a clear conscience .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	▁Zutabe en ▁gaineko ▁habe ▁haiek ▁berrogeita ▁bost ▁ziren , ▁lerro ▁bakoitzean ▁hamabost , ▁eta ▁habe ▁haien ▁gainaldean ▁zedrozko ▁ohol tza .
PRED:	The capitals on the sides of the capitals on the sides of the pillars were decorated with walls .
GOLD:	The hall had a cedar roof . Above the beams on the pillars were forty-five side rooms , arranged in three tiers of fifteen each .

ID:	2947
INPUT:	▁« Mundu ra ▁jaiotako ▁lehen ▁gizakia ▁ote ▁zara , ▁bada ? Mu in oak ▁baino ▁lehen ▁sortu ▁ote ▁zintuzten ?
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O God , who is you ? Was you you you you the first ? ”
GOLD:	“ Were you the first person ever born ? Were you born before the hills were made ?

ID:	2948
INPUT:	▁« Israeldar rak , ▁Bene - J aak ango ▁putzu etatik ▁abiaturik , ▁M os erara ▁iritsi ▁ziren . ▁Han ▁hil ▁zen ▁Aaron , ▁eta ▁bertan ▁ehortzi ▁zuten . ▁Aaronen ▁ordez , ▁beraren ▁seme ▁Eleazar ▁izan ▁zen ▁hurrengo ▁apaiz .
PRED:	They left the camp and camped at the following instructions . They killed Aaron and killed the other leaders of Aaron , and he died in the camp .
GOLD:	( The people of Israel set out from the wells of the people of Jaakan and traveled to Moserah , where Aaron died and was buried . His son Eleazar ministered as high priest in his place .

ID:	2949
INPUT:	▁Aurrez ▁aurre ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zizuen ▁Jaunak ▁mendian , ▁suaren ▁erditik .
PRED:	When the Lord spoke to you , he spoke to you from the fire .
GOLD:	At the mountain the Lord spoke to you face to face from the heart of the fire .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	▁Gau z ok ▁esan ▁zituenean , ▁askok ▁sinetsi ▁zuten ▁harengan .
PRED:	When all the night they believed in him , they believed in him .
GOLD:	Then many who heard him say these things believed in him .

ID:	2951
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁egon ▁adi i rakaspen ari ▁eta ▁aitorpen ari ! Hau etara ▁jotzen ▁ez ▁duenak ez ▁du ▁egunsenti rik ▁ikusiko .
PRED:	But you have turned to listen to what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : It is not going to see ! '
GOLD:	Look to God 's instructions and teachings ! People who contradict his word are completely in the dark .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	▁Beldur - ikaraz ▁gelditu ▁ziren , ▁elkarri ▁esanez : ▁« Nor ▁ote ▁dugu ▁hau , ▁esana ▁egiten ▁baitiote ▁haizeak ▁eta ▁aintzi rak ▁ere ?»
PRED:	The disciples were amazed at each other , saying , “ Who is the wind ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were absolutely terrified . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ Even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	2953
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁atera ▁zenean , ▁gupidarik ▁gabe ▁eraso ▁zioten ▁lege - maisuek ▁eta ▁fariseuek , ▁handik ▁eta ▁hemendik ▁galdezka ,
PRED:	When the Pharisees left the crowd , the teachers of religious law began to save the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	As Jesus was leaving , the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees became hostile and tried to provoke him with many questions .

ID:	2954
INPUT:	▁Justizia ▁eta ▁zuzenbidea ▁maite ▁ditu ; Jaunaren ▁maitasunaz ▁betea ▁da ▁lurra .
PRED:	The heavens love of the Lord is filled with unfailing love .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	2955
INPUT:	▁Zorobabel , ▁Josue , ▁Nehem ias , ▁Seraias , ▁Re elaias , ▁Mardokeo , ▁Bil xan , ▁Mis par , ▁Big bai , ▁Rehum ▁eta ▁Baana ▁zituzten ▁gidari . Hona ▁israeldar ▁hauen ▁zerrenda :
PRED:	These are the leaders of Jeshua , Jeshua , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Bani , and priest . These are the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Their leaders were Zerubbabel , Jeshua , Nehemiah , Seraiah , Reelaiah , Mordecai , Bilshan , Mispar , Bigvai , Rehum , and Baanah.This is the number of the men of Israel who returned from exile :

ID:	2956
INPUT:	▁Leiala ▁ez ▁denaz ▁arrisku aldi etan ▁fi datzea , hor tz ▁hautsi az ▁jatea ▁eta ▁zango ▁bihurri tu az ▁ibiltzea ▁bezala ▁da .
PRED:	Do n't let them worship in trouble , so they may worship God 's paths .
GOLD:	Putting confidence in an unreliable person in times of troubleis like chewing with a broken tooth or walking on a lame foot .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	▁nire ▁izenean ▁egiten ▁baduzu ▁zin egi az , ▁justiziaz ▁eta ▁zuzenbidez , bedein katuko ▁ditut ▁beste ▁herriak ▁ere , eta ▁nitaz ▁harro ▁agertuko ▁dira ».
PRED:	If you do not worship me , I will make a solemn oath , and they will worship me , and they will worship me . ”
GOLD:	Then when you swear by my name , saying , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , 'you could do sowith truth , justice , and righteousness.Then you would be a blessing to the nations of the world , and all people would come and praise my name . ”

ID:	2958
INPUT:	▁Bide gabekeria ▁horren ▁aurka ▁egin ▁dut ▁oihu , eta ▁inork ▁erantzun ▁ez ; laguntza ▁eskatu , ▁eta ▁justiz iarik ▁ez .
PRED:	I have spoken against her ; no one can save them .
GOLD:	“ I cry out , ‘ Help ! ' but no one answers me.I protest , but there is no justice .

ID:	2959
INPUT:	▁Gainerako ek ▁Afek ▁hirira ▁egin ▁zuten ▁ihes ; ▁baina ▁harresia ▁hogeita ▁zazpi ▁mila ▁gizon ▁haien ▁gainera ▁erori ▁zen . ▁Ben - Hadadek ▁berak ▁ere ▁hiri ▁hartara ▁egin ▁zuen ▁ihes ▁eta ▁gel az ▁gela ▁ezkutatzen ▁ibili ▁behar ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	The rest of the fighting men fled to the wall , but the wall was killed by the wall . So Ben-hadad chased them out and fled to the wall .
GOLD:	The rest fled into the town of Aphek , but the wall fell on them and killed another 27,000 . Ben-hadad fled into the town and hid in a secret room .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	▁Mundua ▁mundu ▁denetik , ▁berez ▁ikus ezina ▁dena , ▁hau ▁da , ▁Jainkoaren ▁betiereko ▁ahalmena ▁eta ▁jainko tasuna , ▁ikus garri ▁gertatzen ▁zaio ▁haren ▁egintzak ▁aztertzen ▁dituenari . ▁Ez ▁dute , ▁beraz , ▁aitzaki arik ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : It is true to do anything that is true , and it is true to do what is right , and it will happen to you .
GOLD:	For ever since the world was created , people have seen the earth and sky . Through everything God made , they can clearly see his invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature . So they have no excuse for not knowing God .

ID:	2961
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁loturik , ▁beren ▁jantzi ▁eta ▁guzti , ▁p raka , ▁soingaineko ▁eta ▁buruko ekin , ▁labeko ▁su ▁bizira ▁jaurti ▁zituzten .
PRED:	They put their clothes in burlap and put it on the head of his head , and he threw it into the fiery furnace .
GOLD:	So they tied them up and threw them into the furnace , fully dressed in their pants , turbans , robes , and other garments .

ID:	2962
INPUT:	▁Salomonek ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁ondoan ▁zegoen ▁aldarera ▁igo ▁eta ▁mila ▁erre - opari ▁eskaini ▁zituen ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	Solomon offered a burnt offering to the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and he offered sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	There in front of the Tabernacle , Solomon went up to the bronze altar in the Lord 's presence and sacrificed 1,000 burnt offerings on it .

ID:	2963
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁luzatu ▁gabe ▁uzta ▁guztien ▁eta ▁ardo aren ▁eskaintza .« S agaratu ▁niri ▁zeuen ▁lehen - semea ,
PRED:	“ Do n't be eating and drink the wine of your firstborn firstborn firstborn son .
GOLD:	“ You must not dishonor God or curse any of your rulers .

ID:	2964
INPUT:	▁Anai az ▁bihotz - hun ki turik , ▁negar gur ak ▁eman ▁zion ▁eta , ▁presaka ▁bere ▁gelara ▁joanez , ▁negar ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	He remembered his father 's decrees , and weep for his clothes . He prayed to the place he had been waiting for him .
GOLD:	Then Joseph hurried from the room because he was overcome with emotion for his brother . He went into his private room , where he broke down and wept .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	▁Mar tak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Bai , ▁Jauna , ▁sinesten ▁dut ▁zeu ▁zarela ▁Mesias , ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea , ▁mundura ▁etortzekoa ▁zena .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Peter replied , “ I believe the Messiah , the Son of God , who is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , Lord , ” she told him . “ I have always believed you are the Messiah , the Son of God , the one who has come into the world from God . ”

ID:	2966
INPUT:	▁Gu daroste ▁batek ▁inguraturik ▁ere , ▁nire ▁bihotzak ▁ikar arik ▁ez ; nire ▁aurka ▁borrokan ▁hasita ▁ere , ▁nik ▁konfiantza ▁galtzen ▁ez .
PRED:	I know that I am in trouble ; no one can stand against me ; no one can stand against me .
GOLD:	Though a mighty army surrounds me , my heart will not be afraid.Even if I am attacked , I will remain confident .

ID:	2967
INPUT:	▁Erre bel atu ▁egin ▁g atzaiz kizu , ▁kontra ▁altxatu , eta ▁zuk ▁ez ▁diguzu ▁barkatu , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	O Lord , you have spoken to you , and you have sinned against you .
GOLD:	“ We have sinned and rebelled , and you have not forgiven us .

ID:	2968
INPUT:	▁Eror ▁bedi ▁hilketa ▁honen ▁errua ▁Joaben ▁eta ▁beronen ▁etxekoen ▁gain ! ▁Izan ▁bedi ▁beti ▁Joaben ▁etxean ▁odol jario dun ik , ▁legendun ik , ▁eme - itxurako ▁gizonik , ▁ezpataz ▁edota ▁goseak ▁hilko ▁denik !»
PRED:	May the Lord be like Joab and his flock , and his young men are like Joab and his young men . If you die , let her die in the house of her house , or those who die . ”
GOLD:	Joab and his family are the guilty ones . May the family of Joab be cursed in every generation with a man who has open sores or leprosy or who walks on crutches or dies by the sword or begs for food ! ”

ID:	2969
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁diet ▁zuen ▁alab ei kon turik ▁eskatuko , emagaldu ▁bihurtu ▁direlako ; ezta ▁zuen ▁errain ei ▁ere , a dul terio gile ▁bihurtu ▁direlako . Apaiz ak ▁berak ▁bai to az emagaldu ekin , tenpl uko ▁emagaldu ekin elkar tzen ▁baitira sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzeko . Eta ▁hala , ▁zentzu gabeko ▁herri ahon damen dira ▁doa .
PRED:	But I will not defile her daughters , for she is married to her . She is detestable to her , and she is detestable to her . She is detestable to commit adultery .
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	▁Ju dar ekin ▁batera ▁Isakar ▁eta ▁Zabulonen ▁leinuak ▁etxolatuko ▁dira . ▁Isakar tarren ▁buruzagia ▁Tzu arren ▁seme ▁Netanel ▁izango ▁da ,
PRED:	The sons of Issachar were joined by the tribe of Zebulun and Issachar . The sons of Issachar will be the father of Zebulun .
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar54,400

ID:	2971
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁haiz ez ▁manten tzen ▁da , hego - haiz earen ▁ondoren ▁dabil egun ▁osoan . G ezurra ▁gezur raren ▁gain , gogor keria ▁gogor keriaren ▁gain . Asiri arekin ▁ituna ▁egiten ▁du , Egipto rekin ▁salerosketan ▁dabil ».
PRED:	“ If you are like a wild man , you are like a wild man from the land of Egypt , the people of Israel are caught in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord is bringing charges against Judah.He is about to punish Jacob for all his deceitful ways , and pay him back for all he has done .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	▁beldur ▁nintzen , ▁eta ▁zure ▁talen tua ▁lurrean ▁ezkutatu ▁nuen . ▁Hona ▁zeure ▁dirua !”
PRED:	I was afraid of your servants , and I took your money in the dust .
GOLD:	I was afraid I would lose your money , so I hid it in the earth . Look , here is your money back . '

ID:	2973
INPUT:	▁Eror tzen ▁ari ▁naiz ▁nahi gabez ▁ahul durik : jaso ▁nazazu , ▁zeure ▁promesaren ▁arabera !
PRED:	The Lord says , “ I want you ; you have forgotten me .
GOLD:	I weep with sorrow ; encourage me by your word .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁gogoan ▁zeu ▁ere ▁esklabo ▁izan ▁zin ela ▁Egipton , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁zeure ▁Jainkoak ▁atera ▁zintu ela ▁handik ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁eta ▁esku ▁indartsuz . ▁Horregatik ▁agindu ▁dizu ▁Jaunak ▁zeure ▁Jainkoak ▁atseden - eguna ▁gordetzeko .
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God has made a covenant with you in Egypt , and the Lord your God has brought you out of Egypt . That is why the Lord your God has commanded you .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in Egypt , but the Lord your God brought you out with his strong hand and powerful arm . That is why the Lord your God has commanded you to rest on the Sabbath day .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁dizue ▁n atu rak ▁berak ▁erakusten ▁gizaseme arentzat ▁lotsagarri ▁dela ▁ilea ▁luze ▁era matea ,
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you are not faithful to you when you come , you will show your hair on your head .
GOLD:	Is n't it obvious that it 's disgraceful for a man to have long hair ?

ID:	2976
INPUT:	▁purpuraz ▁jantzitako ▁gobernari ▁eta ▁agintariak , ▁gazte ▁bikain ▁eta ▁zaldun ▁trebeak .
PRED:	all the kings of the officers and officers , officers , officers , and all who are clothed with gold .
GOLD:	They were all attractive young men , captains and commanders dressed in handsome blue , charioteers driving their horses .

ID:	2977
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁egin ▁beharreko ▁oharpen aren ▁helburua ▁hauxe ▁da : ▁bihotz ▁garbi tik , ▁kontzientzia ▁onetik ▁eta ▁itxurak eri arik ▁gabeko ▁sinesmenetik ▁datorren ▁maitasuna ▁indar tzea .
PRED:	In this way , this is a special gift to those who love your faith . Instead , you are filled with love and love .
GOLD:	The purpose of my instruction is that all believers would be filled with love that comes from a pure heart , a clear conscience , and genuine faith .

ID:	2978
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁bere ▁gaiztakeri an ▁egiten ▁du ▁estropezu , zintzoak ▁bere ▁prestu tasunean ▁du ▁konfiantza .
PRED:	The wicked are trapped by evil people , but the godly are godly .
GOLD:	The wicked are crushed by disaster , but the godly have a refuge when they die .

ID:	2979
INPUT:	▁Efraimen ▁ikus ezina ▁galdu ▁egingo ▁daeta ▁Judaren ▁etsai goa ▁amaitu . Efraim ek ▁ez ▁du ▁Judaren tzatik us ezin ik ▁izango , ezta ▁Judak ▁ere Efraimen tzat ▁etsai gorik .
PRED:	Their enemies will be cut off from the land of Ephraim , and no one will be scattered .
GOLD:	Then at last the jealousy between Israel and Judah will end.They will not be rivals anymore .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordan ▁ondoan ▁etxolatu ▁ziren , ▁Bet - J ex imo tetik ▁Abel - X i tim ▁bitartean .
PRED:	So they camped at the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River . They camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin .
GOLD:	Along the Jordan River they camped from Beth-jeshimoth as far as the meadows of Acacia on the plains of Moab .

ID:	2981
INPUT:	▁Jendeak , ▁hala ▁ere , ▁birrindu ▁beharreko ak ▁ziren ▁harrapakin etatik ▁ardi ▁eta ▁idi rik ▁hoberenak ▁hartu ▁ditu ▁Jaunari , ▁zure ▁Jainkoari , ▁Gilgalen ▁eskaintzeko .
PRED:	But all the people who had been taken away from the Lord your God . They took them to worship the Lord your God as a burnt offering to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Then my troops brought in the best of the sheep , goats , cattle , and plunder to sacrifice to the Lord your God in Gilgal . ”

ID:	2982
INPUT:	▁Erregeak , ▁hirugarren ez , ▁beste ▁buruzagi ▁bat ▁bidali ▁zuen , ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁gizonekin . ▁Hirugarren ▁buruzagi ▁hau ▁ere ▁igo ▁zen ▁Eliasen gana ; ▁baina , ▁heldu ▁zenean , ▁belaunik atu ▁egin ▁zen ▁haren ▁aitzinean ▁eta ▁honela ▁erregutu ▁zion :— Jainkoaren ▁gizon , ▁utz ▁gaitzazu ▁bizirik , ▁bai ▁ni , ▁bai ▁zeure ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁zerbitzariok .
PRED:	So the king sent ten men to the king , and he sent ten of his servants to come to him . But when he got up to his servants , he bowed low to him , “ Come , ” he said .
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	2983
INPUT:	▁« Aur rerantzean ▁ez ▁duzu eguz ki rik ▁beharko ▁eguna ▁argitzeko , ezta ▁ilargi - disti rarik ▁ere ▁gauez , ni , ▁Jauna , ▁izango ▁bainau zuzeure ▁argi ▁betiko , ni , ▁zeure ▁Jainkoa , ▁distira .
PRED:	“ The day of your unfailing love will be filled with the moon , and the moon will be filled with joy , and I will show you unfailing love .
GOLD:	“ No longer will you need the sun to shine by day , nor the moon to give its light by night , for the Lord your God will be your everlasting light , and your God will be your glory .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	▁Samari aren ▁hondamendia ▁berriro ▁aipatu
PRED:	A Message about Samaria
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	2985
INPUT:	▁P laz an ▁eserita , ▁marmarka ▁ari ▁zaizkit , mozkor rek ▁koplak ▁ateratzen ▁dizkidate .
PRED:	My enemies surround me ; rescue me from their tongues .
GOLD:	But I keep praying to you , Lord , hoping this time you will show me favor.In your unfailing love , O God , answer my prayer with your sure salvation .

ID:	2986
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Ekron era ▁igorri ▁zuten ▁Jainkoaren ▁kutxa . ▁Heldu ▁zenean , ▁Ekrongo ▁jendeak ▁esan ▁zuen ▁oihuka : ▁« Gu ▁eta ▁gure ▁herria ▁hil ▁gaitzan ▁ekarri ▁digute ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoaren ▁kutxa !»
PRED:	When they arrived at the Ark of God , they said to him , “ The people of Israel , the Ark of God of our God , the God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	So they sent the Ark of God to the town of Ekron , but when the people of Ekron saw it coming they cried out , “ They are bringing the Ark of the God of Israel here to kill us , too ! ”

ID:	2987
INPUT:	▁Leak ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Hau ▁zoria !» ▁Eta ▁Gad ▁eman ▁zion ▁izen .
PRED:	Rachel said , “ This is what the father of Gad ! ”
GOLD:	Leah named him Gad , for she said , “ How fortunate I am ! ”

ID:	2988
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ezetz ▁ikusten ▁badu , ▁bestea ▁oraindik ▁urruti ▁dela , ▁mandatariak ▁bidaliko ▁dizkio ▁bakea ▁eskatuz .
PRED:	But if you see that no one can go into the wilderness , we will send them into peace .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	2989
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁ere ▁abiatu , ▁eta ▁Arnon ▁errekaz ▁beste ▁aldean ▁etxolatu ▁ziren ; ▁Arnon ▁errekak , ▁amortarren ▁lurraldean ▁sortu ▁ondoren , ▁basamortua ▁zehar katzen ▁du ▁eta ▁moabdarren ▁eta ▁amortarren ▁lurralde en ▁muga ▁mar katzen .
PRED:	From the territory of the Arnon River , including the Jordan River , along the edge of the Arnon River , the Arnon River , along the Arnon River .
GOLD:	Then they moved out and camped on the far side of the Arnon River , in the wilderness adjacent to the territory of the Amorites . The Arnon is the boundary line between the Moabites and the Amorites .

ID:	2990
INPUT:	▁Nire gatik ▁erabiliko ▁zaituztete ▁horrela , ▁bidali ▁nauena ▁ezagutzen ▁ez ▁dutelako .
PRED:	I will write these things to you , but they do n't know me .
GOLD:	They will do all this to you because of me , for they have rejected the one who sent me .

ID:	2991
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁Jeremiasi ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zion
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :

ID:	2992
INPUT:	▁harri ▁hutsez ▁eraikiko ▁duzue ▁aldarea . ▁Ondoren , ▁erre - opariak ▁eskainiko ▁dizkiozue ▁bertan ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ;
PRED:	You must build an altar to the Lord your God as a burnt offering to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	▁« On dasun ez ▁beteko ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak : ▁emankor ▁egingo ▁zaituzte , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁zuen ▁abere ▁eta ▁lurrak , ▁Jaunak ▁arbasoei ▁zin ▁eginez ▁zuei ▁emango ▁zizuela ▁aginduriko ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You will give you your flocks and herds and herds of cattle , and your ancestors will give you the land the Lord swore to give you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will give you prosperity in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you , blessing you with many children , numerous livestock , and abundant crops .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	▁Badakigu ▁Kristo , ▁behin ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piz tuz ▁gero , ▁ez ▁dela ▁berriro ▁hilko : ▁herio ak ▁ez ▁du ▁harengan ▁agin terik ;
PRED:	We know that Christ is raised from the dead , and he will die . He will not die before him .
GOLD:	We are sure of this because Christ was raised from the dead , and he will never die again . Death no longer has any power over him .

ID:	2995
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁ziren ▁beren ▁arm ei ▁esker ▁nagusitu ▁lurraldeaz , ez ▁zuten ▁beren ▁indar rari ▁esker ▁lortu ▁garaipena , zure ▁ahalmen ari ▁eta ▁indar rari eta ▁presentzia ▁argi tsuari ▁esker ▁baizik , ▁maite ▁zen itu elako .
PRED:	They were not filled with their weapons , and their strength was filled with their strength . Instead , the strength of your powerful powerful powerful powerful powerful arm was filled with fear .
GOLD:	You are my King and my God.You command victories for Israel .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	▁Har antz ago , ▁Az buk en ▁seme ▁eta ▁Bet - T zur reko ▁barru ti ▁erdiaren ▁buru ▁zen ▁Nehem iasek ▁egin ▁zuen ▁lan , ▁Daviden ▁hilobi en ▁aurrean , ▁ur mael eraino ▁eta ▁gudarien ▁ku arte ler aino .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Nehemiah son of Hushai , repaired the wall of Sheba son of Asaph , the commander of the district of the district of David . He rebuilt the wall of David 's reign in the city .
GOLD:	Next to him was Nehemiah son of Azbuk , the leader of half the district of Beth-zur . He rebuilt the wall from a place across from the tombs of David 's family as far as the water reservoir and the House of the Warriors .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁zerbitzu ari ▁dagokion ean , ▁Kristorengan ▁jartzen ▁dut ▁harrotzeko ▁neure ▁bidea ;
PRED:	If we have been faithful to Christ , I am in Christ 's way .
GOLD:	So I have reason to be enthusiastic about all Christ Jesus has done through me in my service to God .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁mandatu ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zion ▁erregeak ▁Rah abi :— Irten arazi ▁etxean ▁sartu ▁zaizkizun ▁gizon ▁horiek , ▁gure ▁lurraldea ▁ikertzera ▁etorri ▁baitira .
PRED:	Then the king sent this message to him : “ Come , ” the king told him . “ These men are all living in the fields . ”
GOLD:	So the king of Jericho sent orders to Rahab : “ Bring out the men who have come into your house , for they have come here to spy out the whole land . ”

ID:	2999
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁da ▁agindurik ▁nagusiena ▁eta ▁lehena .
PRED:	This is the account of the family of the Last .
GOLD:	This is the first and greatest commandment .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	▁« Izan ▁al ▁zara ▁el ur - bil tegietan ? Ikusi ▁al ▁dituzu ▁kazkabar - gor dail uak ?
PRED:	“ How are you happy ? Are you happy ? Are you happy ? Are you happy ?
GOLD:	“ Have you visited the storehouses of the snowor seen the storehouses of hail ?

ID:	3001
INPUT:	▁abereentzat ▁belarra ▁zelaietan ▁eta ▁zeuentzat ▁asetzeko ▁adina ▁janari ▁emango ▁dizue .
PRED:	In the fields , you may eat food from the fields and herds of livestock .
GOLD:	He will give you lush pastureland for your livestock , and you yourselves will have all you want to eat .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	▁Pekah iasen ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak ▁eta ▁egintza ▁guztiak ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Uzziah 's reign are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Pekahiah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	3003
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁apaiz - jantziak ▁eta ▁jantzi ▁Aaroni ▁tunika , ▁mantua , ▁efoda ▁eta ▁bularrekoa , ▁eta ▁lotu ▁efoda <unk> laz ;
PRED:	Take garments on Aaron 's head and fine linen linen , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Dress Aaron in his priestly garments — the tunic , the robe worn with the ephod , the ephod itself , and the chestpiece . Then wrap the decorative sash of the ephod around him .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	▁Davidek , ▁orduan , ▁Abiat arri : ▁« B anekien , ▁bai , ▁egun ▁hartan ▁han ▁gertatu ▁zen ▁Do eg ▁edom darra ▁ez ▁zela ▁geldituko ▁Sauli ▁berri ▁eman ▁gabe . ▁Neu ▁nauzu ▁aitaren ▁senitarteko ▁guztien ▁heriotzaren ▁errudun .
PRED:	Then David said to him , “ When you see what you are saying , you know that your family is true , you will know that your family is not guilty . I am guilty of your father . ”
GOLD:	David exclaimed , “ I knew it ! When I saw Doeg the Edomite there that day , I knew he was sure to tell Saul . Now I have caused the death of all your father 's family .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diotsuet ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Jakizue ▁ongi , ▁ez ▁dut ▁honela ▁zuengatik ▁jokatzen . ▁Israeldarrok , ▁zeuek ▁egon ▁behar ▁duzue ▁lotsaz ▁gorri ▁zeuen ▁jokabide agatik .
PRED:	I say , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am not with you , for you are your detestable to you .
GOLD:	But remember , says the Sovereign Lord , I am not doing this because you deserve it . O my people of Israel , you should be utterly ashamed of all you have done !

ID:	3006
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemgo ▁ekialdean ▁eta ▁Olia men diko ▁hegoaldera ▁zeuden ▁kultu - lekuak ▁ere ▁profanatu ▁zituen ▁Josiasek ; ▁kultu - leku ▁haiek ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Salomonek ▁eraik iak ▁ziren ▁sidon darren ▁jainkos a ▁zen ▁Astarteren ▁irudi ▁higuingarri ari , ▁moabdarren ▁jainko ▁zen ▁Kem o xen ▁irudi ▁nazkagarri ari ▁eta ▁amondarren ▁jainko ▁zen ▁Mil ko men ▁irudi ▁nard agarri ari ▁kultu ▁emateko .
PRED:	Then Josiah made the Ark of the Lord , the God of Israel . He offered sacrifices to the gods of the Amorites , the god of the Amorites , the god of Moab , the Ammonites , and the god of Ammon .
GOLD:	The king also desecrated the pagan shrines east of Jerusalem , to the south of the Mount of Corruption , where King Solomon of Israel had built shrines for Ashtoreth , the detestable goddess of the Sidonians ; and for Chemosh , the detestable god of the Moabites ; and for Molech , the vile god of the Ammonites .

ID:	3007
INPUT:	▁Sal batu ak ▁gaude , ▁bai , ▁baina ▁itxaropen etan ▁bakarrik . ▁Eta ▁itxaro ▁duguna ▁begien ▁aurrean ▁bagenu , ▁hori ▁ez ▁litzateke ▁itxaropena ▁izango , ▁inork ▁ez ▁baitu ▁itxaroten ▁begien ▁aurrean ▁duena .
PRED:	That is why we are not going to be hope , but we can not be hope . And it is no hope to be sure to be sure to be hope .
GOLD:	We were given this hope when we were saved . ( If we already have something , we do n't need to hope for it .

ID:	3008
INPUT:	▁Are ▁gehiago , ▁urrutiko ▁gizonei ▁mezulariak ▁bidali ▁zizkieten , ▁etortzeko ▁esanez ; ▁eta ▁haiek ▁etorri ▁ondoren , ▁bain atu , ▁begiak ▁pin tatu ▁eta ▁beren ▁burua ▁bitx iz ▁apaindu ▁zuten .
PRED:	The men of Benjamin sent messengers to the tribe of Benjamin , and they sent them to come to the valley of blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ You sisters sent messengers to distant lands to get men . Then when they arrived , you bathed yourselves , painted your eyelids , and put on your finest jewels for them .

ID:	3009
INPUT:	▁bosgarren a ▁sar don iz ez , ▁seigarren a ▁kor nal in az , ▁zazpigarrena ▁kri soli toz , ▁zortzigarren a ▁ber il oz , ▁bederatzigarren a ▁top azio z , ▁hamargarren a ▁a ga taz , ▁ham aik ag arrena ▁hi az in toz , ▁hamabigarren a ▁am at is taz .
PRED:	On the sixth year of the sixth year , the sixth year of the sixth year of the second year , the second year of the second year of the second year , which is a new year .
GOLD:	the fifth onyx , the sixth carnelian , the seventh chrysolite , the eighth beryl , the ninth topaz , the tenth chrysoprase , the eleventh jacinth , the twelfth amethyst .

ID:	3010
INPUT:	▁Jeroboam ▁aldarean ▁intsentsua ▁erretzen ▁ari ▁zela , ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizon ▁bat ▁heldu ▁zen , ▁Jaunaren ▁aginduz , ▁Judatik ▁Betelera .
PRED:	When Jeroboam burned incense on the altar of God , he went to Bethel to Bethel .
GOLD:	At the Lord 's command , a man of God from Judah went to Bethel , arriving there just as Jeroboam was approaching the altar to burn incense .

ID:	3011
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁utzi ▁ni ! ▁Ene ▁Jainko , ▁ez ▁geldi ▁urruti !
PRED:	For the Lord is not with me ; he is not far away from me .
GOLD:	Come quickly to help me , O Lord my savior .

ID:	3012
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁hondatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁etiopi arrak ▁Asaren ▁eta ▁Judakoen ▁aitzinean , ▁eta ▁etiopi arrek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then the Lord struck the people of Judah , and he fled to Judah .
GOLD:	Then Asa cried out to the Lord his God , “ O Lord , no one but you can help the powerless against the mighty ! Help us , O Lord our God , for we trust in you alone . It is in your name that we have come against this vast horde . O Lord , you are our God ; do not let mere men prevail against you ! ”

ID:	3013
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁eman ▁diez azkizu laz er uko ▁ihintza eta ▁lurreko ▁guri tasuna , ogi - ardo tan ▁oparo tasuna .
PRED:	May God give you the best of you to eat the fruit of the earth , and you may eat the fruit of your wine .
GOLD:	“ From the dew of heavenand the richness of the earth , may God always give you abundant harvests of grainand bountiful new wine .

ID:	3014
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁Asaren ▁erregealdiko ▁hogeita ▁zazpigarren ▁urtean ▁egin ▁zen ▁errege ▁Zimri ; ▁zazpi ▁egunez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Tirtzan . ▁Gu daros tea , ▁aldi ▁hartan , ▁filistearren ▁hiri ▁Gib eton ▁setiatzen ▁ari ▁zen .
PRED:	In the seventh year of King Asa 's reign , King Jehoshaphat of Judah became king in Judah . He reigned in Judah 's reign in Judah .
GOLD:	Zimri began to rule over Israel in the twenty-seventh year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , but his reign in Tirzah lasted only seven days . The army of Israel was then attacking the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	3015
INPUT:	▁Hauxe ▁da ▁jakin ▁eta ▁ulertu ▁behar ▁duzuna : ▁Erbestetik ▁itzuli ▁eta ▁Jerusalem ▁berrera ik itzeko ▁mezua ▁agertu ▁zen etik ▁buruzagi ▁sagaratua ▁agertu ▁arte , ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁zazpi ▁denboraldi ▁igaroko ▁dira ; ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁hirurogeita ▁bi ▁denboraldi tan ▁erbestetik ▁etorri ▁eta ▁hiria ▁eta ▁honen ▁kale ▁eta ▁harresiak ▁egingo ▁dituzte , ▁baina ▁garai ▁zai lak ▁izango ▁dira .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ This is what the Lord says : The time of Jerusalem will come to see seven years , and there will be seven years old enough for seven days .
GOLD:	Now listen and understand ! Seven sets of seven plus sixty-two sets of seven will pass from the time the command is given to rebuild Jerusalem until a ruler — the Anointed One — comes . Jerusalem will be rebuilt with streets and strong defenses , despite the perilous times .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁ahalmen ▁bikaina
PRED:	Living by God 's power
GOLD:	Future Conversion of Gentiles

ID:	3017
INPUT:	▁Al ko hol - edari ei ▁buruzko ▁arauak
PRED:	Parable of the Amalekites
GOLD:	Instructions for Priestly Conduct

ID:	3018
INPUT:	▁kendu ▁egingo ▁diet ▁aho tiko dola ▁darion ▁okela , h agin etatik ▁idoloei ▁eskainitako ▁jaki ak ; hala ▁ere , geldituko ▁dira ▁batzuk ▁bizirik eta ▁neure - neure ak ▁izango ▁ditut , Judako ▁leinuak ▁bezala ; Ek ron goak ▁jebustarrak ▁bezal aizango ▁dira .
PRED:	So I will bring them out of their meat , meat , meat , meat , meat , and birds will be destroyed . They will be destroyed by my people , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	I will grab the bloody meat from their mouthsand snatch the detestable sacrifices from their teeth.Then the surviving Philistines will worship our Godand become like a clan in Judah.The Philistines of Ekron will join my people , as the ancient Jebusites once did .

ID:	3019
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁engainatu ▁zeuen ▁buruak , ▁senide ▁maiteok !
PRED:	Dear friends , dear brothers and sisters ! Do n't be afraid of your brothers .
GOLD:	So do n't be misled , my dear brothers and sisters .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁nonbait ▁onartzen ▁ez ▁bazaituztete ▁eta ▁entzun ▁nahi ▁ez , ▁handik ▁alde ▁egitean , ▁astindu ▁zeuen ▁oinetako ▁hautsa , ▁beraien ▁kontrako ▁seinale tzat ».
PRED:	And if you refuse to listen to the end of the earth , do not turn from the dust . ”
GOLD:	But if any place refuses to welcome you or listen to you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	3021
INPUT:	▁Goizean ▁etortzean , ▁kez k ati ▁aurkitu ▁zituen ▁Josek
PRED:	When Joseph arrived , Joseph found that Joseph had gone to Joseph ,
GOLD:	When Joseph saw them the next morning , he noticed that they both looked upset .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	▁Tx akur ▁galdu ari ▁belarri etatik ▁hel tzea ▁bezal ain oren ▁eztabai datan ▁sartzea .
PRED:	If it seems to say , it is like a fool to enter the eye . ”
GOLD:	Interfering in someone else 's argumentis as foolish as yanking a dog 's ears .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	▁Jaunarengan , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoarengan , ▁ipini ▁zuen ▁bere ▁ustea . ▁Ez ▁zen ▁hura ▁bezalako ▁erregerik ▁izan ▁Judan , ▁ez ▁aurretik , ▁ez ▁ondoren .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave him to you in the presence of the Lord your God . He did not be like a king in Judah .
GOLD:	Hezekiah trusted in the Lord , the God of Israel . There was no one like him among all the kings of Judah , either before or after his time .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	▁Gauez , ▁ohean , neure ▁bihotzeko ▁kutun aren ▁bila ▁nenbil en . Bila ▁ibili , ▁bai , baina ▁aurkitu , ▁ez .
PRED:	But if I look at my bed , I searched for myself , but they found no more .
GOLD:	One night as I lay in bed , I yearned for my lover.I yearned for him , but he did not come .

ID:	3025
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁aukeratu ▁gabeak izen datu ▁dituzte ▁errege , nire ▁on iri tzirik ▁gab eh au tatu ▁dituzte ▁buruzagiak . Beren ▁zilar ▁eta ▁urrez jainko - irudiak ▁egin ▁dituzte , beren ▁buruaren ▁galbide .
PRED:	My people are their king , and their princes are crushed with silver , silver , silver , silver , gold , and silver , gold , and gold .
GOLD:	The people have appointed kings without my consent , and princes without my approval.By making idols for themselves from their silver and gold , they have brought about their own destruction .

ID:	3026
INPUT:	▁Bad ak izkizu ▁aginduak : ▁Ez ▁egin ▁adulteriorik , ▁ez ▁hil ▁inor , ▁ez ▁ostu , ▁ez ▁egin ▁gezurrezko ▁testigantzarik , ▁ohoratu ▁aita - amak .
PRED:	Then you said , ‘ You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery . '
GOLD:	But to answer your question , you know the commandments : ‘ You must not commit adultery . You must not murder . You must not steal . You must not testify falsely . Honor your father and mother . ' ”

ID:	3027
INPUT:	▁Zigor ▁nazala ▁Jainko ▁zuzenak , ▁zentzarazi ▁Jainko ▁on berak , baina ▁ez ▁dezala ▁nire ▁buruak ▁gaiztoen ▁olioz ▁distira ▁egin . Otoitz ean ▁iraungo ▁dut ▁nik , ▁haien ▁ohitura ▁oker ren ▁kontra .
PRED:	Yes , I am pure with good , but I am good to you . Do n't be angry with you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Let the godly strike me ! It will be a kindness ! If they correct me , it is soothing medicine.Do n't let me refuse it.But I pray constantlyagainst the wicked and their deeds .

ID:	3028
INPUT:	▁« L eg enak ▁jotako ▁gizonak ▁arropak ▁urratu ak ▁eramango ▁ditu , ▁ilea ▁harro ▁eta ▁aurpegia ▁erdi ▁estalirik , ▁eta ▁“ Kuts atua ! ▁Kuts atua !” ▁oihu ▁eginez ▁ibiliko ▁da .
PRED:	“ The man has sex with a prostitute , ” says the Lord . “ He will put his hair on the ground , and he will shout , ‘ You will fall into the ground . '
GOLD:	“ Those who suffer from a serious skin disease must tear their clothing and leave their hair uncombed . They must cover their mouth and call out , ‘ Unclean ! Unclean ! '

ID:	3029
INPUT:	▁Hiri ▁horiek ▁izango ▁dituzue ▁babesleku , ▁hildakoa ▁mendekatzeko ▁eskubidea ▁duenaren ▁eskuetatik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁ahal ▁izateko ; ▁horrela , ▁hiltzailea ▁ez ▁da ▁hilko , ▁elkartearen ▁aurrean ▁auzitara ▁agertu ▁baino ▁lehen .
PRED:	These cities are the people who flee to the house of the house , for the person who accidentally killed the person who refuses to kill you .
GOLD:	These cities will be places of protection from a dead person 's relatives who want to avenge the death . The slayer must not be put to death before being tried by the community .

ID:	3030
INPUT:	▁Erantzun ▁zien :— G isa ▁honetako ▁espirituak ▁botatzeko ▁bide ▁bakarra ▁otoitza ▁da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ This is the one of this way ! ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ This kind can be cast out only by prayer . ”

ID:	3031
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁gauza ▁guztiak haren ▁menpean ▁jarri ▁ditu ▁Jainkoak . ▁Baina ▁Liburu ▁Santuak , ▁dena ▁haren ▁menpeko ▁dela ▁esatean , ▁ez ▁du , ▁noski , ▁hor ▁sartzen ▁Jainkoa ▁bera , ▁gauza ▁guztiak ▁menpean ▁jarri ▁dizki ona .
PRED:	For God has made everything he has done , but he has made his authority . But he is the Scriptures say , “ God has made you right . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ God has put all things under his authority. ” ( Of course , when it says “ all things are under his authority , ” that does not include God himself , who gave Christ his authority . )

ID:	3032
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁dirua ▁ere ▁eta ▁itzuli ▁zeuen ▁zaku - muturrean ▁ekarri takoa , ▁oker ren ▁bat ▁izan ▁da ▁eta .
PRED:	Take a money for your money , and take a money for your money .
GOLD:	Also take double the money that was put back in your sacks , as it was probably someone 's mistake .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁zuek , ▁gaiztoak ▁izanik , ▁seme - alabei ▁gauza ▁onak ▁ematen ▁baldin ▁badakizue , ▁zenbatez ▁areago ▁ez ▁die ▁zeruko ▁zuen ▁Aitak ▁Espiritu ▁Santua ▁emango ▁eskatzen ▁diotenei ?»
PRED:	So you know that your children are doing what is right , so that you know that the Holy Spirit gives birth to the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	So if you sinful people know how to give good gifts to your children , how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him . ”

ID:	3034
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁esan ▁zien ▁Joabi ▁eta ▁honekin ▁ziren ▁gizonei : ▁« Ur ratu ▁zeuen ▁jantziak , ▁hartu ▁soinean ▁dolu - jantzia ▁eta ▁egizue ▁negar ▁Abnerren ▁aurrean ». Ondoren , ▁David ▁hil kutxaren ▁atzetik ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	So David said to Joab , “ Get out of the Israelite army and put my clothes on burlap and mourning . So David 's clothes in burlap and wept in mourning . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to Joab and all those who were with him , “ Tear your clothes and put on burlap . Mourn for Abner. ” And King David himself walked behind the procession to the grave .

ID:	3035
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁da ▁herrian ▁behartsu rik ▁faltako ; ▁horregatik ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁zeuen ▁herritar rekin , ▁zeuen ▁ardurapean ▁dituzuen ▁dohakabe ▁eta ▁behartsu ekin , ▁eskuzabal ▁izateko .
PRED:	“ Do n't be poor and poor , for you are poor and harvest the poor . I have given you the poor for your fellow Israelites .
GOLD:	There will always be some in the land who are poor . That is why I am commanding you to share freely with the poor and with other Israelites in need .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ar ro tzen gandik . Jesusek , ▁orduan :— Etx ekoak ▁libre ▁daude , ▁beraz .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ The family of Zebedee , ” Jesus replied .
GOLD:	“ They tax the people they have conquered , ” Peter replied. “ Well , then , ” Jesus said , “ the citizens are free !

ID:	3037
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁Jaunari , ▁ene ▁Jainkoari , ▁tenplua ▁eraiki ▁nahi ▁diot ▁eta ▁berari ▁sagaratu . ▁Han ▁intsentsua ▁eta ▁usainki ▁goz oak ▁erreko ▁ditugu ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁berari ▁eskainitako ▁ogiak ▁jarriko ▁ditugu ▁etengabe ▁eta ▁egunero , ▁goiz ▁eta ▁arratsalde ; ▁eta ▁larunba tetan , ▁ilberri - jaietan ▁eta ▁Jaunaren , ▁gure ▁Jainkoaren , ▁jai ▁nagusi etan ▁erre - opariak ▁eskainiko ▁ditugu . ▁Hala ▁eginen ▁da ▁beti ▁Israelen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have built an altar to the Temple of the Lord our God . We must burn incense before the Lord our God and burn incense on the Sabbath day of Israel .
GOLD:	Solomon also sent this message to King Hiram at Tyre : “ Send me cedar logs as you did for my father , David , when he was building his palace .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitez ▁desbidera ▁ez ▁eskuin , ▁ez ▁ezker retara ; ur rundu ▁oinak ▁gaiztakeriatik .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from your feet ; take your feet from your feet .
GOLD:	Do n't get sidetracked ; keep your feet from following evil .

ID:	3039
INPUT:	▁Liburu ▁Santuetan ▁idatzirik ▁dagoen ▁guztia ▁Jainkoak ▁in spi ratua ▁da ▁eta ▁irakasteko , ▁arraz oiak ▁emateko , ▁okerrak ▁zuzen tzeko ▁eta ▁biziera ▁zuzenean ▁hez teko ▁balia garria ;
PRED:	The Scriptures say to those who say , “ The Scriptures say , ‘ The Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies is forgiven , and those who try to listen to others . '
GOLD:	All Scripture is inspired by God and is useful to teach us what is true and to make us realize what is wrong in our lives . It corrects us when we are wrong and teaches us to do what is right .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	▁Hitz ▁hauek ▁entzutean , ▁ehuntariak ▁gudalburuari ▁jakinarazi ▁zion , ▁esanez :— Begira ▁ongi ▁zer ▁egiten ▁duzun ! ▁Gizon ▁hori ▁Erromako ▁hiri tarra ▁duzu .
PRED:	When the Roman officer heard this , he said to the commander of the commander of the Roman officer , “ Look ! You have a Roman city ! ”
GOLD:	When the officer heard this , he went to the commander and asked , “ What are you doing ? This man is a Roman citizen ! ”

ID:	3041
INPUT:	▁« Hiri ▁bat , ▁eraso ▁eta ▁konkistatu ▁aurretik , ▁luzaroan ▁setiatu ▁behar ▁baduzue , ▁ez ▁dituzue ▁inguruko ▁arb olak ▁aizko raz ▁botako , ▁beraien ▁fruitu ez ▁janari tu ▁beharko ▁duzue ▁eta . ▁Gizaki ▁ote ▁dira , ▁bada , ▁arb olak , ▁setiatu tzat ▁hartzeko ?
PRED:	“ When you attack the city , you will be swept away from its fruit , you will be swept away from its fruit . When you eat its fruit , you will be filled with fruit , and your fruit will be thrown into the tree .
GOLD:	“ When you are attacking a town and the war drags on , you must not cut down the trees with your axes . You may eat the fruit , but do not cut down the trees . Are the trees your enemies , that you should attack them ?

ID:	3042
INPUT:	▁O toitza
PRED:	Teaching about Prayer
GOLD:	Cyrus , the Lord 's Chosen One

ID:	3043
INPUT:	▁Zuhur rak , ▁hiletak ▁jotzen ▁ari ▁diren etxean ▁du ▁bihotza ; ten tel ak , ▁berriz , jaietan ▁dagoen ▁etxean .
PRED:	The wise are trapped by the mother of the godly , but their hearts are at the home of the dead .
GOLD:	A wise person thinks a lot about death , while a fool thinks only about having a good time .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁haiek ▁belarriak ▁itxi ▁eta , ▁garrasika , ▁gainera ▁jaurti ▁zitzaizkion ▁Esteban i ▁denak ▁batean .
PRED:	Then they cried out to him , and they threw him into a trap .
GOLD:	Then they put their hands over their ears and began shouting . They rushed at him

ID:	3045
INPUT:	▁M endeb aldeko ▁muga ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoa ▁zen . Horra , ▁bada , ▁Judaren ▁leinuko ei ▁senitarteka ▁banaturiko ▁lurralde - zat iaren ▁mugak .
PRED:	The southern boundary extended from the Mediterranean Sea ; it was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Judah .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	3046
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Amatziasek ; ▁ez , ▁ordea , ▁David ▁bere ▁arbasoak ▁bezain ▁zintzo . ▁Bere ▁aita ▁Joaxen ▁antzera ▁jokatu ▁zuen ▁Amatziasek ▁ere .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , but he did not be as his father .
GOLD:	Amaziah did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , but not like his ancestor David . Instead , he followed the example of his father , Joash .

ID:	3047
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Josiasek ▁Jekonias ▁eta ▁honen ▁anaiak , ▁israeldarrak ▁Babiloniara ▁erbesteratu ▁zituzten ▁garaian .
PRED:	Josiah and his brothers and his brothers went to Babylon .
GOLD:	Josiah was the father of Jehoiachin and his brothers ( born at the time of the exile to Babylon ) .

ID:	3048
INPUT:	▁Ezin ▁konta ▁ahala ▁dira ▁gure ▁erruak , baina ▁zuk ▁barkatu ▁egiten ▁dizki guzu ▁hob enak .
PRED:	You do n't have any of our sins , but we have done to you .
GOLD:	What joy for those you choose to bring near , those who live in your holy courts.What festivities await usinside your holy Temple .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁galdetu ▁zien :— Zer ▁egingo ▁ote ▁die ▁nekazari ▁horiei ▁mahasti - j abeak ▁itzultzean ?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	3050
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁gutiziatu ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ik ▁ezer : ▁ez ▁haren ▁emazterik , ▁ez ▁morroi - mira ber ik , ▁ez ▁idi rik , ▁ez ▁asto rik , ▁eta ▁ez ▁beste ▁ezertxo ▁ere ».
PRED:	“ You must not commit adultery . Do not have sexual relations with a male goat or female servant or female servant , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , and goats . ”
GOLD:	“ You must not covet your neighbor 's house . You must not covet your neighbor 's wife , male or female servant , ox or donkey , or anything else that belongs to your neighbor . ”

ID:	3051
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁zeure ▁jokabide ▁zital ▁eta ▁higuingarri aren ▁ondorenak ▁jasan ▁behar ▁dituzu . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana .
PRED:	You must be cut off from your detestable sins , for I am the Lord .
GOLD:	This is your punishment for all your lewdness and detestable sins , says the Lord .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	▁Gogoratu ▁esan ▁nizuena : ▁morroia ▁ez ▁da ▁nagusia ▁baino ▁handiago . ▁Ni ▁pertsegitu ▁banau te , ▁zuek ▁ere ▁pertsegituko ▁zaituztete ; ▁nire ▁mezua ▁nola ▁hartu , ▁hala ▁hartuko ▁dute ▁zuena ▁ere .
PRED:	That is why I said , ‘ You are not greater than I am sending you out of my master . But you will pay attention to what I am going . '
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	▁Apaizek ▁nire ▁legea ▁hausten ▁dute ▁eta ▁nire ▁gauza ▁santuak ▁profanatzen ; ▁ez ▁dute ▁bereizten ▁sakratua ▁eta ▁profan oa , ▁ez ▁dute ▁ezagu tarazten ▁garbi aren ▁eta ▁kutsatu aren ▁arteko ▁aldea ; ▁ez ▁zaie ▁axola ▁nire ▁larunbata ; ▁horrela , ▁profanatu ▁egiten ▁naute .
PRED:	The priests must not defile my law and the law of the law . They are not defiled by the law of the Lord 's Armies . They are not defiled by eating the Sabbath , and they are defiled by my Sabbath .
GOLD:	Your priests have violated my instructions and defiled my holy things . They make no distinction between what is holy and what is not . And they do not teach my people the difference between what is ceremonially clean and unclean . They disregard my Sabbath days so that I am dishonored among them .

ID:	3054
INPUT:	▁Samuelek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Jauna ▁urrundu ▁baldin ▁bazaizu ▁eta ▁kontra ▁jarri , ▁zertarako ▁egin ▁niri ▁kontsulta ?
PRED:	But Samuel replied , “ If you have sinned against me , why should I do you ? ”
GOLD:	But Samuel replied , “ Why ask me , since the Lord has left you and has become your enemy ?

ID:	3055
INPUT:	▁Jan , ▁bada , ▁mesedez , ▁behar rezkoa ▁baituzue ▁salbatzeko . ▁Ez ▁duzue ▁inork ▁buruko ▁ile ▁bat ▁ere ▁galduko ».
PRED:	So do n't let me drink your hair , for no one can save me . ”
GOLD:	“ Please eat something now for your own good . For not a hair of your heads will perish . ”

ID:	3056
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁zeruko ▁zuen ▁Aitak ▁ez ▁du ▁nahi ▁txiki ▁hauetako ▁inor ▁gal tzerik .
PRED:	In the same way , the Father of heaven , the Father of heaven came down on the earth .
GOLD:	In the same way , it is not my heavenly Father 's will that even one of these little ones should perish .

ID:	3057
INPUT:	▁Zintzoa ▁eta ▁zuzena ▁salbatuak , gaiztoa ▁eta ▁maltzurra ▁haien ▁ordez ▁gaitzets iak .
PRED:	For the wicked will be forgiven , and the wicked will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The wicked are punished in place of the godly , and traitors in place of the honest .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	▁Hemen ▁duzue , ▁bada , ▁zeuek ▁hautatu ▁eta ▁eskatu ▁duzuen ▁erregea . ▁Hara , ▁Jaunak ▁erregea ▁eman ▁dizue .
PRED:	Now now , you have chosen the king to be your king and your king .
GOLD:	All right , here is the king you have chosen . You asked for him , and the Lord has granted your request .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁zelaietan ▁dauden ▁ardi ▁edo ▁ahuntz etatik ▁berrehun eko ▁bat ▁eskainiko ▁duzue . ▁Hau ▁guztia ▁labore - oparitzat , ▁erre - oparitzat ▁nahiz ▁elkartasun - oparitzat ▁aurkeztuko ▁duzue ▁bekatuen ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁egiteko . ▁Honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	You must present a male goat as a burnt offering to the Lord . In this way , you must present a male goat as a sin offering to the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	and one sheep or goat for every 200 in your flocks in Israel . These will be the grain offerings , burnt offerings , and peace offerings that will make atonement for the people who bring them , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	3060
INPUT:	▁Begi ▁aurrean ▁dut ▁beti ▁zure ▁maitasuna eta ▁leial ▁jokatu ▁dut ▁zurekiko ;
PRED:	I am blameless before you , and I love your love .
GOLD:	For I am always aware of your unfailing love , and I have lived according to your truth .

ID:	3061
INPUT:	▁Haien ▁aurrean ▁dar - dar ▁dagi ▁lurrak , ikara ▁da ▁zerua ; eguz ki - ilargiak ▁ilundu ▁egiten ▁dira , iz arrek ▁beren ▁dir dira ▁galtzen .
PRED:	Their earth tremble before the heavens , and the earth will be filled with violence , and the earth will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	The earth quakes as they advance , and the heavens tremble.The sun and moon grow dark , and the stars no longer shine .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	▁Gedeonek ▁esan ▁zien :— Ongi ▁da . ▁Baina ▁Jaunak ▁Zebah ▁eta ▁Tzalmuna ▁nire ▁esku ▁uz tean , ▁basamortuko ▁o tez ▁eta ▁gar duz ▁urratuko ▁zaituztet .
PRED:	Gideon replied , “ The Lord is your servant ! ”
GOLD:	So Gideon said , “ After the Lord gives me victory over Zebah and Zalmunna , I will return and tear your flesh with the thorns and briers from the wilderness . ”

ID:	3063
INPUT:	▁baina ▁egizue ▁apal tasunez ▁eta ▁errespe tuz , ▁kontzientzia ▁garbiz ▁jokatuz . ▁Horrela , ▁Kristoren ▁sines le ▁bezala ▁duzuen ▁jokaera ▁on az ▁gaizki - esaka ▁ari ▁direnak ▁beren ▁hitz ▁gaizto ez ▁lots atuko ▁dira .
PRED:	But if you are pure with knowledge , you are pure with Christ .
GOLD:	But do this in a gentle and respectful way . Keep your conscience clear . Then if people speak against you , they will be ashamed when they see what a good life you live because you belong to Christ .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	▁Ir te erako ▁eta pen ▁zerrenda
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	Remembering Israel 's Journey

ID:	3065
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁salbatu ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁Ezekias ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunak ▁Asiriako ▁errege ▁Senakerib en ▁eta ▁gainerako ▁etsaien ▁eskuetan ▁erortzetik . ▁Eta ▁bakea ▁eman ▁zien ▁alde ▁guztietan .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah prayed to Hezekiah , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the king of Assyria , who rescued them from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	That is how the Lord rescued Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem from King Sennacherib of Assyria and from all the others who threatened them . So there was peace throughout the land .

ID:	3066
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁izan ▁zen ▁zab ul ondarren ▁ondarea , ▁senitarteka ▁banatua , ▁aipaturiko ▁hiri ▁eta ▁herrixkak ▁barne .
PRED:	These were the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Levi , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Zebulun included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁janaria , ▁j akirik ▁goxo ena ▁ere , naz kagarri ▁gertatzen ▁zaio .
PRED:	“ But if you are eating with food , you can hide in your presence .
GOLD:	They lose their appetitefor even the most delicious food .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	▁Zer ura ▁igo ta ▁ere , ▁zu ▁hantxe ! Hildakoen ▁Egoitzara ▁jaitsi ta ▁ere , ▁zu ▁bertan !
PRED:	“ Why are you going to leave , ” he went down to the place .
GOLD:	If I go up to heaven , you are there ; if I go down to the grave , you are there .

ID:	3069
INPUT:	▁Irten ▁ziren , ▁orduan , ▁Sodoma , ▁Gomorra , ▁Ad ma , ▁Tz eboim ▁eta ▁B ela ▁edo ▁Tzoar ko ▁erregeak , ▁eta ▁eraso ▁egin ▁zieten ▁Si di mgo ▁haranean
PRED:	So the king left Sodom and Gomorrah , Sodom , Gomorrah , and Gomorrah , as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as the Valley .
GOLD:	Then the rebel kings of Sodom , Gomorrah , Admah , Zeboiim , and Bela ( also called Zoar ) prepared for battle in the valley of the Dead Sea .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	▁Zeuk ▁entzun ▁duzu ▁zer ▁egin ▁dieten ▁Asiriako ▁erregeek ▁herrialde ▁guztiei : ▁erabat ▁hondatu . ▁Eta ▁zu ▁libratuko ▁zarelako an ▁al ▁zaude ?
PRED:	You have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all the kings of Assyria .
GOLD:	You know perfectly well what the kings of Assyria have done wherever they have gone . They have completely destroyed everyone who stood in their way ! Why should you be any different ?

ID:	3071
INPUT:	▁dena ▁estaliko ▁dute , ▁lurra ▁bera ▁ezin ▁ikus teraino . ▁K azkab arrak ▁honda tz eke ▁utz iriko ▁apurra ▁ere ▁jan ▁egingo ▁dute ▁eta ▁baita ▁landetan ▁ernetzen ▁ari ▁diren ▁zuhaitzak ▁ere .
PRED:	The earth will not see the earth , and it will not be filled with fruit . Your fruit will be filled with fruit , and birds will be filled with fruit .
GOLD:	They will cover the land so that you wo n't be able to see the ground . They will devour what little is left of your crops after the hailstorm , including all the trees growing in the fields .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	▁Jesusen ▁agindu ▁berria
PRED:	Jesus Is Greater Than Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3073
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁gogoko ▁buruzagiak ▁emango ▁dizkizuet , ▁jakinduriaz ▁eta ▁zuhur tasunez ▁gidatuko ▁zaituztetenak .
PRED:	I will give you wise advice , knowledge , and knowledge will guide you .
GOLD:	And I will give you shepherds after my own heart , who will guide you with knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herriak ▁Jauna ▁baztertu
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	The Death of Joshua

ID:	3075
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁erdi arekin , ▁berriz , ▁jainko - irudi ▁bat ▁egiten ▁du ▁eta ▁aurrean ▁ahuspezturik ▁gurtzen . ▁Eta ▁otoitz ▁egiten ▁dio , ▁esanez : ▁« Salba ▁nazazu , ▁zu ▁baitzaitut ▁jainko !»
PRED:	Then he added , “ This is a god who does such a calf ? ” And he said , “ I pray to you , O God ! ”
GOLD:	Then he takes what 's leftand makes his god : a carved idol ! He falls down in front of it , worshiping and praying to it. “ Rescue me ! ” he says. “ You are my god ! ”

ID:	3076
INPUT:	▁Erakutsi ▁al ▁dizkizute Herio aren ▁erreinu ▁ilun eko ▁ateak ?
PRED:	Do you listen to me , O King of Heaven 's Armies ?
GOLD:	Do you know where the gates of death are located ? Have you seen the gates of utter gloom ?

ID:	3077
INPUT:	▁“ Zil ar ▁mespretxagarri ” deituko ▁dituzte , mespretxatu ▁egin ▁baititut ▁nik , Jaunak ».
PRED:	“ The land will become pregnant , and I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	I will label them ‘ Rejected Silver , 'for I , the Lord , am discarding them . ”

ID:	3078
INPUT:	▁Z aldizko ▁gudariak ▁berrehun ▁mil io i ▁zirela ▁entzun ▁nuen .
PRED:	At that time I heard his troops , and I heard them all around him .
GOLD:	I heard the size of their army , which was 200 million mounted troops .

ID:	3079
INPUT:	▁Bestela , ▁larrugorrian ▁utziko ▁dut , jaio ▁zen ▁egunean ▁bezala ▁biluzik . Bas amortu aren ▁antzeko ▁egingo ▁dut , lur ▁id or ▁bihurtuko eta ▁eg arriz ▁hilaraziko .
PRED:	But I will be ashamed , like those who live in the streets , just as they live in the streets . I will turn away from the ground , and I will gather you in the ground .
GOLD:	Their mother is a shameless prostituteand became pregnant in a shameful way.She said , ‘ I 'll run after other loversand sell myself to them for food and water , for clothing of wool and linen , and for olive oil and drinks . '

ID:	3080
INPUT:	▁Sartu ▁zen ▁jan to kian ▁Hero d iasen ▁alaba ▁eta ▁dantzan ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁atsegin ▁izan ▁zitzaien ▁Herodes i ▁eta ▁honen ▁mahaikide ei . ▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁neskatxari ▁esan ▁zion :— Eskatu ▁nahi ▁duzuna , ▁eta ▁emango ▁dizut .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the daughter of Hilkiah , went to the daughter of Shecaniah , and she gave her to her , and she said to her , “ I 'll ask you to ask you . ”
GOLD:	Then his daughter , also named Herodias , came in and performed a dance that greatly pleased Herod and his guests . “ Ask me for anything you like , ” the king said to the girl , “ and I will give it to you . ”

ID:	3081
INPUT:	▁Haserre - eguna ▁izango ▁da , larri tasun - ▁eta ▁nahigabe - eguna , hondamendi ▁handiko ▁eguna , ilun pe - ▁eta ▁goibel tasun - eguna , hodei - ▁eta ▁laino ▁bel tzaren ▁eguna .
PRED:	In the day the day of the Lord will be filled with joy and day , dark , darkness , and great day of darkness will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	It will be a day when the Lord 's anger is poured out — a day of terrible distress and anguish , a day of ruin and desolation , a day of darkness and gloom , a day of clouds and blackness ,

ID:	3082
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Asak ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁eta ▁bere ▁jauregiko ▁altxor tegietan ▁zeuden ▁urre - zilarrak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Damaskon ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Siriako ▁errege ▁Ben - Hada di ▁bidali ▁zizkion , ▁esanez :
PRED:	Then King Asa sent messengers to the Temple of the Lord , along with gold , silver , gold , and gold , and gold , and the kings of Aram . He sent them to the king of Aram .
GOLD:	Asa responded by removing the silver and gold from the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord and the royal palace . He sent it to King Ben-hadad of Aram , who was ruling in Damascus , along with this message :

ID:	3083
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁ote ▁hau ▁guztia , ▁Israel , bidean ▁gidatu ▁zintuen ▁Jauna , zeure ▁Jainkoa , bazter tu ▁duzulako ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize all the people of Israel , O Lord , the God of Israel , your unfailing love ! ”
GOLD:	And you have brought this upon yourselvesby rebelling against the Lord your God , even though he was leading you on the way !

ID:	3084
INPUT:	▁Aleluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! Goretsazue , ▁Jaunaren ▁zerbitzariok , ▁goretsi ▁Jaunaren ▁izena !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Yes , give praise , O servants of the Lord.Praise the name of the Lord !

ID:	3085
INPUT:	▁Goiz ero ▁berritzen ▁dira . ▁Bai ▁handia , ▁Jauna , ▁zure ▁leialtasuna !
PRED:	Yes , O Lord , the strength of your unfailing love .
GOLD:	Great is his faithfulness ; his mercies begin afresh each morning .

ID:	3086
INPUT:	▁Nolatan ▁esan ▁dezakezue jakin tsu ▁zaretela , zeu ekin ▁duzuela ▁Jaunaren ▁legea ? Zeuen ▁lege - maisuen ▁l uma ▁gezurtiak faltsu ▁bihurtu ▁du ▁lege ▁hori !
PRED:	But you know that you are your law , you know that you are your law , and you are the law of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ ‘ How can you say , “ We are wise because we have the word of the Lord , ” when your teachers have twisted it by writing lies ?

ID:	3087
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁zioen ▁konden aren ▁arrazoia ▁adierazten ▁zuen ▁idaz kun ak : ▁« Ju duen ▁erregea ».
PRED:	When he was speaking , he said to him , “ This is what the Jews are saying to the Jews . ”
GOLD:	A sign announced the charge against him . It read , “ The King of the Jews . ”

ID:	3088
INPUT:	▁Bihar ▁edo ▁etzi ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁honek ▁guztiak ▁zer ▁esan ▁nahi ▁duen ▁galde tzean , ▁hau ▁erantzungo ▁diezue : ▁“ Jaunak ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁atera ▁gintuen ▁Egiptotik , ▁esklabotzatik .
PRED:	“ If you ask , ‘ What is your son ? ' he asked , ‘ This is what the Lord says : If you ask , ‘ The Lord has brought us out of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ And in the future , your children will ask you , ‘ What does all this mean ? ' Then you will tell them , ‘ With the power of his mighty hand , the Lord brought us out of Egypt , the place of our slavery .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁eraman , ▁beraz , ▁ezer ▁higuingarri rik ▁zeuen ▁etxera , ▁zuek ▁ere , ▁idoloak ▁bezala , ▁erabat ▁suntsi ▁ez ▁zaitzaten . ▁Guztiz ▁arbu ia garri ▁eta ▁higuingarri tzat ▁hartuko ▁dituzue , ▁erabat ▁suntsi tuak ▁behar ▁dute ▁izan ▁eta .
PRED:	You must not defile your detestable sins , just as you are detestable to your detestable sins . You are detestable to your detestable sins and detestable sins .
GOLD:	Do not bring any detestable objects into your home , for then you will be destroyed , just like them . You must utterly detest such things , for they are set apart for destruction .

ID:	3090
INPUT:	▁Erre inu ▁eta ▁herriak men pean ▁jarri ▁zenizkien , eta ▁inguruko ▁lurrak ▁banatu . Hexb ongo ▁errege ▁Sihon - en ▁lurralde ah artu ▁zuten , Ba x ango ▁errege ▁Og - ena .
PRED:	So the people of Israel did not drive out the land of the Amorites , and the kings of Bashan . They were forced to Sihon and conquered the kings of Bashan .
GOLD:	“ Then you helped our ancestors conquer kingdoms and nations , and you placed your people in every corner of the land . They took over the land of King Sihon of Heshbon and the land of King Og of Bashan .

ID:	3091
INPUT:	▁Joka ▁ezazue ▁ongi ▁jentilen ▁artean ; ▁horrela , ▁orain ▁gaizkile tzat ▁salatzen ▁bazaituztete ▁ere , ▁zuen ▁egintza ▁onak ▁aitortu ▁beharko ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁Jainkoa ▁goretsiko ▁dute , ▁hura ▁kontuak ▁hartzera ▁etortzean .
PRED:	When you think you are doing , you will attack the Gentiles , you will know that the Lord your God will judge them .
GOLD:	Be careful to live properly among your unbelieving neighbors . Then even if they accuse you of doing wrong , they will see your honorable behavior , and they will give honor to God when he judges the world .

ID:	3092
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁arte ▁oldartu ▁behar ▁duzue ▁gizakiaren ▁kontra , hau ▁akabatu ▁nahian ? P ar eta ▁oker tua , ▁hesi ▁koloka ▁zarete ▁guztiok !
PRED:	How long will you be destroyed ? How long will you be destroyed ? How long will you be destroyed ?
GOLD:	They plan to topple me from my high position.They delight in telling lies about me.They praise me to my facebut curse me in their hearts.Interlude

ID:	3093
INPUT:	▁Erro l datu ▁hogeita ▁hamar ▁urtetik ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁arteko ak , ▁elkarketa - etxolako ▁zerbitzua ▁bete ▁dezaten .
PRED:	All who are ten years old or ten or fifty or ten or ten or serve at the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	List all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who are eligible to serve in the Tabernacle .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien , ▁orduan , ▁Jesus : ▁« Kontuz ! ▁Ez ▁zaitzatela ▁inork ▁engaina .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Do n't let anyone deceive you .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't let anyone mislead you ,

ID:	3095
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁aldarea ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁eta ▁« Jauna , ▁nire ▁bandera » ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁izena ,
PRED:	Then Moses built an altar and built this altar to the Lord .
GOLD:	Moses built an altar there and named it Yahweh-Nissi ( which means “ the Lord is my banner ” ) .

ID:	3096
INPUT:	▁Erdi min etan ▁zegoela , ▁em ag inak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Ez ▁izan ▁beldur ; ▁mutikoa ▁duzu ▁berriro !»
PRED:	When the boy had finished , she said to the boy , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	After a very hard delivery , the midwife finally exclaimed , “ Do n't be afraid — you have another son ! ”

ID:	3097
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁eta ▁Beeltzebul
PRED:	Jesus Appears to the Temple
GOLD:	Jesus and the Prince of Demons

ID:	3098
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁Tamar ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Amn onen ▁etxera ; ▁hau ▁ohean ▁ze tzan . ▁Tam arrek ▁ogi - ir ina ▁hartu , ▁orea ▁egin , ▁anaiaren ▁aurrean ▁opilak ▁prestatu ▁eta ▁erre ▁zituen .
PRED:	So Amnon went to Tamar to Amnon , and she went home to Amnon . She ate her as she had done , she prepared for her . She ate it as she had commanded her .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	3099
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁Israelgo ▁arduradunekin ▁batera , ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zion ▁herriari : ▁« Bete ▁gaur ▁ematen ▁dizkizuedan ▁agindu ▁guztiok .
PRED:	Moses gave this message to the people of Israel : “ This is what the Lord says : I am giving you today .
GOLD:	Then Moses and the leaders of Israel gave this charge to the people : “ Obey all these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	▁Asiriako ▁erregearentzat ▁zilar - kopuru ▁hori ▁bildu ▁ahal ▁izateko , ▁Israelgo ▁aberats ▁guztiei ▁zilarrezko ▁berrogeita ▁hamar na ▁txanpon ▁eman arazi ▁zien , ▁zerga tzat . ▁Asiriako ▁erregea , ▁Israelen ▁gelditu ▁gabe , ▁bere ▁erreinura ▁itzuli ▁zen .
PRED:	Then King Sennacherib of Assyria gathered a large amount of silver and silver to all the kings of Assyria . He gave fifty silver silver silver to the king of Assyria . He went to the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Menahem extorted the money from the rich of Israel , demanding that each of them pay fifty pieces of silver to the king of Assyria . So the king of Assyria turned from attacking Israel and did not stay in the land .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	▁Israeli ▁bere ▁gaiztakeri en ▁kontua eska ▁diezaiodan ▁egunean , Betel go ▁aldarearen ▁kontra ekin go ▁diot : er tzak ▁apurtuko ▁dizkio teta ▁lurrera ▁botako .
PRED:	In this day I will make a covenant with his glory , and I will bring them to the altar of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ On the very day I punish Israel for its sins , I will destroy the pagan altars at Bethel.The horns of the altar will be cut offand fall to the ground .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁“ Horrela ▁hondo ratuko ▁da ▁Babilonia , ▁ez ▁da ▁jaikiko ▁nik ▁bidaliko ▁diodan ▁hondamendi tik ”». Hemen ▁amaitzen ▁dira ▁Jeremiasen ▁mezuak .
PRED:	“ Yes , I will send you out of Babylon , ” says the Lord. “ I will send you down from the land I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then say , ‘ In this same way Babylon and her people will sink , never again to rise , because of the disasters I will bring upon her . ' ” This is the end of Jeremiah 's messages .

ID:	3103
INPUT:	▁Bazi ren ▁bi ▁egun ▁Gedalias ▁hila ▁zela , ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁artean ▁inork ▁ez ▁jakin ▁arren .
PRED:	When they heard about two days , they learned that no one was dead .
GOLD:	The next day , before anyone had heard about Gedaliah 's murder ,

ID:	3104
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dut ▁gehiago ▁seme - iz enik ▁merezi . ▁Har ▁nazazu ▁zeure ▁langile etako ▁bat ▁bezala ”.
PRED:	I am not worthy of your son , just as I said to you . I am willing to take one of you . '
GOLD:	and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . Please take me on as a hired servant . ” '

ID:	3105
INPUT:	▁mendiko ▁hegazti ▁harraparien tza teta ▁basapizti entzat ▁uzten ▁dira , hegazti ▁harrapari ek ▁uda eta ▁basapiztiek ▁negu aber tan ▁igaro ▁dezaten . Halaxe ▁gertatuko ▁da et io pi arrekin ▁ere ».
PRED:	I will gather my people from the mountains , the houses of the sky , and the houses of the sky will be destroyed , and all the animals will disappear . ”
GOLD:	Your mighty army will be left dead in the fieldsfor the mountain vultures and wild animals.The vultures will tear at the corpses all summer.The wild animals will gnaw at the bones all winter .

ID:	3106
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁tenplu ▁bikain ean ▁sartuko ▁naiz , ▁Jainko ▁Jauna , leiala ▁zu ▁bakarrik ▁zarela ▁iragarriko .
PRED:	I will enter the Temple of the Lord your God , for you are not faithful .
GOLD:	I will praise your mighty deeds , O Sovereign Lord.I will tell everyone that you alone are just .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁gorpuak , ▁berriz , ▁basamortu ▁honetan ▁geldituko ▁dira ;
PRED:	Your bodies will remain in ruins , and your bodies will be deserted .
GOLD:	But as for you , you will drop dead in this wilderness .

ID:	3108
INPUT:	▁Igo ▁mendi ▁garai ▁batera , ▁Sion , al biste ▁pozgarria ▁hots ▁egitera ; go ratu ▁indarrez ▁ahotsa , ▁Jerusalem , go ratu ▁beldur gabe ▁ahotsa , esan ▁Judako ▁hiriei :« Hemen ▁da ▁zuen ▁Jainkoa !
PRED:	The people of Jerusalem will come to Jerusalem , and Jerusalem will come to hear the voice of the Lord , saying , “ This is what the God says : ‘ This is what the God says : '
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	3109
INPUT:	▁« Izan ▁kontu , ▁beraz ! ▁Jauna ▁suaren ▁erditik ▁Horeb ▁mendian ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaiz uen ean , ▁ez ▁zenuten ▁inolako ▁irudi rik ▁ikusi .
PRED:	“ That is why the Lord said to you , “ O Lord , you have seen your face from Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	“ But be very careful ! You did not see the Lord 's form on the day he spoke to you from the heart of the fire at Mount Sinai .

ID:	3110
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁beldurtu , ez ▁zara ▁barregarri ▁geldituko ; ez ▁lotsatu , ▁ez ▁zaituzte ▁laido tuko . Ah aztu ▁egingo ▁duzu gazte tako ▁lots aiz una , ez ▁zara ▁oroituko alargun ▁zinen eko ▁laido az ,
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , for you will be ashamed . You will be ashamed , and you will worship your name . You will worship the queen of widows .
GOLD:	“ Fear not ; you will no longer live in shame.Do n't be afraid ; there is no more disgrace for you.You will no longer remember the shame of your youthand the sorrows of widowhood .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	▁Senar ▁berriak ▁ere , ▁emakume az ▁gogai turik , ▁dibortzio - agiria ▁idatzi , ▁emakumeari ▁eman ▁eta ▁etxetik ▁bidaltzen ▁badu ▁edota ▁senar ▁berria ▁hiltzen ▁bada ,
PRED:	If she has been unfaithful to her , she gave her her her her a woman to her husband , she she must marry her .
GOLD:	But if the second husband also turns against her , writes a document of divorce , hands it to her , and sends her away , or if he dies ,

ID:	3112
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁lagundu ▁ez ▁bal it , herio - isil pean ▁nengo keen ▁dagoeneko .
PRED:	For the Lord did not kill me when he was in the grave .
GOLD:	Unless the Lord had helped me , I would soon have settled in the silence of the grave .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	▁Zabaldu ▁niri ▁garaile en ▁ateak , Jauna ▁gorestera ▁sar ▁nadin .
PRED:	Let me return to the Lord , for I will praise you .
GOLD:	Open for me the gates where the righteous enter , and I will go in and thank the Lord .

ID:	3114
INPUT:	▁Egiptoko ▁erregeak ▁Joakazen ▁anaia ▁Eliakim ▁ezarri ▁zuen ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁errege ; ▁baina ▁izena ▁aldatu ▁zion , ▁Joiakim ▁dei tuz . ▁Joakaz , ▁berriz , ▁Egiptora ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁preso .
PRED:	When the king of Judah arrived in Jerusalem , he called the king of Judah , but he called the name of Josiah . But he called him to Egypt .
GOLD:	The king of Egypt then installed Eliakim , the brother of Jehoahaz , as the next king of Judah and Jerusalem , and he changed Eliakim 's name to Jehoiakim . Then Neco took Jehoahaz to Egypt as a prisoner .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	▁Jakin tsuaren ▁hitz ▁ez tiak erra zago ▁aditzen ▁dira er g elen ▁buruzagiaren deia darrak ▁baino .
PRED:	The wise can not speak , and the needy are trapped by the home of the city .
GOLD:	Better to hear the quiet words of a wise personthan the shouts of a foolish king .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	▁bere ▁ibai adar rekin , Ar ▁ibarrera ▁jaitsi eta ▁Moabeko ▁muga ▁ondotik igar <unk> ▁dena ».
PRED:	When the waters of Moab came to the waters of Moab , you will come to the border of Moab . ”
GOLD:	and the ravines that extend as far as the settlement of Ar on the border of Moab . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	▁Kanta . ▁Koreren ▁semeen ▁salmoa .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	How great is the Lord , how deserving of praise , in the city of our God , which sits on his holy mountain !

ID:	3118
INPUT:	▁Non ahi ▁jan ▁dezakezue ▁zeuek ▁eta ▁zuen ▁etxeko ek . ▁Hori ▁da ▁zuen ▁ordaina ▁elkarketa - etxolako ▁zerbitzu agatik .
PRED:	“ Where is your flocks and your relatives , your relatives , and your duty on the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	You Levites and your families may eat this food anywhere you wish , for it is your compensation for serving in the Tabernacle .

ID:	3119
INPUT:	▁Guztia ▁alferrik ▁zela ▁eta , ▁gainera , ▁iskanbila ▁sor tzera ▁zihoala ▁ikusirik , ▁Pilatok ▁ura ▁hartu ▁eta ▁eskuak ▁garbitu ▁zituen ▁jendearen ▁aurrean , ▁esanez :— Ez ▁naiz ▁gizon ▁honen ▁heriotzaren ▁erantzule ! ▁Zeuek ▁ikusi !
PRED:	When they saw it , he saw that it was in the temple of the city and asked them , “ I have hands on the people of Israel ! ” “ I have n't seen him ! ”
GOLD:	Pilate saw that he was n't getting anywhere and that a riot was developing . So he sent for a bowl of water and washed his hands before the crowd , saying , “ I am innocent of this man 's blood . The responsibility is yours ! ”

ID:	3120
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁zein ▁ziren ▁jentil - herri ▁haiek : ▁filistearren ▁bost ▁buruzagiak , ▁kanaandar ▁guztiak , ▁sidon darrak ▁eta ▁Baal - Her mon ▁menditik ▁Hamateko ▁sarreraraino ▁Libanoko ▁mendialdean ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁hibiarrak .
PRED:	These are the towns of the Amorites who lived in the land of the Amorites , the Amorites , who lived in the hill country of Ammon .
GOLD:	These are the nations : the Philistines ( those living under the five Philistine rulers ) , all the Canaanites , the Sidonians , and the Hivites living in the mountains of Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon to Lebo-hamath .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	▁Guardiaburuak , ▁gainera , ▁urre ▁nahiz ▁zilar ▁huts ezko ▁tresnak ▁hartu ▁zituen : ▁errautsontziak , ▁intsentsu - ontziak , ▁isipu - ontziak , ▁el tzeak , ▁argimutil ak ▁eta ▁katil uak .
PRED:	The captain of the guard was also made of gold , silver , gold , silver , gold , and bronze .
GOLD:	The captain of the guard also took the small bowls , incense burners , basins , pots , lampstands , ladles , bowls used for liquid offerings , and all the other articles made of pure gold or silver .

ID:	3122
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁pentsa ▁nahikoa ▁duzuen ik ▁“ Abrahamen ▁ondorengo ▁gara ” ▁esatea . ▁Egia ▁esan , ▁honako ▁harri ▁hauetatik ▁ere ▁atera ▁ditzake ▁Jainkoak ▁Abrahamen ▁ondorengoak .
PRED:	For you are not allowed to eat , ‘ We are descendants of Abraham , ' and we said , ‘ We have come from the land of Abraham . '
GOLD:	Do n't just say to each other , ‘ We 're safe , for we are descendants of Abraham . ' That means nothing , for I tell you , God can create children of Abraham from these very stones .

ID:	3123
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zoritxar ▁eta ▁atsekabe ▁izugarri ▁horiek ▁gertatzean , ▁kantika ▁hau ▁lekuko ▁izango ▁dute ▁beren ▁kontra , ▁ondorengoek ▁ere ▁gogoan ▁eta ▁ahoan ▁izango ▁baitute . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁ondo txo ▁dakit ▁zer ▁asmo ▁darabil tzan ▁gogoan ▁herri ▁honek , ▁zin ▁eginez ▁agindutako ▁lurraldera ▁eraman ▁baino ▁lehenago tik ▁ere ».
PRED:	In this way , this is what happened to happen , and his descendants will happen to them , and they will know what they have done . They are saying , ‘ I have done . ' ”
GOLD:	And when great disasters come down on them , this song will stand as evidence against them , for it will never be forgotten by their descendants . I know the intentions of these people , even now before they have entered the land I swore to give them . ”

ID:	3124
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁eskatu ▁eta ▁hartzen ▁ez ▁baduzue , ▁gaizki ▁eskatzen ▁duzuelako ▁da , ▁zeuen ▁grina ▁txarrak ▁asetzeko .
PRED:	If you do n't realize that you do n't want you to turn away from your evil desires .
GOLD:	And even when you ask , you do n't get it because your motives are all wrong — you want only what will give you pleasure .

ID:	3125
INPUT:	▁S uak ▁kiskali ▁zuen ▁haien ▁taldea , ▁gar rak ▁irentsi ▁gaiztoak .
PRED:	They destroyed their armies by their enemies , and their enemies swallowed up their lives .
GOLD:	Fire fell upon their followers ; a flame consumed the wicked .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	▁Lotek ▁Jordango ▁ibar ▁osoa ▁hautatu ▁zuen ▁beretzat ▁eta ▁ekialderantz ▁jo . ▁Honela , ▁banatu ▁egin ▁ziren ▁bata ▁beste arengandik .
PRED:	They were camped at night and camped at the east of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Lot chose for himself the whole Jordan Valley to the east of them . He went there with his flocks and servants and parted company with his uncle Abram .

ID:	3127
INPUT:	▁Guztira , ▁urre ▁eta ▁zilarrezko ▁ 5 . 400 ▁ontzi . Hori ▁guztia ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁Xex batz arrek , ▁erbesteratuak ▁Babiloniatik ▁Jerusalemera ▁itzuli ▁zirenean .
PRED:	These were the towns of silver and gold , along with gold , which was called to Jerusalem . When the Babylonian exile , he returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	In all , there were 5,400 articles of gold and silver . Sheshbazzar brought all of these along when the exiles went from Babylon to Jerusalem .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	▁Haserre tzen ▁bazarete ▁ere , ▁ez ▁heldu ▁bekatu ▁egiteraino ; ▁zuen ▁haserreak ▁ez ▁beza ▁eguzkia ▁sartu ▁arte ▁iraun .
PRED:	If you turn your anger , let your anger be filled with fire , let the sun be filled with fire .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you. ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	3129
INPUT:	▁Apaiz ari ▁eramango ▁dizkio . ▁Apaizak ▁barkamen - oparitzat ▁eskaini ▁beharrekoa ▁aurkeztuko ▁du ▁lehenbizi ; ▁burua ▁moztuko ▁dio ▁lepo - hezur ▁ondotik , ▁baina ▁erabat ▁erauzi ▁gabe ;
PRED:	The priest must present their offerings to the priest as a sin offering to the priest , but it must be cut off from the ashes . But it must be cut off from it .
GOLD:	You must bring them to the priest , who will present the first bird as the sin offering . He will wring its neck but without severing its head from the body .

ID:	3130
INPUT:	▁Bizi dun ▁ororen ▁bis tatik ▁ezkutuan ▁dago , zeruko ▁hegazti entzat ▁gordeta .
PRED:	He gives justice to the heavens , and he gives justice to the heavens .
GOLD:	It is hidden from the eyes of all humanity.Even the sharp-eyed birds in the sky can not discover it .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁senideek ▁ere ▁ez ▁zuten , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁berarengan ▁sinesten .
PRED:	His brothers did not believe in him , for they believe him .
GOLD:	For even his brothers did n't believe in him .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	▁Elkarketa - etxola ▁eramateko ▁gurdi en ▁eskaintza
PRED:	Instructions for the Priests
GOLD:	Offerings of Dedication

ID:	3133
INPUT:	▁Esn ez ▁hazi ▁zintuztedan , ▁ez ▁janari ▁sendo z , ▁hau ▁hartzeko ▁ez ▁baitzineten ▁oraindik ▁gauza . ▁Orain ▁ere ▁ez ▁zarete ▁gauza ,
PRED:	You did not forget the food of your suffering , for you did not forget your regulations .
GOLD:	I had to feed you with milk , not with solid food , because you were n't ready for anything stronger . And you still are n't ready ,

ID:	3134
INPUT:	▁Honek ▁erantzun :— Ene ▁errege ▁jauna , ▁engainatu ▁egin ▁ninduen ▁morroiak . ▁Nik , ▁zure ▁zerbitzari ▁honek , ▁astoa ▁tx al ma tzeko ▁agindu ▁nion , ▁gainean ▁jarri ▁eta ▁erregearekin ▁joateko , ▁her rena ▁naiz ▁eta .
PRED:	“ My lord , my lord , ” the king said . “ My servants have been deceived , ‘ My servant , ' the king said , ‘ I 'm going to tell you the king , ‘ I 'm going ! '
GOLD:	Ziba has slandered me by saying that I refused to come . But I know that my lord the king is like an angel of God , so do what you think is best .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	▁Beti ▁haserre ▁egon ▁behar ▁al ▁duzu ▁gurekin , men derik ▁mende ▁kopetilun ?
PRED:	Do you be angry with us ? Do you be angry with us ?
GOLD:	Wo n't you revive us again , so your people can rejoice in you ?

ID:	3136
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁Jaunak ▁ene ▁Jaunari ▁esana : ▁« Eseri ▁nire ▁eskuinean , ▁zeure ▁etsaiak ▁oinazpian ▁jartzen ▁dizkizudan ▁bitartean ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to the Lord : “ When you hide your feet in your right hand , take your feet in your right hand . ”
GOLD:	‘ The said to my Lord , Sit in the place of honor at my right handuntil I humble your enemies beneath your feet . '

ID:	3137
INPUT:	▁H ots ▁handiko ▁hitzaldi ▁hutsak ▁egiten ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁grina ▁lizun en ▁bitartez ▁oker bidetik ▁aldendu ▁berriak ▁liluratzen .
PRED:	When they are saying to them , they turn away from the desires of our sins .
GOLD:	They brag about themselves with empty , foolish boasting . With an appeal to twisted sexual desires , they lure back into sin those who have barely escaped from a lifestyle of deception .

ID:	3138
INPUT:	▁Bi tan ▁banaturiko ▁apatxak ▁dituzten ▁eta ▁hausnar tzaile ▁diren ▁animal ia ▁guztiak ▁jan ▁ditzakezue .
PRED:	You may eat the animal that scurry along the cud , and everything you eat .
GOLD:	“ You may eat any animal that has completely split hooves and chews the cud ,

ID:	3139
INPUT:	▁zuri ▁hau ▁esateko : ▁“ Bar katu , ▁mesedez , ▁zure ▁senideen ▁hobena ▁eta ▁bekatua ; ▁kalte ▁egin ▁dizute , ▁bai , ▁baina ▁orain ▁barkatu ▁beraien ▁hobena ▁zure ▁aitaren ▁Jainkoaren ▁zerbitzari ▁hauei ”». Hau ▁entzutean , ▁negar ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Josek .
PRED:	“ That is why I said to you , ‘ That is why your father said to you , ‘ You have sinned against your brothers and sisters , ' But when they heard your father 's servant Joseph 's servant . ”
GOLD:	to say to you : ‘ Please forgive your brothers for the great wrong they did to you — for their sin in treating you so cruelly . ' So we , the servants of the God of your father , beg you to forgive our sin. ” When Joseph received the message , he broke down and wept .

ID:	3140
INPUT:	▁Haien ▁buru ▁hiru ▁ministro ▁ezarri ▁zituen ; ▁hauei ▁eman ▁behar ▁zieten ▁eskualde buruek ▁beren ▁administra z ioaren ▁kontua , ▁erregearen ▁kaltetan ▁ibil ▁ez ▁zitezen . ▁Daniel ▁zen ▁hiru ▁ministro ▁horietako ▁bat
PRED:	Their officials were made in charge of their officials , and all the nobles of the kings of the king 's officials were in charge of the king 's officers .
GOLD:	Daniel soon proved himself more capable than all the other administrators and high officers . Because of Daniel 's great ability , the king made plans to place him over the entire empire .

ID:	3141
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁etxeko ▁guztiak ▁bezala , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa ▁gurtzen ▁zuen ▁eta ▁jainkozal ea ▁zen ; ▁limosna ▁asko ▁ematen ▁zizkion ▁judu - herri ari ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egiten ▁zion ▁Jainkoari ▁ohiko ▁ordu etan .
PRED:	He gave his family to God , just as he was in the place of God . He gave many people to God , and he prayed to God .
GOLD:	He was a devout , God-fearing man , as was everyone in his household . He gave generously to the poor and prayed regularly to God .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	▁Lebiren ▁leinuari ▁ez ▁zion ▁ondar erik ▁eman , ▁Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁baitzuen ▁ondare , ▁Jaunak ▁berak ▁hitzeman ▁bezala .
PRED:	But the Levites did not forget the Lord your God , just as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	But Moses gave no allotment of land to the tribe of Levi , for the Lord , the God of Israel , had promised that he himself would be their allotment .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	▁baina ▁eguzkiak ▁jo ▁orduko , ▁erre ▁egin ▁zen ▁eta , ▁sustrairik ▁ez ▁zuelako , ▁ihartu .
PRED:	But when the sun was dried up , he did n't believe it .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	▁Moab
PRED:	Moab Intercedes for Moab
GOLD:	God 's Judgment on Judah and Israel

ID:	3145
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁Jainko ▁ahalguztiduna , noiz ▁arte ▁egon ▁behar ▁duzu ▁haserre , herria ▁otoizka ▁duzun ▁bitartean ?
PRED:	O Lord , what is your Heaven 's Armies , your people , says , “ Why are you angry with me ? Why are you angry ? ”
GOLD:	You have fed us with sorrowand made us drink tears by the bucketful .

ID:	3146
INPUT:	▁Ara b , ▁D uma , ▁E xan ,
PRED:	Lachish , Eglon ,
GOLD:	Also included were the towns of Arab , Dumah , Eshan ,

ID:	3147
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bedi ▁inor ▁sar ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean , ▁zerbitz aldia ▁duten ▁apaiz ▁eta ▁lebitarrak ▁izan ▁ezik ; ▁horiek ▁sar ▁daitezke , ▁sagaratuak ▁baitira . ▁Baina ▁gainerako ▁jendeak ▁bete ▁dezala ▁Jaunaren ▁agindua .
PRED:	Do not go to the Temple of the Lord , for they are serving the priests and Levites . Instead , they will serve the Lord . But the rest of the Lord 's people . ”
GOLD:	Remember , only the priests and Levites on duty may enter the Temple of the Lord , for they are set apart as holy . The rest of the people must obey the Lord 's instructions and stay outside .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	▁« Nik , ▁Jesusek , ▁neure ▁aingerua ▁bidali ▁dut ▁eliz ▁elkarteei ▁mezu ▁hau ▁ematera . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Daviden ▁kim ua ▁eta ▁jatorria , ▁neu ▁goizeko ▁ar tiz ar ▁distiratsua ».
PRED:	“ I am the angel who sent me to the angel of the church . I have sent this message to the people of David . I am the next morning . ”
GOLD:	“ I , Jesus , have sent my angel to give you this message for the churches . I am both the source of David and the heir to his throne . I am the bright morning star . ”

ID:	3149
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁herri ▁asko ▁epaituko ▁ditu , nazio ▁indartsuen ▁auziak ▁erabakiko , baita ▁urrutiko en enak ▁ere . Ezp atak ▁go lde ▁bihurtuko ▁dituzteeta ▁lantz ak ▁igitai . Ez ▁da ▁n aziorik n azi oren ▁kontra ▁altxatuko , ez ▁dira ▁gehiago gu durako ▁prestatuko .
PRED:	He will judge many nations with their swords against them . They will be accompanied by a sword of war against the Lord . They will not fight against their swords and fight against them .
GOLD:	The Lord will mediate between peoplesand will settle disputes between strong nations far away.They will hammer their swords into plowsharesand their spears into pruning hooks.Nation will no longer fight against nation , nor train for war anymore .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁hondar - meta ▁batean ▁hondoa ▁jo ▁zuten ; ▁b ran ka ▁hondar retan ▁sartua ▁gelditu ▁zen , ▁mugitu ▁ezinik ; ▁tx opa , ▁berriz , ▁zar tatuz ▁zihoan ▁olatu en ▁kol pez .
PRED:	But the waters of the sea was poured out the road to the sea , but the waters stopped stopped at the shore of the sea .
GOLD:	But they hit a shoal and ran the ship aground too soon . The bow of the ship stuck fast , while the stern was repeatedly smashed by the force of the waves and began to break apart .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	▁Goretsazue ▁Jauna , ▁nazio ▁guztiok , os pa ▁ezazue , ▁herri ▁guztiok !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all the nations of the nations , and all the nations .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , all you nations.Praise him , all you people of the earth .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	▁Kar abanak ▁bidetik ▁okertu ▁egiten ▁dira : erre ka ▁leh orrei ▁ere m urantz ▁jarraitu ▁eta ▁bertan ▁galtzen .
PRED:	You have rejected us , and I have turned away from the dust .
GOLD:	The caravans turn aside to be refreshed , but there is nothing to drink , so they die .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erregeak ▁erantzungo ▁die : ▁“ Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Nire ▁seni derik ▁txikien ▁hauetako ▁edozein i ▁egin ▁zenio tena , ▁neuri ▁egin ▁zenidaten ”.
PRED:	Then the king will reply , ‘ I tell you the truth , you know the truth of my enemies . '
GOLD:	“ And the King will say , ‘ I tell you the truth , when you did it to one of the least of these my brothers and sisters , you were doing it to me ! '

ID:	3154
INPUT:	▁Agurtu ▁besar kada ▁santuaz ▁senide ▁guztiak .
PRED:	Greet all the sacred kiss .
GOLD:	Greet all the brothers and sisters with a sacred kiss .

ID:	3155
INPUT:	▁Tenpluko ▁laguntzaileak ▁Ofel ▁auza tegian ▁bizi ▁ziren ; ▁Tz ih a ▁eta ▁G ix pa ▁ziren ▁haien ▁buru .
PRED:	The Temple of the tribe of Levi lived in the hill country of the hill country of Ophel .
GOLD:	The Temple servants , however , whose leaders were Ziha and Gishpa , all lived on the hill of Ophel .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jainko ▁Jauna ▁laino ▁batean ▁jaitsi ▁eta ▁Moisesekin ▁egon ▁zen , ▁eta ▁bere ▁izena ▁hots ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁« Jauna ».
PRED:	Then the Lord came down to the pillar of cloud , and he spoke to Moses . “ Lord , ” he said , “ the name of Moses . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord came down in a cloud and stood there with him ; and he called out his own name , Yahweh .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	▁D ir uz alek eria
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The Futility of Wealth

ID:	3158
INPUT:	▁Jai ▁haiek ▁bukatu rik , ▁bertan ▁izaniko ▁israeldarrak ▁Judako ▁hirietan ▁barrena ▁ibili ▁ziren ▁zutarri ▁sakratuak ▁hausten , ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁ebaki ▁eta ▁kultu - leku ▁eta ▁aldareak ▁desegiten , ▁denak ▁suntsitu ▁arte . ▁Eta ▁hori ▁bera ▁egin ▁zuten ▁Benjamin , ▁Efraim ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurraldeetan ▁ere . ▁Ondoren , ▁israeldar ▁guztiak ▁nor ▁bere ▁hiri ▁eta ▁etxera ▁itzuli ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the people of Israel had finished giving the rest of the Lord 's reign , the people of Judah , and the Asherah poles of the pagan shrines , and all the pagan shrines , and all the people of Israel returned to their pagan shrines .
GOLD:	When the festival ended , the Israelites who attended went to all the towns of Judah , Benjamin , Ephraim , and Manasseh , and they smashed all the sacred pillars , cut down the Asherah poles , and removed the pagan shrines and altars . After this , the Israelites returned to their own towns and homes .

ID:	3159
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁jantziak ▁banatzen ▁dituzte , nire ▁soinekoa ▁zotz ▁egiten .
PRED:	They will wear my clothes in my clothing , and my clothes will be broken .
GOLD:	O Lord , do not stay far away ! You are my strength ; come quickly to my aid !

ID:	3160
INPUT:	▁Z oz ketaz ▁banatuko ▁duzue ▁lurraldea ▁leinu ▁eta ▁senitarte en ▁artean : ▁senitartea ▁ugaria ▁bada , ▁ondare - zatia ▁ere ▁handiagoa ▁emango ▁zaio , ▁eta ▁ur ria ▁bada ▁txik iagoa . ▁Sen itar te ▁bakoitzak ▁zoz ketan ▁egokitu riko ▁ondarea ▁jasoko ▁du .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Each tribe will be given to the clans of the tribe of Levi . It will be a permanent allotment of land flowing with its allotment .
GOLD:	You must distribute the land among the clans by sacred lot and in proportion to their size . A larger portion of land will be allotted to each of the larger clans , and a smaller portion will be allotted to each of the smaller clans . The decision of the sacred lot is final . In this way , the portions of land will be divided among your ancestral tribes .

ID:	3161
INPUT:	▁« I k asi ▁pikondo aren ▁irudi ▁honetatik : ▁kim ua ▁berritzen ▁eta ▁hos toa ▁zabaltzen ▁zaion eko , ▁badakizue ▁uda ▁hurbil ▁dela .
PRED:	“ Then you will become a tree of fruit , and it will be cut down from its branches .
GOLD:	“ Now learn a lesson from the fig tree . When its branches bud and its leaves begin to sprout , you know that summer is near .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁artean ▁nioen : ▁“ Hitz ▁egin ▁beza ▁adin ak , i rakats ▁bezate ▁urte ek ▁jakinduria ”.
PRED:	“ Then I said to myself , ‘ Let the wisdom of the Pharisees ! '
GOLD:	I thought , ‘ Those who are older should speak , for wisdom comes with age . '

ID:	3163
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herriak , ▁erregeak ▁kasurik ▁ere ▁ez ▁ziola ▁egiten ▁oharturik , ▁ihardetsi ▁zion :« Ez ▁dugu ▁deus ▁ere ▁nahi ▁Davidekin ! Ez ▁dugu ▁parterik ▁nahi Jeseren ▁seme arekin ! Zeuen ▁etxoletara , ▁israeldarrok ! Zaindu ▁zeuk ▁zeure ▁etxea , ▁David !» Horrela , ▁bada , ▁israeldarrak ▁beren ▁etxoletara ▁joan ▁ziren .
PRED:	When the people of Israel heard what the king had done , he said to David , “ We do n't want to go to your family , and we want to go home to your family . ”
GOLD:	When all Israel realized that the king had refused to listen to them , they responded , “ Down with the dynasty of David ! We have no interest in the son of Jesse.Back to your homes , O Israel ! Look out for your own house , O David ! ” So the people of Israel returned home .

ID:	3164
INPUT:	▁bere ▁eskuzabal tasunaren ▁dohain ako paro ▁isuri ▁ditu ▁gure ▁gainera , jakinduria ▁eta ▁ezaguera ▁oroz gu ▁horni tuz .
PRED:	May the grace of the grace of our Lord give us great wisdom and knowledge .
GOLD:	He has showered his kindness on us , along with all wisdom and understanding .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	▁eta ▁hango ▁ogia ▁ja tean , ▁zati ▁bat ▁bereizi ▁eta ▁Jaunari ▁eskainiko ▁diozue .
PRED:	You may eat the food to the Lord your God and give it to the Lord .
GOLD:	and you eat the crops that grow there , you must set some aside as a sacred offering to the Lord .

ID:	3166
INPUT:	▁Ibili ▁Jaunaren ▁bila , ▁bizi ▁zaitezten . Beste la , ▁Joseren ▁ondorengoen gain era ▁oldar tuko ▁da , itz ali ▁ezin eko ▁suz iren tsiko ▁du ▁Betel .
PRED:	When you return to the Lord , he will send them out to the name of the Lord , he will judge the people of Joseph , and he will judge his people .
GOLD:	Come back to the Lord and live ! Otherwise , he will roar through Israel like a fire , devouring you completely.Your gods in Bethelwo n't be able to quench the flames .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁ordea , ▁bere ▁burura ▁hautsa ▁bota , ▁soinekoa ▁urratu ▁eta ▁eskuak ▁buruan ▁zituela , ▁garrasika ▁joan ▁zen ▁Tamar .
PRED:	But when he tore his hands on his head , he tore his hands on his feet .
GOLD:	But now Tamar tore her robe and put ashes on her head . And then , with her face in her hands , she went away crying .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	▁D il an , ▁Mitz pe , ▁Jok te el ,
PRED:	Mizpah , Akkub ,
GOLD:	Dilean , Mizpeh , Joktheel ,

ID:	3169
INPUT:	▁Etsaiak ▁ateetan
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's Last Warning

ID:	3170
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁hau ▁esan ▁dit :« Leh oiak ▁nahiz ▁leh oik umeak orro ▁eginez eraso tzen ▁dio ▁harrapakin ari , eta ▁ez ▁dute ▁beldur tzen aur ka ▁datorkion artzain - taldearen ▁oihu ek , ez ▁eta ▁uz kur rarazten haien ▁zalapar tak . Halaxe ▁etorriko ▁da Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna Sion ▁mendira , ▁bere ▁mendira , borro kara .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ My young men will become like sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , goats , and lions will come down to the mountains of Zion .
GOLD:	But this is what the Lord has told me : “ When a strong young lionstands growling over a sheep it has killed , it is not frightened by the shouts and noiseof a whole crowd of shepherds.In the same way , the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill come down and fight on Mount Zion .

ID:	3171
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁hasi ▁zen ▁berekiko ▁pentsatzen : ▁“ Zer ▁egin , ▁ez ▁baitut ▁uzta ▁non ▁jasorik ?”
PRED:	And he began to say , ‘ What sorrow awaits you ? '
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

