BLEU:	0.10305067736313182
ID:	0
INPUT:	Áko bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii nayízhdééłkidgo ábijiní , Ha'át'íishą' baa nídaaht'į́ ?
PRED:	He asked them , “ What do you do ? ”
GOLD:	“ What is all this arguing about ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	1
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí Bóhólníihii níjooskango t'áadoo há yi'iilaa da ; na'iigeeł bee nidi dooda , doodaii' Yúrim bee nidi dooda , doodaii' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii bee nidi dooda .
PRED:	And Saul cried out to the Lord , and he did not prophesy in dreams , nor of prophets , nor of prophets .
GOLD:	He asked the Lord what he should do , but the Lord refused to answer him , either by dreams or by sacred lots or by the prophets .

ID:	2
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God bíí' nílínígi át'éego shí ałdó' bíí' nishłį́ ; shí ałdó' łeezh bee áshi'diilyaa .
PRED:	For I am God 's , and I also am also of dust .
GOLD:	Look , you and I both belong to God.I , too , was formed from clay .

ID:	3
INPUT:	Tónteel biyi'góó nik'eh honít'i' ; tó ayóó át'éii bii'góó ne'atiin , nidi nikék'eh hashchíín doo bééhózin da .
PRED:	Thou hast gone through the sea ; thy way is great , but the land hath not known .
GOLD:	Your road led through the sea , your pathway through the mighty waters — a pathway no one knew was there !

ID:	4
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá áłah Bóhólníihii bizaad yee hach'į' yááłti' , haghandóó danilíinii ałdó' t'áá ałtso .
PRED:	And the word of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) spoke unto them , and all his house .
GOLD:	And they shared the word of the Lord with him and with all who lived in his household .

ID:	5
INPUT:	Ałtso saad bee niyázhníłti'go t'áá naazínígóó biyaagi ni' ałts'áádláád ,
PRED:	When he had finished speaking , he was cast into the middle of the earth .
GOLD:	He had hardly finished speaking the words when the ground suddenly split open beneath them .

ID:	6
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í jinítínígo doo yá'áshónígi át'éego dajíkáahii bits'áhizhdookahgo nída'jookąąhgo Bóhólníihii há yididoots'į́įłgo da'át'é , háálá Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí báhóóchįįdgo t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego yee atí'éł'íinii díí dine'é yee yá haadzíi'go át'é .
PRED:	Everyone who does evil will turn away from his way , and will hear the voice of the Lord , because the anger of the Lord has spoken against this people .
GOLD:	Perhaps even yet they will turn from their evil ways and ask the Lord 's forgiveness before it is too late . For the Lord has threatened them with his terrible anger . ”

ID:	7
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádíshní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ! Hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yaa nahalne' ya' , dashiłní .
PRED:	And I said , O Lord God ! They say to me ,
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , they are saying of me , ‘ He only talks in riddles ! ' ”

ID:	8
INPUT:	Yiską́ągo kót'ée dooleeł , diníigo nahó'áago t'áadoo bee ádaa hó'niihí , háálá yiską́ągo ádahodooníłígíí doo nił bééhózin da .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the day , that the law shall not be ashamed : for thou shalt not know that it shall come to pass .
GOLD:	Do n't brag about tomorrow , since you do n't know what the day will bring .

ID:	9
INPUT:	Nihí éí díí kwe'é t'áá ałtso díí jį́ baa nideiikaígíí doo baa nidaahkai da doo ; jó , t'ááłá'í jinítínígo , Díí t'áá ákóne' ásht'į́ , daznízingo baa nidajikai .
PRED:	And ye do not do all the works of this day , for each man is doing this thing .
GOLD:	“ Your pattern of worship will change . Today all of you are doing as you please ,

ID:	10
INPUT:	Abímelek aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ędą́ą́'
PRED:	Abimelech 's King Abimelech
GOLD:	Abimelech Rules over Shechem

ID:	11
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah bitah doo hóóts'íid da
PRED:	Hezekiah and King Hezekiah
GOLD:	Hezekiah 's Sickness and Recovery

ID:	12
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí ayóó át'éii nilį́ , áko t'áá íiyisí baa ha'niihgo yą́ą́h nilį́ , índa yee ayóó át'éii doo nijółkaah át'ée da .
PRED:	The Lord is great , and he is worthy of glory , and his glory is not known .
GOLD:	Great is the Lord ! He is most worthy of praise ! No one can measure his greatness .

ID:	13
INPUT:	Áádóó Rebékah hayáázh alą́ąjį' nilínígíí Íísa bi'éé' yá'át'éhígíí wóne'dę́ę́' nízhdiinilgo hayáázh akéédę́ę́' nilínígíí Jéíkab bee hazhdiilaa .
PRED:	And Rebekah took the good robe of Esau 's firstborn , and took up his son , and made Jacob a son of Jacob .
GOLD:	Then she took Esau 's favorite clothes , which were there in the house , and gave them to her younger son , Jacob .

ID:	14
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa dzíínílíi dooleeł biniyé díí jį́ nich'į' bééhózingo íishłaa ; éí t'áá ni nich'į' bééhózingo íishłaa .
PRED:	I have seen this day , that you may trust in the Lord , that you may trust in him .
GOLD:	I am teaching you today — yes , you — so you will trust in the Lord .

ID:	15
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ,
PRED:	The offering was one silver offering , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , and twenty shekels of fine flour mixed with oil .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	16
INPUT:	Jó , kéyahgi niikaigo tsésǫ'dę́ę́' hadanihíínílo' yę́ęgi díí tł'óół ts'ósí łichxí'ígíí náát'i'go ádíílííł , áko nizhé'é áádóó nimá áádóó nilahkéí índa nizhé'é bighandóó dah ooldahígíí t' áá ałtso nighan góne' áłah ádíílííł .
PRED:	For when they come into the land , thou shalt make them scarlet , scarlet , and thy father , and thy brethren , and thy brethren , and all the house of thy father .
GOLD:	When we come into the land , you must leave this scarlet rope hanging from the window through which you let us down . And all your family members — your father , mother , brothers , and all your relatives — must be here inside the house .

ID:	17
INPUT:	Jesus bídahooł'aahii yá sodilzin
PRED:	Jesus and His disciples
GOLD:	The Prayer of Jesus

ID:	18
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii yee haadzí'ígíí ádooníiłii Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' díí bee nich'į' ééhózin doo ,
PRED:	And the word of the Lord shall be a sign from the Lord :
GOLD:	“ ‘ And this is the sign from the Lord to prove that he will do as he promised :

ID:	19
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo shik'eh dahóół'įįd da índa t'áadoo dashidiizts'ą́ą' da , nidi t'áá bí ádaaníinii índa bijéí biyi'dę́ę́' doo yá'át'éehii bił ádaat'íinii yik'ehgo deíkai , áko t'áadoo náás deeskai da , nidi t'ą́ą́' anáákai .
PRED:	But they did not listen to me , but they did not listen to me . They did what is evil and evil in their own heart , but they did not return .
GOLD:	“ But my people would not listen to me . They kept doing whatever they wanted , following the stubborn desires of their evil hearts . They went backward instead of forward .

ID:	20
INPUT:	Kót'éego ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' naa hashniih doo . Dego dah nídidiishnihgo nízhi' bee naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	So I will praise you all the days of your life , and I will praise you by your name .
GOLD:	I will praise you as long as I live , lifting up my hands to you in prayer .

ID:	21
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hach'į' hanáádzíi'go áhodííniid , Doo yá'áshxǫ́ǫ́góó índa adilyé yee ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii hadeintá , nidi bee ééhózinii doo ła' bá ádoolníił da , t'áá hazhó'ó Jónah , Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo bee ééhózinii silį́'ígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	Jesus answered and said to them , “ They are looking for a sign that will be for them , but there will be no sign for them , but Jonah the prophet . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ Only an evil , adulterous generation would demand a miraculous sign ; but the only sign I will give them is the sign of the prophet Jonah .

ID:	22
INPUT:	Éí bąągo shí , Bóhólníihii baa hashne'go biniinaa awáalyaaí nishłíinii nánihooshkąąh , Diyin God yiniyé nihíká ádííniidii bą́ą́h da'nohłį́įgo dayínóhkááh .
PRED:	Therefore , I beseech you , my prisoner , because of the word of the Lord , that you might be called to God .
GOLD:	Therefore I , a prisoner for serving the Lord , beg you to lead a life worthy of your calling , for you have been called by God .

ID:	23
INPUT:	áko Dził Lébanandę́ę́' tsin t'áá nínízinígíí ná dadiitsiłgo ahídahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo tónteel bee Jápa kin haal'áajį' ch'ídahidiil'oł , áko éí áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áá góde ahidííyééł .
PRED:	So we will take some of the trees of Lebanon , and bring them out of the sea to Tyre , to Tyre , and bring them to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	We will cut whatever timber you need from the Lebanon mountains and will float the logs in rafts down the coast of the Mediterranean Sea to Joppa . From there you can transport the logs up to Jerusalem . ”

ID:	24
INPUT:	Béthel índa Éí'ai kin haal'áádóó diné naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' .
PRED:	The men of Ai and Ai , two hundred and two .
GOLD:	The people of Bethel and Ai223

ID:	25
INPUT:	Áádóó níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ą́góó iidoojihgo áłtséédą́ą́' dóola yázhí yiidííłid yę́ęgi át'éego yiididoołił ; díí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego Ízrel dine'é bá át'ée doo .
PRED:	And he shall turn out of the camp , and burn it as the first bull , and burn it as a sin offering . This is a sin offering for the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the priest must take what is left of the bull and carry it outside the camp and burn it there , just as is done with the sin offering for the high priest . This offering is for the sin of the entire congregation of Israel .

ID:	26
INPUT:	Áko diyingo bits'ąą hasti'go hóyoołkáłígíí Bóhólníihii bich'į' ats'á'ánídizhdoot'ááł , áádóó dibé yázhí biką'ii ła' binááhaaí jidoolóosgo doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áhát'į́į́jí nááhániihii át'éego nááhizhdoołnih , nidi átséédą́ą́' ats' á'ázhdeet'ą́ągo hwíiníłkánígíí doo íílįįd da , háálá ats'á'ázhdeet'áanii yíchxǫ' .
PRED:	And in the days of the holy things shall be holy unto the Lord , and he shall offer a male lamb a year old , and a year old without blemish , but he shall not be holy .
GOLD:	The days of their vow that were completed before their defilement no longer count . They must rededicate themselves to the Lord as a Nazirite for the full term of their vow , and each must bring a one-year-old male lamb for a guilt offering .

ID:	27
INPUT:	Églan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í , Gíízer dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	the king of Assyria , one ; the king of Ammon , one ;
GOLD:	The king of EglonThe king of Gezer

ID:	28
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é bisiláo anaa' ádeidoolííł biniyé Shóko kin haal'áadi Júdah kéyahgi áłah daazlį́į́' , áko Shóko áádóó Azííkah kin shijaa' bita'gi éí <unk> dámim haz'ánígi nidahaazná .
PRED:	And the Philistines came together to fight against the Philistines , and they came together in Judah , and they set out a place between them : and they set out between them , which is between them .
GOLD:	The Philistines now mustered their army for battle and camped between Socoh in Judah and Azekah at Ephes-dammim .

ID:	29
INPUT:	Áko Dził Sáínai bighą́ą'di t'áá dził bikáa'jį' Bóhólníihii hadahóóle' , áádóó Mózes hágo yidííniidgo Mózes ákóde haayá .
PRED:	And the Lord called upon Mount Sinai , and called Moses , and Moses went up .
GOLD:	The Lord came down on the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the top of the mountain . So Moses climbed the mountain .

ID:	30
INPUT:	Eliyéízar biye' Fíniyas éí Éran náá'iiłniihii nilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binálí Ízrel dine'é baa łe'nisinígi át'éego łe'nízingo sháhóóchįįdígíí Ízrel dine'é yits'ą́ąjį' kóyiilaa , áko baa łe'nisingo ábi'niiłdįįdígíí t'áadoo atíshłaa da .
PRED:	And Eleazar the son of Eleazar , the son of Aaron , the priest , whom I was angry with the people of Israel , and I will pour out my wrath upon them , and I will not send them upon them .
GOLD:	“ Phinehas son of Eleazar and grandson of Aaron the priest has turned my anger away from the Israelites by being as zealous among them as I was . So I stopped destroying all Israel as I had intended to do in my zealous anger .

ID:	31
INPUT:	Áko Ruth éí Mó'ab asdzání nilíinii Neiyómii áyidííniid , Shíni'dii k'ad dá'ák'ehgóó dishááh ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í daagizhgi ajooba' bee shich'oha'néego shąąh tsídookosígíí bikéé' nahodishdáa doo . Áko ábijiní , Nílááhánee' , shich'é'é .
PRED:	Naomi said to Naomi , “ Let me go to the field , and I will find favor in the field . ” And she said , “ I will walk in my sight , my daughter . ”
GOLD:	One day Ruth the Moabite said to Naomi , “ Let me go out into the harvest fields to pick up the stalks of grain left behind by anyone who is kind enough to let me do it. ” Naomi replied , “ All right , my daughter , go ahead . ”

ID:	32
INPUT:	Jó , nihitahgóó t'áá aaníí oodlání danilínígíí béédahodoozįįł biniyé ałts'á'áldah hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	For there shall be a light among you , that the church may be known among you .
GOLD:	But , of course , there must be divisions among you so that you who have God 's approval will be recognized !

ID:	33
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí bik'i dinaago nahaz'ánígíí ałtso yída'nééł'ąądgo ha'a'aahdę́ę'go yah a'atiin góne' shił ch'íní'áázh áádóó tł'óó'dę́ę'go yínááda'nééł'ąąd .
PRED:	And he brought me out of the temple , and brought me through the east side of the east side of the east , and measured the door .
GOLD:	When the man had finished measuring the inside of the Temple area , he led me out through the east gateway to measure the entire perimeter .

ID:	34
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	35
INPUT:	kójíníigo , Shik'isóó danilíinii nízhi' bee bił dahodeeshnih ; da'oodlání áłah nádleehii bitahgi naa hashniihgo hashtaał doo .
PRED:	He said , “ My brothers and sisters , I will sing praise to you in the church .
GOLD:	For he said to God , “ I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people . ”

ID:	36
INPUT:	Áádóó ákwii hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' Jáshowa éí Éínak dine'é íísdįįd ; dziłgo nahaz'ánígi kéédahat'íinii , Hííbran kin haal'áagi áádóó Dííber kin haal'áagi áádóó Éínab kin haal'áagi índa Júdah dine'é bikéyah dziłgo nahaz'ánígi t'áá át'é áádóó Ízrel dine'é bikéyah dziłgo nahaz'ánígi t'áá át'é kéédahojit'íinii t'áá ałtso hakin hadaas'áii t'áá bił Jáshowa áhásdįįd .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that Joshua destroyed the children of Israel , who dwelt in the mountains of Hebron , Hebron , Hebron , and in Hebron , and in Hebron , and in all the cities of Judah , and in the hill country of Israel .
GOLD:	During this period Joshua destroyed all the descendants of Anak , who lived in the hill country of Hebron , Debir , Anab , and the entire hill country of Judah and Israel . He killed them all and completely destroyed their towns .

ID:	37
INPUT:	Kódzaago dízdiin jį́ áádóó dízdiin tł'éé' bíighah azlį́į'go tsé dilkǫǫhii naakigo hasht'eelyaaígíí bikáa'gi bik'e'ashchį́įgo Bóhólníihii sheinínil ; t'áá éí bee aha'deet'áanii tsé dilkǫǫhii bikáa' gi bee ak'e'ashchį́ .
PRED:	And it came to pass , after forty days and forty nights , that the Lord gave me the two stone that was written upon them : and the covenant of the covenant was written upon them .
GOLD:	“ At the end of the forty days and nights , the Lord handed me the two stone tablets inscribed with the words of the covenant .

ID:	38
INPUT:	Áko ádá k'ihodideeshłééł ; doo haa a'ááh nisin da yę́ę haa a'ááh dínéesįįł , áádóó , Doo shidine'é danohłį́į da , ho'di'níí nít'ée'ii , K'ad shidine'é danohłį́ , bidideeshniił , áko , Ni t'éí nihiDiyin God nílį́ , dashididooniił .
PRED:	I will give it to them , and I will show mercy on you , and you are my people , and you are my people , and say , “ You are my people , and you are my God . ”
GOLD:	At that time I will plant a crop of Israelitesand raise them for myself.I will show loveto those I called ‘ Not loved . 'And to those I called ‘ Not my people , ' I will say , ‘ Now you are my people . 'And they will reply , ‘ You are our God ! ' ”

ID:	39
INPUT:	Béésh nitł'izii éí nahasdzáán biyi'dóó haagééd áádóó tsé bii'dóó bééshłitsoii hadahidilyį́į́h .
PRED:	The stones of iron is broken in the midst of the earth , and the bronze of bronze .
GOLD:	They know where to dig iron from the earthand how to smelt copper from rock .

ID:	40
INPUT:	Kót'éego dadoohsį́į́ł : t'áá áká dasoołzaazgo , t'áá kééh nisoo'eezgo áádóó danihigish nihílák'ee naaztą́ągo dadoohsį́į́ł áádóó tsį́įłgo da'doohsį́į́ł ; éí Bóhólníihii bi'atis'adeesdzá át'é .
PRED:	You shall eat it , and eat it with your feet , and eat it in your hands , and eat it ; it is the Passover of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ These are your instructions for eating this meal : Be fully dressed , wear your sandals , and carry your walking stick in your hand . Eat the meal with urgency , for this is the Lord 's Passover .

ID:	41
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bizaad éí bilááh yileełgo k'ee'ąą yilzhish .
PRED:	But the word of God is more than the word of God .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the word of God continued to spread , and there were many new believers .

ID:	42
INPUT:	Áko diné nidaabaahii t'áá ałtso hoł naakai nít'é'ígíí hoł dah diikaigo kin haal'áhígíí bich'į' t'áá áyídíjį' nijíkai índa Éí'ai náhookǫsjígo nizhníná , áko Éí'ai kin haal'áii bił hata'gi bokooh lá .
PRED:	And all the men that were with him went with him , and went up to the city , and they went to Ai , and set up the north side of Ai between Ai .
GOLD:	All the fighting men who were with Joshua marched in front of the town and camped on the north side of Ai , with a valley between them and the town .

ID:	43
INPUT:	Áko shí , Daniel yinishyéii , shitah doo hóóts'íídgóó t'óó sétį́įgo díkwíí shį́į́ yiską́ , ákohgo nídiish'na'go aláahgo naat'áanii hánídíshnish , nidi shił áhoodzaaígíí t'áá íiyisí bik'ee t'óó shił ahayóigo t'áadoo ła' yik'i'diitání da .
PRED:	And I , Daniel , was a few days ; and when I rose up early , I rose up early , and the king 's work was filled with me , but there was no understanding in me .
GOLD:	Then I , Daniel , was overcome and lay sick for several days . Afterward I got up and performed my duties for the king , but I was greatly troubled by the vision and could not understand it .

ID:	44
INPUT:	Shijéí bi'diił'áhígíí lą'í yileehgo nits'ą́ą́dóó bee hada'ahóníinii shii' sizíinii t'áá íiyisí yił náhooshǫǫł .
PRED:	If my heart is full of trouble , my soul makes me happy .
GOLD:	When doubts filled my mind , your comfort gave me renewed hope and cheer .

ID:	45
INPUT:	Jó , doo ákwii ánísht'éégóó shi'dizhchį́ , áádóó bąąhági át'éii t'áá bił shimá shí'niiltsąąd .
PRED:	For I was born there , and I had no sin with my mother .
GOLD:	For I was born a sinner — yes , from the moment my mother conceived me .

ID:	46
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii náhidiitahgo bi'éé' ayííłdláád índa ni'góó neeztį́ , áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso dabi'éé' adayiisdláadgo bíighahgóó naazį́ .
PRED:	And the king tore his clothes , and sat down upon the ground , and all his servants stood beside him .
GOLD:	The king got up , tore his robe , and threw himself on the ground . His advisers also tore their clothes in horror and sorrow .

ID:	47
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Spáis łikání dahalchinii nídidíínił : éí <unk> <unk> wolyéhígíí áádóó ánika wolyéhígíí índa <unk> banam wolyéhígíí áádóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii fránkinsens wolyéii bił t'áá bízhání nídidíínił ; t'áá ahidaałt'éego dah dahidiidloh doo ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Take away the incense , and put incense on it , and put incense on it , and put incense on it .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Gather fragrant spices — resin droplets , mollusk shell , and galbanum — and mix these fragrant spices with pure frankincense , weighed out in equal amounts .

ID:	48
INPUT:	Shibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáá' t'áadoo biniyéhígóó doo kǫ' didoołtłiłgo nááda'iyołniih da doo biniyé nihitahdóó naagháii ła' shikin bii' sohodizin bich'į' ahóót'i'ígíí yidádi'doołkał laanaa nisin . Doo shił dahonohshǫ́ǫ da doo índa náádahołniihii doo ła' nihílák'eedóó nidideeshłéeł da , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will make you a fire to burn incense in my altar , so that no one can burn it with fire . I will give you an offering of fire , ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	“ How I wish one of you would shut the Temple doors so that these worthless sacrifices could not be offered ! I am not pleased with you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ and I will not accept your offerings .

ID:	49
INPUT:	Diyin God baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał . Baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał . Aláahgo nihinanit'a'í baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał . Baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał .
PRED:	Sing to God ! Sing to God ! Sing to the king , and sing praise to him .
GOLD:	Sing praises to God , sing praises ; sing praises to our King , sing praises !

ID:	50
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo atí'deeshłííł índa shidziil ayóó át'éii ííshjání ádeeshłííł nízingo , t'óó báhádzidgo diné atíidoolíiłgo yá nihwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę t'óó nízaadgóó yich'į' ha'oosniidgoshą' hait'ée doo ?
PRED:	In the same way , I will make my great power , and my strength great strength , and how long will the people call for a long time ?
GOLD:	In the same way , even though God has the right to show his anger and his power , he is very patient with those on whom his anger falls , who are destined for destruction .

ID:	51
INPUT:	Nít'éé' éí bijį́ David éí Bóhólníihii béédzíldzid , áádóó ájíní , Ha'át'éegoshą' Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii shaa doot'ááł ?
PRED:	And David was afraid of the Lord that day , and said , Why shall the ark of the Lord be given to me ?
GOLD:	David was now afraid of the Lord , and he asked , “ How can I ever bring the Ark of the Lord back into my care ? ”

ID:	52
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bee bich'į' nahwii'nánígíí bii'dóó habi'diltééh , áádóó bee hach'į' nahwii'náanii éí diné doo yá'áshóoniida bik'i náánéildoh .
PRED:	A righteous man is raised up from the trouble , and a wicked man is upon him .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	53
INPUT:	áko iiná ániidíii biih dahisoohkai . Diyin God ánihijiilaii , éí nihił éédahózingo ádanihijiléehgo t'áá hwééniilt'éego ániidíii ánánihijidlééh .
PRED:	and you have entered into a new life ; God has made us known , who made us known a new new man .
GOLD:	Put on your new nature , and be renewed as you learn to know your Creator and become like him .

ID:	54
INPUT:	Azhą́ doo hadziilgóó tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł o'oolkaal nidi , Diyin God bibee adziilii bee jiiná . Háálá hoł doo nihidziil da , nidi Diyin God bibee adziilii binahjį' hoł łá'í niidlį́įgo habee adziilii bee hoł hinii'náa doo .
PRED:	Even though he was crucified with his power , he would not be strong , because we are not able to live with him by the power of God .
GOLD:	Although he was crucified in weakness , he now lives by the power of God . We , too , are weak , just as Christ was , but when we deal with you we will be alive with him and will have God 's power .

ID:	55
INPUT:	Łah tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii índa bąąhági ádaaníiłii éí t'áá ałtso dahółts'ą́ą' doo biniyé t'áá áháníjį' hach'į' niikai .
PRED:	And it came to pass on that day , that they should come to him , and to all the sins , to hear him .
GOLD:	Tax collectors and other notorious sinners often came to listen to Jesus teach .

ID:	56
INPUT:	Jó'áko , nanihidi'niitseedgo ga' nihá nihoot'ą́ą́ lá niidzį́į́' , nidi díí doo t'áá nihí áda'ííníidlíi da doo biniyé ákódzaa , Diyin God éí daneeznáanii néidiyiiłjeehii t'éí ba'ííníidlíi doo biniyé .
PRED:	Therefore , because we have been destroyed , but this is what you have done , that God may bless the dead .
GOLD:	In fact , we expected to die . But as a result , we stopped relying on ourselves and learned to rely only on God , who raises the dead .

ID:	57
INPUT:	Shoo , k'ad díí lók'aa' yisk'isgo íí'áhígíí , éí Ííjip dine'é danilį́įgo baa dzíínílí ; t'áá éí diné ła' yíniizį́įgo bíla' baa adoozhosh ; t'áá ádzíłtso éí Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro baa deijólíhígíí ákódahodoolííł .
PRED:	Now , behold , your brother is in the hand of the Egyptians , whom you are standing in the hand of the Egyptians , and all the men of Egypt shall do to Pharaoh .
GOLD:	On Egypt ? If you lean on Egypt , it will be like a reed that splinters beneath your weight and pierces your hand . Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , is completely unreliable !

ID:	58
INPUT:	Hazhé'é ábizhdííniid , Shizhé'é , yá'ąąshii bich'į' índa ni nich'į' bąąhági ásdzaa , náásgóó niye'go nááshi'dójíi dooígíí doo bą́ą́h nishłį́į da sélį́į́' .
PRED:	He said to his father , “ My father , I have sinned against heaven and heaven . I am not worthy to be called your son . ”
GOLD:	His son said to him , ‘ Father , I have sinned against both heaven and you , and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . '

ID:	59
INPUT:	Neeznáadi la' t'óó shaa yáhásinígi át'éego shá hadasoohdzíí' ; doo nihił baa yádahasingóó doo shéédahonohsingóó yee' ída'doołyaa .
PRED:	You have spoken to me as the tenth of the tenth hand ; you do not know me , and you do not know me .
GOLD:	You have already insulted me ten times.You should be ashamed of treating me so badly .

ID:	60
INPUT:	bik'ee nídideeshgąshii baa nashiyí<unk> , índa shik'iidoolchíiłii shił át'į́įgo ánáshiinil'įįh .
PRED:	You will make me afraid of me , and you will make me afraid of my family .
GOLD:	but then you shatter me with dreamsand terrify me with visions .

ID:	61
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é danilíinii Jerúsalemgi anaa' dahodoołeeł . Áko ał'ąą dine'é dajit'íinii t'áá át'é áłah ádeidoolííł : óola ádaat'éii índa béésh łigaii áádóó éé' ayóogo da'ílíinii bee hada'dít'éii t'óó ahayóigo áłah ádeidoolííł .
PRED:	And the men of Judah shall go up to Jerusalem ; and all the nations shall gather together , gold , and clothes , and clothes .
GOLD:	Judah , too , will be fighting at Jerusalem . The wealth of all the neighboring nations will be captured — great quantities of gold and silver and fine clothing .

ID:	62
INPUT:	Díí Jesus jílíinii lą́ą Diyin God nááhodiisáago nihí t'áá áníiltso dabíínáałgo bił béédahózinii daniidlį́ .
PRED:	This is the Lord Jesus , that we may know him , and we are all of him .
GOLD:	“ God raised Jesus from the dead , and we are all witnesses of this .

ID:	63
INPUT:	Hananáíyah biyooch'íidgo hoolne'
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Jeremiah Condemns Hananiah

ID:	64
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord gave me another message . He said ,

ID:	65
INPUT:	Áádóó áshíłní , Diné nílíinii , tsé ahénátł'ingo ní'áhígíí bii' ígééd , áko bii' íígeed nít'éé' dáádílkał léi' bik'í'nígeed .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Son of man , you have a stone in a wall , and there was a pit in a pit . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall. ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	66
INPUT:	Ii' sizíinii yídin nilínígíí yee hwiih nilį́įgo ánáyoodlííł . Dichin nilį́įgo yá'ádaat'éehii yee hwiih yił'į́ .
PRED:	The soul of the soul is filled with the soul ; the soul of the hungry is filled with good .
GOLD:	For he satisfies the thirstyand fills the hungry with good things .

ID:	67
INPUT:	T'áá biyi'ídi ádaaní , Haa'íyee' Bóhólníihii bidine'é ałtso ádadiildįįł . Kéyah bikáá'góó Diyin God bikin bii' áłah nída'adleehgo naaznilii t'áá át'é adeideesk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	They said to themselves , “ Let 's destroy all the people of the Lord . They burned all the kingdoms of the land of God . ”
GOLD:	Then they thought , “ Let 's destroy everything ! ” So they burned down all the places where God was worshiped .

ID:	68
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , dooládó' binishínílnishii lą'í ał'ąą ádaat'ée da ! Baa honíyą́ągo t'áá ałtso ádeinilaa . Nahasdzáán bii' nit'íinii hadeezbin .
PRED:	How terrible are your works , O Lord ! You have made many works ! You have made all the earth full of wisdom .
GOLD:	O Lord , what a variety of things you have made ! In wisdom you have made them all.The earth is full of your creatures .

ID:	69
INPUT:	Áko yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo kéyah daahóó' dadooleełii dajilą'ígíí áádóó ádajíłch'į́dígíí há ałts'ádahidíízoh .
PRED:	And ye shall divide the land according to the lot of twelve tribes , and each one of them according to their inheritance .
GOLD:	Each grant of land must be assigned by lot among the larger and smaller tribal groups . ”

ID:	70
INPUT:	Nít'éé' shoo , Kúshai dine'é nilíinii níyá áádóó Kúshai dine'é ání , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii hane' hólǫ́ ; jó , Bóhólníihii éí diné nik'ijį' nidaabaah nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso díí jį́ ná k'éidiidlaa .
PRED:	And behold , there came a message unto the king , and said , The Lord is with thee : for the Lord hath done against all the people that have done against thee today .
GOLD:	Then the man from Ethiopia arrived and said , “ I have good news for my lord the king . Today the Lord has rescued you from all those who rebelled against you . ”

ID:	71
INPUT:	Éí bee éédahózinii áádóó ayóó át'éego ádahooníiłii t'áá át'é ázhdoolííł biniyé Bóhólníihii yich'į' hóół'aadígíí Ííjip kéyahdi Féro bich'į' áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso bich'į' índa bikéyahgi t'áá át'é nít'éé' baa nijigháá nít'éé' .
PRED:	He did all the signs and wonders that the Lord had commanded him to do in Egypt . He did all his servants and all his land .
GOLD:	The Lord sent him to perform all the miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt against Pharaoh , and all his servants , and his entire land .

ID:	72
INPUT:	Áádóó náábiiskání <unk> hoolyéedi kin haal'áágóó jiníyá , áko hódahooł'aahii índa diné t'óó ahayóí hoł yíkai .
PRED:	And on the next day he went into a city , and his disciples and the people went with him .
GOLD:	Soon afterward Jesus went with his disciples to the village of Nain , and a large crowd followed him .

ID:	73
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá shí sháháchį'go bik'e'íyé'ígi át'éego atínihish'į́įgo t'óó báhádzidgo até'ésh'į́įgo shigaan ayóó ábóodziilii bee nihich'į' k'ídííníshnii'go nihił da'ahideeshgą́ą́ł .
PRED:	And I will pour out my wrath upon you , as I have poured out my hand upon you , and I will fight against you with a mighty hand .
GOLD:	I myself will fight against you with a strong hand and a powerful arm , for I am very angry . You have made me furious !

ID:	74
INPUT:	Diné ła' asdzání bahastiin hólóonii yił shitéezhgo habi'deel'į́į'go , asdzání bił jineezhtézhígíí t'áá bił nahodi'dootsił . Kót'éego Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó doo yá'áshóonii nahjį' kódaoł'į́į doo .
PRED:	If a man lies with her husband , she is lying with her husband , and she shall kill her with the woman , and you shall be cut off from the midst of Israel .
GOLD:	“ If a man is discovered committing adultery , both he and the woman must die . In this way , you will purge Israel of such evil .

ID:	75
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'éésh naalte' nilį́ ? Naalte' nilį́įgoósh yizhchį́ ? Ákoshą' ha'át'íí biniyé bąąh oogą́ą'ii silį́į́' ?
PRED:	Is he a servant of Israel ? Why is he the slave of a servant ? What is he that has become a prey ?
GOLD:	“ Why has Israel become a slave ? Why has he been carried away as plunder ?

ID:	76
INPUT:	Áádóó nihitahgi diné t'áá íiyisí bił ahojooba'í nít'ée'ii índa oosą́ nít'ée'ii éí bik'is áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'áyó'nínígíí índa ba'áłchíní yidziihígíí yich'į' baa'ihígi át'į́įgo yich'į' aanichį' doo ,
PRED:	And he shall be angry with you in your midst , and against his brother , and to his wife , and to his wife , and to his house ,
GOLD:	The most tenderhearted man among you will have no compassion for his own brother , his beloved wife , and his surviving children .

ID:	77
INPUT:	Áádóó éé' nineezígíí éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii naashch'ąą'go bik'i yí'nilgo deidootł'óołgo íínísin ; ch'ah dijoolí ałdó' áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii bee ádeidoolíiłgo índa sis bee áká ná'álzis dooígíí naashch'ąą'go yistł'ǫ́ǫgo ádeidoolíiłgo íínísin .
PRED:	And thou shalt make a linen cloth of fine linen , and thou shalt make it of fine linen ; thou shalt make it of fine linen , and of fine linen .
GOLD:	“ Weave Aaron 's patterned tunic from fine linen cloth . Fashion the turban from this linen as well . Also make a sash , and decorate it with colorful embroidery .

ID:	78
INPUT:	Nihá aląąjį' naazíinii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ áádóó bídahwíínółnííh . Háálá éí nihii' naazíinii t'áá áłahjį' nihá yik'i hada'ídées'į́į'go yee nihindaalnishígíí Diyin God yee yił nídahalne' . Bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihindaalnishgo yá'át'ééh , doodaii' doo bik'eh dahonoł'į́į́góó éí yínííł danilį́įgo t'áadoo nihá nídoodleełí da .
PRED:	Be careful to obey your leaders and obey them . If you do what you are doing , you must do what is right . If you do , you must do what is good or bad .
GOLD:	Obey your spiritual leaders , and do what they say . Their work is to watch over your souls , and they are accountable to God . Give them reason to do this with joy and not with sorrow . That would certainly not be for your benefit .

ID:	79
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus tó bee ho'doolzį́į'go táyi'dę́ę́' háádzísdzá , nít'éé' jó'akon yá' <unk> ąą ádzaa , áádóó Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii hasbídí nahalingo Jesus bik'ijį' hadahooleełgo áádóó bik'i dah neezdáago jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Jesus was baptized from the water , and behold , the Holy Spirit of God came upon him , and sat upon him , and sat upon him .
GOLD:	After his baptism , as Jesus came up out of the water , the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and settling on him .

ID:	80
INPUT:	Bee bidziilii yee nahasdzáán áyiilaa , bibee hódzáanii yee nahasdzáán niiní'ą́ , áádóó bił bééhózinígíí yee yádiłhił dah yiskaad .
PRED:	He has made the earth by his power , and has given the wisdom of his wisdom to the earth , and he has cast them out of heaven .
GOLD:	The Lord made the earth by his power , and he preserves it by his wisdom.With his own understandinghe stretched out the heavens .

ID:	81
INPUT:	Háálá yádiłhił biyi'di áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi dahólóonii t'áá ałtso , daat'íinii índa doo daat'íinii hó hwee Diyin God ádayiilaa , azhą́ naat'áanii ayóó ádaat'éii , éí doodaii' bídahólníihii , éí doodaii' naat'áanii danilíinii , éí doodaii' óhólnííh bee dahólóonii doo daat'íinii t'áá ałtso hó hwee Diyin God ádayiilaa . T'áá ałtsoní hwee ádaalyaa índa há ádabi'diilyaa .
PRED:	For they made the God of heaven , and all that are on the earth , and upon all that are on the earth , or princes , or princes , or princes , or princes , or princes , or princes , or kingdom , and all that were in them .
GOLD:	for through him God created everythingin the heavenly realms and on earth.He made the things we can seeand the things we ca n't see — such as thrones , kingdoms , rulers , and authorities in the unseen world.Everything was created through him and for him .

ID:	82
INPUT:	háálá nihí doo hadoohdzih da , nidi nihiTaa' biNíłch'i Diyinii nihiyi'dóó yáłti'ígíí hadoodzih .
PRED:	For you will not speak , but the Holy Spirit will speak to you .
GOLD:	For it is not you who will be speaking — it will be the Spirit of your Father speaking through you .

ID:	83
INPUT:	<unk> gaii yik'i dah sidáii
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	The Rider on the White Horse

ID:	84
INPUT:	Shich'ijí nílį́įgo bee bééhózinii ła' shich'į' bééhonísįįh , áko diné shik'ee dadiniihii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł , háálá shíká íínílwod áádóó ha'ííníshníigo áshiinilaa , Bóhólníihii nílíinii .
PRED:	Give me a sign to me , and they that hate me shall be ashamed , and they shall be ashamed , for thou hast helped me , O Lord .
GOLD:	Send me a sign of your favor.Then those who hate me will be put to shame , for you , O Lord , help and comfort me .

ID:	85
INPUT:	Dził até'éł'íinii nílíinii , nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso atíinilaii , nik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon ; nich'į' k'ídideeshnihgo tséghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hadandeesmasgo dził díílidgo ándeeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Behold , I am against thee , O mountains , and upon all the earth , which thou hast made , and I will send thee up , and I will cast thee out of the rock , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Look , O mighty mountain , destroyer of the earth ! I am your enemy , ” says the Lord. “ I will raise my fist against you , to knock you down from the heights.When I am finished , you will be nothing but a heap of burnt rubble .

ID:	86
INPUT:	Áko ayóó'ádashó'níinii badadi'yoodi łígíí biyódí bá dahooghangóó yódí hadadeezbingo ádadeeshłííł .
PRED:	And I will make them a house for those who love me , that love me .
GOLD:	Those who love me inherit wealth.I will fill their treasuries .

ID:	87
INPUT:	Ákohgo Mózes hwe'asdzą́ą́ bił áádóó haye'ké éí télii dabíyeehgo Ííjip kéyahgóó dashdiikai . Mózes éí Diyin God bigish jootį́į́ł .
PRED:	So Moses took his wife and his sons , and went to Egypt . Moses found the staff of God .
GOLD:	So Moses took his wife and sons , put them on a donkey , and headed back to the land of Egypt . In his hand he carried the staff of God .

ID:	88
INPUT:	K'ad nídashookąąhgo ádashiłní , ShiDiyin God , Ízrel dine'é niidlíinii néédahoniilzin .
PRED:	Now they cried out to me , “ My God , Israel , we know you . ”
GOLD:	Now Israel pleads with me , ‘ Help us , for you are our God ! '

ID:	89
INPUT:	Shidine'é bikéyah bikáá' ch'il deeníní áádóó ch'il da'dishahii hadadínóot'į́įłii , t'áá aaníí , kin bii' ił hózhǫ́ yę́ę índa ił hózhǫ́ǫgo kin haal'á yę́ę bąąh danihíni'go atínídadinohdleeh ,
PRED:	My people , my land , and the vine of my people , and the vine , and the city , and the joy ,
GOLD:	For your land will be overgrown with thorns and briers.Your joyful homes and happy towns will be gone .

ID:	90
INPUT:	Háálá jó'akon , diné kódazhdidooniiłígíí t'áá áhánídę́ę́' bich'į' yoołkááł , Doo da'ałchíhígíí índa doo daaltsánígíí , índa doo dabi'doolt'ódígíí éí dabízhánee' !
PRED:	Behold , behold , the days of men come near , and those who do not eat , and those who do not eat , and those who are in the field .
GOLD:	For the days are coming when they will say , ‘ Fortunate indeed are the women who are childless , the wombs that have not borne a child and the breasts that have never nursed . '

ID:	91
INPUT:	Háni'dii azhool bił deíyółígi át'éego Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í binoołkał le' !
PRED:	Let the angel of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ] be like the wind of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ] .
GOLD:	Blow them away like chaff in the wind — a wind sent by the angel of the Lord .

ID:	92
INPUT:	Nidi ákwii yoołkáłígíí índa oolkiłígíí diné ła'da doo hoł bééhózin da , yá'ąąshdi diyingo nidaal'a'í nidi dooda , aYe' nidi dooda , nidi aTaa' t'éiyá bił bééhózin .
PRED:	But no one knows that day and the hour , nor the angels of heaven , but the Father knows .
GOLD:	“ However , no one knows the day or hour when these things will happen , not even the angels in heaven or the Son himself . Only the Father knows .

ID:	93
INPUT:	Koréízingi kéédahoht'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Bethséyida kéédahoht'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! háálá aají nihitahgi ádahooníiłii ayóó ádaat'éii baa nida'asdee'ii éí Táir índa <unk> dan kin haal'áagi baa nida'asdee' nít'ée'go , ákwii kéédahat'íinii ałk'idą́ą́' aghaashzhiin yistł'óonii yee hadadiidzaago łeeshch'iihtahgi dineezbingo łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdadeezkéezgo yada'oozlíi' doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Woe to you , O inhabitants of Sidon ! Woe to you , you inhabitants of Sidon ! For the great miracles of Tyre have been given to Tyre , and they have been given to you in sackcloth , and have been clothed with sackcloth in sackcloth .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , Korazin and Bethsaida ! For if the miracles I did in you had been done in wicked Tyre and Sidon , their people would have repented of their sins long ago , clothing themselves in burlap and throwing ashes on their heads to show their remorse .

ID:	94
INPUT:	Áádóó danoonáago éí naat'agii t'áá ałtso índa nihokáá'góó naaldlooshii da'ałchinii danihits'íís deilghał doo áádóó doo ła'da nihik'iidínóołkałí da .
PRED:	All the wild animals and wild animals will eat food and wild animals .
GOLD:	Your corpses will be food for all the scavenging birds and wild animals , and no one will be there to chase them away .

ID:	95
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii shináshzhiizh , nidi nibee haz'áanii doo beisénah da .
PRED:	The wicked have forgotten me , but I have not forgotten your law .
GOLD:	Evil people try to drag me into sin , but I am firmly anchored to your instructions .

ID:	96
INPUT:	doodaii' t'áadoo yoo'íní tsé yee néidííłne'ígíí daaztsą́ą́ ládą́ą́' ; éí doo yi'ana'í nilį́į́góó , doodaii' atízhdoolíiłgi doo binahodziz'ą́ą́góó ,
PRED:	Or if he has seen a stone , if he is dead , he is not guilty of his enemies , or if he is not able to go into the end of his enemies ,
GOLD:	or accidentally drops a huge stone on someone , though they were not enemies , and the person dies .

ID:	97
INPUT:	áádóó ákóne' Zerábabel éí Abáíyad há yizhchį́ , náá'ákóne' Abáíyad éí Iiláíyakim há yizhchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Iiláíyakim éí Éízor há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	and he became the father of Zerubbabel , who was the father of Zerubbabel , and he became the father of Jehoiakim .
GOLD:	Zerubbabel was the father of Abiud.Abiud was the father of Eliakim.Eliakim was the father of Azor .

ID:	98
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é atíyiilaa
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Moses Intercedes for the People

ID:	99
INPUT:	Áshkelan kin haal'á bik'ijį' índa tónteel bibąąhgóóígíí bik'ijį' na'anish dooleełgo Bóhólníihii ákót'éego bá haadzíi'goshą' haa yit'éego hasht'edít'ée doo ?
PRED:	Why should the Lord say to them , “ Why should the Lord do for them ? Why should you do for them ? ”
GOLD:	“ But how can it be stillwhen the Lord has sent it on a mission ? For the city of Ashkelonand the people living along the seamust be destroyed . ”

ID:	100
INPUT:	Haadzíi'go nahachagiitsoh níłnii' , áádóó ch'osh ditł'ooí doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą́'góó níłnii' .
PRED:	He said , “ The locusts sent locusts , and there are no number . ”
GOLD:	He spoke , and hordes of locusts came — young locusts beyond number .

ID:	101
INPUT:	Áko Bath-shííba éí ni'jį' jineeshjoolgo aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' hozdísingo ájíní , Bíni'dii bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii David hináago ahóyéel'áa le' .
PRED:	She bowed down to the ground and cried to the king , “ Let my lord the king live forever and ever . ”
GOLD:	Then Bathsheba bowed down with her face to the ground before the king and exclaimed , “ May my lord King David live forever ! ”

ID:	102
INPUT:	Ádadii'nínígíí díí ááhyiłní : aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ákót'éii , yá'ąąshdi Ayóó'ájít'éii bikáá'dóó hojoo'áałii honish'náájí dah sidáii nihá aláahgo náá'iiłniihii nilį́ .
PRED:	This is what we say : He is the high priest in heaven , who sits on the right hand of the Most High .
GOLD:	Here is the main point : We have a High Priest who sat down in the place of honor beside the throne of the majestic God in heaven .

ID:	103
INPUT:	Eihazáíyah dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' , áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nant'áago t'ááłá'í nááhai . Bimá éí Athaláíyah wolyéego <unk> yitsi' nilį́ .
PRED:	Ahaziah was forty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned one years in Jerusalem . His mother 's name was Athaliah 's daughter .
GOLD:	Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem one year . His mother was Athaliah , a granddaughter of King Omri .

ID:	104
INPUT:	Rábshakeh áhodííniid , Heziikáíyah bich'į' hadaohdziih , Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ayóó át'é nanit'a'í nilíinii kóní , Ha'át'íí ba'ahódlíí shį́įshą' baadzíínílí ?
PRED:	“ Speak to Hezekiah , king of Assyria , saying , ‘ What do you trust in your faith ? '
GOLD:	Then the Assyrian king 's chief of staff told them to give this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the great king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in that makes you so confident ?

ID:	105
INPUT:	Áádóó ashdla' náhááh góne' daneest'ánígíí éí daohsą́ą doo , áko t'óó ahayóí nihá níná'nít'į́įh doo ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	And you shall eat the fruit of the fifth year , and you shall eat it ; for I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Finally , in the fifth year you may eat the fruit . If you follow this pattern , your harvest will increase . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	106
INPUT:	Éí ach'į' nahwii'ná bił yoołkáłígíí bighá yooską́ą́dóó bik'ijį' , t'áá áko jį́honaa'éí bił chahodoołhi ł , áádóó ooljéé' doo adiníłdíin da doo , índa yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' sǫ' nidahindéeh doo , áádóó yá'ąąshdi bee dahółdzilii dadoogał ,
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in those days of trouble , that the sun shall be at the end of the sun , and the stars shall be in heaven , and the stars of heaven shall fall .
GOLD:	“ Immediately after the anguish of those days , the sun will be darkened , the moon will give no light , the stars will fall from the sky , and the powers in the heavens will be shaken .

ID:	107
INPUT:	David áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bá náásgóó áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Géed índa Diyin God yá halne'ii Néíthan éí nidahaz'áanii bik'ehgo niinínil . Éí béésh ahídí'niłgo diits'a'ígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół neeznáá bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii índa tsin tł'óół naakits'áadah bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii Líívai dine'é dah deíjáahgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' niinínil , háálá kót'éego Bóhólníihii bá dahalne'ii yee haadzíí' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And David set them in the law of the king , and Nathan the prophet , and the prophet , and the harp , and the harp , and the harp , and the harp , and the Levites , for the Lord had spoken in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	King Hezekiah then stationed the Levites at the Temple of the Lord with cymbals , lyres , and harps . He obeyed all the commands that the Lord had given to King David through Gad , the king 's seer , and the prophet Nathan .

ID:	108
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iiláísha éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii ííłní , Haash nideeshłííł ? Nílááh , nizhé'é yę́ę áádóó nimá yę́ę yá dahalne'ii bich'į' dínááh . Áko Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Dooda , háálá díí aláahgo naat'áanii tániilt'éego Mó'ab dine'é yaa nihidoonił biniyé ahínihiinilígíí éí Bóhólníihii át'į́ .
PRED:	Elisha said to the king of Israel , “ What will I do to you ? Go to your father and your mother ? ” So the king of Israel said to the king of Moab , “ No ! ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you coming to me ? ” Elisha asked the king of Israel . “ Go to the pagan prophets of your father and mother ! ” But King Joram of Israel said , “ No ! For it was the Lord who called us three kings here — only to be defeated by the king of Moab ! ”

ID:	109
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii baazhdookáałgo bílák'ee ak'áán hadeezbingo haidoojihgo éí bee ééhániihii át'éego bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii yididoołił ; éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'é .
PRED:	And he shall bring it into the hand of the priest , and he shall take it into his hand , and burn it upon the altar , an offering made by fire unto the Lord ; it is a sin offering unto the Lord .
GOLD:	Take the flour to the priest , who will scoop out a handful as a representative portion . He will burn it on the altar on top of the special gifts presented to the Lord . It is an offering for sin .

ID:	110
INPUT:	Híílai éí Máthat biye' , Máthat éí Líívai biye' , Líívai éí Mélkai biye' , Mélkai éí Jána biye' , Jána éí Jóseph biye' ,
PRED:	the son of Levi , the son of Levi , the son of Joseph , the son of Joseph ,
GOLD:	Heli was the son of Matthat.Matthat was the son of Levi.Levi was the son of Melki.Melki was the son of Jannai.Jannai was the son of Joseph .

ID:	111
INPUT:	Diltłish éí baa dadzíínóhłí áádóó doo daaldinii baa nidaahkai índa t'ááłá'í nootínígo bił kééhoht'íinii be'asdzą́ą́ bił da'ahidołyé ; kót'éegoósh kéyah shóideesht'eeł danohsin ?
PRED:	Do you trust in the sword , and every man his neighbor 's wife , that I may give you the land ?
GOLD:	Murderers ! Idolaters ! Adulterers ! Should the land belong to you ? '

ID:	112
INPUT:	Yah ííyáá nít'éé' ; nidaa'na'ii índa nidaaldlooshii doo daaldinii ts'ídá t'áá ałtso ał'ąą ádaat'éii áádóó Ízrel dine'é bi'eda'alyaii ts'ídá t'áá ałtso tsé ahénátł'ingo ní'áhígíí bikáa'jį' bééda'alyaago ahééhool'á .
PRED:	And when I came in , all the beasts of the earth , and all the beasts of the earth , and all the beasts of the earth , and of all the beasts of Israel , and upon the wall .
GOLD:	So I went in and saw the walls covered with engravings of all kinds of crawling animals and detestable creatures . I also saw the various idols worshiped by the people of Israel .

ID:	113
INPUT:	Ákohgo áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Hananáíyah éí azéédéetání Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah yąąh na'iidiitą́ągo k'íiníti' .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah the prophet cut off the yoke of the yoke , and cut off the yoke of the prophet .
GOLD:	Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke off Jeremiah 's neck and broke it in pieces .

ID:	114
INPUT:	Éí bąą aláahgo naat'áanii danohłíinii , dahonohsą́ ; nahasdzáán bikáá'góó ánihwii'aahii danohłíinii , nidanihidi'nitin le' .
PRED:	Therefore , O king , be wise , and teach you , judge of the earth .
GOLD:	Now then , you kings , act wisely ! Be warned , you rulers of the earth !

ID:	115
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , t'áá ánółtso t'áadoo ałghadadoht'áhí , áádóó t'áadoo ał<unk> kahí , nidi t'ááłá'í góne' nitsáhákeesgo áádóó t'ááłá'í hoot'ááł bee da'ahíínóhtą' doogo nihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ bízhi' binahjį' baa nánihooshkąąh .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , do n't let anyone go away , but I beg you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I appeal to you , dear brothers and sisters , by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ , to live in harmony with each other . Let there be no divisions in the church . Rather , be of one mind , united in thought and purpose .

ID:	116
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniinaanígóó naat'áanii danilíinii atídashííł'įįd , nidi shijéí bee nizaad dinisin .
PRED:	Do n't let the princes of the princes have turned against me , but my heart keeps your words .
GOLD:	Powerful people harass me without cause , but my heart trembles only at your word .

ID:	117
INPUT:	Bada'áłchíní k'ee'ąą dínéest'ą́ągo diltłish bee nidadootsił yiniyé ádaat'į́áádóó bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchííłgóó ch'iyáán doo yee hwiih daole' át'ée da doo .
PRED:	He will not fill their children with the sword , and they will not be filled with the sword , nor will their children be filled with the sword .
GOLD:	They may have many children , but the children will die in war or starve to death .

ID:	118
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bida'ana'í yits'ą́ąjį' nídadíníchéehgo ha'át'íí lá dishníi doo !
PRED:	O Lord , what shall I say unto the enemies of Israel , O Lord , if they turn away from their enemies .
GOLD:	Lord , what can I say now that Israel has fled from its enemies ?

ID:	119
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádanoht'éé nít'éé' yę́ę , áádóó ádaot'įįd nít'éé' yę́ę béédadoołnih , áko ádił nida'ayoosíí' nít'éé' yę́ę índa doo ákwii ádaot'įįd nít'éé' yę́ę biniinaa ádił nináda'oht'įįh doo .
PRED:	You will remember the evil things you have done , and you will be put to shame because of their sins and their sins .
GOLD:	Then you will remember your past sins and despise yourselves for all the detestable things you did .

ID:	120
INPUT:	Háálá Júdas éí hoł nihi'déélta' , díidí Jesus bá nideiil'a'ígíí łahjį' ałdó' haa deet'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	For they were counted with Judas , who was with us all the days of Jesus .
GOLD:	Judas was one of us and shared in the ministry with us . ”

ID:	121
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ábsalam éí ashiiké táá' há niheezhchį́ ; bitsi' éí t'ááłá'í : Téímar wolyé ; éí asdzání ayóó ánóolninii nilį́ .
PRED:	Absalom had three sons , and his daughter Tamar was Tamar . She was a woman .
GOLD:	He had three sons and one daughter . His daughter 's name was Tamar , and she was very beautiful .

ID:	122
INPUT:	Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Diyin God bikin ánálnéhíjį' nináhaaskaigo naaki béédaahááh góne' naaki nídízííd binih , Shiyáltiyel biye' Zerábabel áádóó Jázadak biye' Jéshuwa áádóó dabik'isóó nidahaasdzí'ígíí éí nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é danilíinii índa yisnááh danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę éí Jerúsalemjį' nidahaaskaígíí t'áá ałtso bił . Diyin God bikin bidazhdeeshnish , áádóó yik'i dadéez'į́į' dooleeł biniyé Líívai dine'é naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaígíí nídeidiinil .
PRED:	In the second year of the second month , in the second month , in the second month of the second month , Zerubbabel son of Zerubbabel , son of Jeshua , and his brethren , and the Levites , and the Levites , and all the work of the house of God .
GOLD:	The construction of the Temple of God began in midspring , during the second year after they arrived in Jerusalem . The work force was made up of everyone who had returned from exile , including Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , Jeshua son of Jehozadak and his fellow priests , and all the Levites . The Levites who were twenty years old or older were put in charge of rebuilding the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	123
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí Ámalek dine'é bikin haal'áagi jiníyá áádóó yíldzisdę́ę́' baa nidziyeedzá .
PRED:	And Saul went to the city of the Amalekites , and came to him .
GOLD:	Then Saul and his army went to a town of the Amalekites and lay in wait in the valley .

ID:	124
INPUT:	Aniné áádóó iiná baa yájíłti'ii bohoolnííł , áádóó éí ájínínígíí ayóó'ádayó'níinii aneest'ą' nahalingo deildeeł doo .
PRED:	The words of life and life will come to pass , and those who love him will eat fruit .
GOLD:	The tongue can bring death or life ; those who love to talk will reap the consequences .

ID:	125
INPUT:	Áko David éí Gath kin haal'áágóó anííchą́ą'go Saul bił nááhóóne' nidi t'áadoo háká náádínéeztą́ą' da .
PRED:	David fled from Gath , but Saul did not find him .
GOLD:	Word soon reached Saul that David had fled to Gath , so he stopped hunting for him .

ID:	126
INPUT:	Nidashiniłchéii tsiidétáán bich'į' bił handeeł ! Shii' sizíinii ábidiní , Shí yisdánííłtíinii nishłį́ !
PRED:	Speak to them with their spear , and say to my soul , “ I am the one who saves me . ”
GOLD:	Lift up your spear and javelinagainst those who pursue me.Let me hear you say , “ I will give you victory ! ”

ID:	127
INPUT:	Háálá ánihidishní , Bee haz'áanii yitis nidahideestáalii bił bi'déélta' , níigo bee ak'e'ashchínígíí shí shee bohodoolnííł , háálá sheinít'į́įgo bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí éí bidahodoolnííł .
PRED:	For I say unto you , The law shall be counted by the law , that it may be written : for it shall be written in me .
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	128
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é kóbidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shikin bii' sohodizin , nihibee adziil bee nihi'áshodahódli'ii daoł<unk> go baa nihił dahózhóonii áádóó nihii' sizíinii yídin nilíinii doo ílį́į́góó ádadeeshłííł , jó'akon , índa nihiye'ké áádóó nihitsi'ké daadziihígíí doo ílį́į́góó ádadeeshłíiłgo diltłish bee nidadootsił .
PRED:	“ Thus says the Lord God of Israel : Behold , I will make you a strong house , and your soul a desolation , and I will cause you to fall by the sword , and by the sword .
GOLD:	and I was told to give this message to the people of Israel . This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will defile my Temple , the source of your security and pride , the place your heart delights in . Your sons and daughters whom you left behind in Judah will be slaughtered by the sword .

ID:	129
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Ha'át'íishą' nínízin ? Nít'éé' ábijiní , Díí shiyáázh nidilt'éego bee nóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biyi'di , ła' ninish'náájí dah sidáa doogo índa ła' éí ninishtł'ají dah sidáa doogo bee bá handziih .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ What do you know ? ” He said to them , “ My son , you will sit on your right hand and on your left . ”
GOLD:	“ What is your request ? ” he asked.She replied , “ In your Kingdom , please let my two sons sit in places of honor next to you , one on your right and the other on your left . ”

ID:	130
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' . T'áá shiTaa' shiníł'a'ígi át'éego , shí ałdó' danihideesh'aał .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Amen ! I will send you as my Father sent me . ”
GOLD:	Again he said , “ Peace be with you . As the Father has sent me , so I am sending you . ”

ID:	131
INPUT:	Tsi'díníyáagoósh ádíní ? dahałní . Nidi , T'áá aaníí , jiníigo bee nijíltee' . Éíyee' diyingo naal'a'í baa áhályánígíí át'į́ ! daaní .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Are you afraid ? ” But they say , “ You are a fool of the angel ! ”
GOLD:	“ You 're out of your mind ! ” they said . When she insisted , they decided , “ It must be his angel . ”

ID:	132
INPUT:	Nidi aláahgo naat'áanii Jóram yę́ę bitsi' Jiihósheba wolyéii Eihazáíyah bideezhí éí Eihazáíyah biye' Jó'ash aláahgo naat'áanii yę́ę biye'ké nidadootsiłii bitahdóó yił dah dii'áazhgo bí áádóó asdzání baa áhályánígíí nida'iilkáhí góne' Athaláíyah yits'ąą náhodees'į́į́' , áko t'áadoo ho'diisyį́į da .
PRED:	But the daughter of Ahaziah , the daughter of Ahaziah , the daughter of Ahaziah , took out of the sons of Joash , and took her from among the sons of Joash the king 's sons , and she hid her not .
GOLD:	But Ahaziah 's sister Jehosheba , the daughter of King Jehoram , took Ahaziah 's infant son , Joash , and stole him away from among the rest of the king 's children , who were about to be killed . She put Joash and his nurse in a bedroom , and they hid him from Athaliah , so the child was not murdered .

ID:	133
INPUT:	Áko hánaaí Íísa bíla' nahalingo hála' ditł'ogo biniinaa t'áadoo hwéédi'nítą́ą da , áko t'óó hak'idzisdli' .
PRED:	And he did not know him because of the hand of Esau his brother Esau 's hand , and he blessed him .
GOLD:	But he did not recognize Jacob , because Jacob 's hands felt hairy just like Esau 's . So Isaac prepared to bless Jacob .

ID:	134
INPUT:	bąąhági át'éii yaa ákodanízingo íidoolííł , háálá doo dashoodlą́ągo shaa dadzólíi da ;
PRED:	He will do what is right , because they do not believe in me .
GOLD:	The world 's sin is that it refuses to believe in me .

ID:	135
INPUT:	Ákohgo áłah ílínídóó hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii ádadííniid , Hait'éegoshą' Bénjamin dine'é t'ahdii asdzání bee ádaadinígíí be'asdzą́ą́ dahólǫ́ǫgo ádadiilnííł ? Shoo , Bénjamin dine'é bits'ąą asdzání ałtso ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	Then the elders of the assembly said to him , “ How can we do with the wives of Benjamin ? Behold , the women of Benjamin are destroyed from Benjamin . ”
GOLD:	So the elders of the assembly asked , “ How can we find wives for the few who remain , since the women of the tribe of Benjamin are dead ?

ID:	136
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo ahidiníłnáago bitsiits'iin deisiłgo booshk'iizh góne' diltłish ahidiníłnáago ałghá deisgeedgo t'áá łahjį' naa'aníídee' ; éí bąą Gíbiyan kin haal'áadi Hél<unk> hoosye' .
PRED:	And each man took his sword in his hand , and put his sword on his side , and cut it in the midst of the sword ; therefore the son of Gideon was at Gibeon .
GOLD:	Each one grabbed his opponent by the hair and thrust his sword into the other 's side so that all of them died . So this place at Gibeon has been known ever since as the Field of Swords .

ID:	137
INPUT:	Áko Gíízer kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii <unk> wolyéii éí Léíkish dine'é yíká adoolwołgo yiniyé níyá , áko Jáshowa éí <unk> áádóó bidine'é t'áá bił nideistseed ; t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' áádeisįįd da .
PRED:	And he came to Achish the king of Heshbon to help him , and Joshua killed his people , and none left them .
GOLD:	During the attack on Lachish , King Horam of Gezer arrived with his army to help defend the town . But Joshua 's men killed him and his army , leaving no survivors .

ID:	138
INPUT:	Dadine'é dziłghą́ą'jį' hágo deiłníi doo ; áadi nááhániihii t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii náádayiiłniih doo , háálá táłkáá'dóó ts'ídá łą́ągo da'ílíinii daboosání doo , índa séí bii' yódí nées'į́į'ii yik'ídadookah .
PRED:	They will call on the mountains , and there the righteous will offer sacrifices to the righteous ; for they will be filled with the multitude of the earth , and the sand will be filled with them .
GOLD:	They summon the people to the mountainto offer proper sacrifices there.They benefit from the riches of the seaand the hidden treasures in the sand . ”

ID:	139
INPUT:	Nihoogháahjį' yoołkáałgo diné kódaat'ée doo
PRED:	In the last day of the people
GOLD:	The Dangers of the Last Days

ID:	140
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'adshą' ha'át'íí nee hólǫ́ ? Bááh ashdla'go , doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhída nee hólónígíí shaa díínił .
PRED:	“ Now why are you here ? You have five loaves , and you have given me what you have . ”
GOLD:	Now , what is there to eat ? Give me five loaves of bread or anything else you have . ”

ID:	141
INPUT:	Azhą́ shį́į́ dził ádadoodįįł índa dah daask'idii nahjį' kódadooníił nidi , bee aa a'ááh nisinii éí doo nits'ą́ąjį' kódooníił da , doo nidi bee hasht'ehodít'éii shidine'é bee bił aha'dinisht'áanii nahjį' kódooníił da , ní Bóhólníihii naa a'ááh nízinii .
PRED:	Though the mountains shall perish , and the hills shall be cut off from thee , but thy mercy shall not be taken away from thee ; but my covenant shall not pass away from thee , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	For the mountains may moveand the hills disappear , but even then my faithful love for you will remain.My covenant of blessing will never be broken , ” says the Lord , who has mercy on you .

ID:	142
INPUT:	T'áá áko diné éí hadaałt'é ánábi'diilyaa , áko bik'izhnitéhí nízdiiłtsoozgo dashdiiyá . Díí háá'áyį́į́h jį́ biyi' áhóót'įįd .
PRED:	So the man was healed , and he took his donkey , and went away , and went on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	Instantly , the man was healed ! He rolled up his sleeping mat and began walking ! But this miracle happened on the Sabbath ,

ID:	143
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nílíinii , dooládó' hózhónígi kééhót'į́į da !
PRED:	How long , O Lord of hosts , how long is it for you , O Lord of hosts !
GOLD:	How lovely is your dwelling place , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	144
INPUT:	Áko hazhé'é ábizhdííniid , Doo nídoosh'nééh át'ée daígíí t'áadoo bik'ee níni' si'ání , bóhonish'níihii , háálá ąądii sélį́į́' . Áko nináá'jízhch'id , nidi t'áadoo bik'ízhních'id da .
PRED:	He said to his father , “ I can not do anything that you do . He said , ‘ My lord , ' because I have been filled with water , ' and he did not find it .
GOLD:	she said to her father , “ Please , sir , forgive me if I do n't get up for you . I 'm having my monthly period. ” So Laban continued his search , but he could not find the household idols .

ID:	145
INPUT:	Áádóó hooghan góne' yah ajííyáago , diné doo oo'íinii haa ní'áázh , áko Jesus áháłní , Díí baa nideeshaałígíísh bíneesh'ą́ągo yinohdlą́ ? Nít'éé' áháłní , Aoo' , Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And when he entered into the house , the blind man came to him , and said to him , “ Have you faith in me ? ” And he said , “ Yes , Lord . ”
GOLD:	They went right into the house where he was staying , and Jesus asked them , “ Do you believe I can make you see ? ” “ Yes , Lord , ” they told him , “ we do . ”

ID:	146
INPUT:	Diné hóyáanii doo yá'át'éehii yiyiiłtséehgo yits'ąą nídít'į́į́h , nidi diné doo hóyáanii éí doo yá'át' éehii yich'į' t'áá <unk> ghááh , áádóó yik'ee ti'hoonih .
PRED:	The wise shall see it , but the wise shall be hid from him ; but the fool shall be delivered away .
GOLD:	A prudent person foresees danger and takes precautions.The simpleton goes blindly on and suffers the consequences .

ID:	147
INPUT:	Áko biiskání ch'ínáádzídzáago Hííbrew dine'é nidilt'éego ałk'iilwod lá , áko bik'is doo ákwii ííł'ínígíí ábizhdííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' t'áá bił ałk'is nídlínígíí náníłhał ?
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that he went forth , and found two Greeks ; and he said unto his brother , Why hast thou circumcised with him ?
GOLD:	The next day , when Moses went out to visit his people again , he saw two Hebrew men fighting . “ Why are you beating up your friend ? ” Moses said to the one who had started the fight .

ID:	148
INPUT:	Áko Mídiyan dine'é bich'į' anaa' dahodzisłį́į́' ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo diné danilínígíí t'áá ałtso nideistseed .
PRED:	They fought against Midian , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	They attacked Midian as the Lord had commanded Moses , and they killed all the men .

ID:	149
INPUT:	T'áadoo tsíhodeeskézí yáníłti'í , áádóó Diyin God binááł t'áadoo tsxį́į́ł ádíl'į́įgo hahídziihí , háálá Diyin God éí yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ , índa ni éí nahasdzáán bikáa'gi honílǫ́ . Éí bąągo saad t'áá díkwíí bee yáníłti' le' .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , and do n't enter into the presence of God , for God is in heaven , and you are in heaven . Therefore speak a few words .
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	150
INPUT:	Sámuel ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' Ízrel dine'é yá nihodiyii'aah nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Samuel judged Israel all the days of Samuel until the end of his life .
GOLD:	Samuel continued as Israel 's judge for the rest of his life .

ID:	151
INPUT:	Diyin God t'ááłá'í hólǫ́ , áko Jew dine'é , bąąh nídahineeshgizhii , bida'oodlą' bee t'áá ákogi ádaat'éego Diyin God bá hahadziih , áádóó doo Jew dine'é danilíinii , doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhii , t'áá bí bida'oodlą'ígíí bee t'áá ákogi ádaat'éego ałdó' Diyin God bá hahadziih .
PRED:	One God is one God , and the Gentiles are called by faith , and by faith , and by faith they are not circumcised .
GOLD:	There is only one God , and he makes people right with himself only by faith , whether they are Jews or Gentiles .

ID:	152
INPUT:	She'asdzą́ą́ hólǫ́ǫgo oodlání nilį́įgo bił tádísh'aash dooleełgoósh doo bee shá haz'ą́ą da , t'áá ła' daal'aadii áádóó Bóhólníihii bik'isóó danilíinii índa Pe<unk> éí ákódaat'ínígi át'éego ?
PRED:	Is it not for me to go with my wife , my wife , and my apostles , and the brethren of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Do n't we have the right to bring a believing wife with us as the other apostles and the Lord 's brothers do , and as Peter does ?

ID:	153
INPUT:	Kin hadaas'áii t'áá ałtso éí Ízrel dine'é bikéyah biyi' Líívai dine'é haa daaszįįdígíí binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił dízdiindóó ba'aan tseebíigo kin hadaas'áhígíí hóó' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	All the cities of Israel gave to the Levites , and their pasture lands .
GOLD:	The total number of towns and pasturelands within Israelite territory given to the Levites came to forty-eight .

ID:	154
INPUT:	Háálá t'ą́ą́' dah nídahidoohkaigo díí ał'ąą ana'í nihitahgi daadzí'ígíí t'áá éí nihił kéédahat'ínígíí bił ahółdahgo bił ahánda'ohgehgo ídadi'doołnííł , áádóó bił ahółdahgo , índa nihił ahíldahgo ,
PRED:	For when you turn back and go back with you all these nations who are with you , make a feast with them , and make a feast with them ;
GOLD:	“ But if you turn away from him and cling to the customs of the survivors of these nations remaining among you , and if you intermarry with them ,

ID:	155
INPUT:	Ana'í dah deínéehii éí aláahgo bindanit'a'í t'áá bił yóó'adahinichééh ! Hooghandi asdzání nidaazdáhígíí éí ana'í binaalye'é daasnáanii nideiniih .
PRED:	The army go down to the king 's house . The woman who is living in the house will praise the spoil .
GOLD:	Enemy kings and their armies flee , while the women of Israel divide the plunder .

ID:	156
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' ádadidooniił , Dabizhé'é yę́ę biBóhólníihii Diyin God yił ahada'deest'áanii yóó'adeideez'ą́ągo biniinaa ákóhóót'įįd ; éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íbiní'eezh yę́ędą́ą́' yił ahada'deest'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they shall say , Because they have forsaken the Lord , the God of their fathers , who brought them out of Egypt , when they brought them out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ And the answer will be , ‘ This happened because the people of the land abandoned the covenant that the Lord , the God of their ancestors , made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt .

ID:	157
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	158
INPUT:	Áko ná nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso shich'į' hadadookah , áádóó shich'į' yaa ádadooníiłgo kódadidooniił , Akóóh yówehjį' ch'ínóhnééh ; diné nikéé' tádíkáhígíí t'áá ałtso ałdó' t'áá bił , áádóó bik'ijį' índa akǫ́ǫ́ ch'ídeeshááł . Mózes éí Féro bits'ą́ą́' ch'ízhníyáago t'áá íiyisí háhóóchįįd .
PRED:	All your servants will come to me , and they will answer me . They will say to me , “ Look at me ! I will come out against all the men who follow you , and I will go out against you , and I will go out against Pharaoh . ”
GOLD:	All the officials of Egypt will run to me and fall to the ground before me . ‘ Please leave ! ' they will beg . ‘ Hurry ! And take all your followers with you . ' Only then will I go ! ” Then , burning with anger , Moses left Pharaoh .

ID:	159
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Háísh , T'áá łiníchí'í , niłní ? Da' tsin doo bąąhdóó adííyį́įł da , nidishní yę́ęésh bąąhdóó ííníyą́ą́' ?
PRED:	The Lord said , “ Who is your sister ? Do you eat from the trees ? Do you eat from the trees ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who told you that you were naked ? ” the Lord God asked . “ Have you eaten from the tree whose fruit I commanded you not to eat ? ”

ID:	160
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílam éí hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yaa áho'niilne'go ání , Bíyor biye' Béílam kódííniid ; bił ééhózingo oo'íinii ání ,
PRED:	And Balaam spake unto them a parable , saying , Thus saith Balaam the son of Nun :
GOLD:	This is the message Balaam delivered : “ This is the message of Balaam son of Beor , the message of the man whose eyes see clearly ,

ID:	161
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel nish'náájí bee k'ízdeesnii'go Íífreiyim bitsii't'áagi dasdees'nii' ; éí akéédę́ę́' yizhchíinii jílį́ . Áádóó nishtł'ají bee Manáseh bitsii't'áagi dasdees'nii' , áko éí ahidiníłnáago bik'i dasdees'nii' , azhą́ Manáseh éí alą́ąjį' yizhchį́įgo hoł bééhózin nidi ájít'į́ .
PRED:	And he divided his right hand against the right hand of Ephraim ; and Manasseh put his hands on his right hand , and Manasseh sat on his right hand , and he knew that Manasseh was the firstborn .
GOLD:	But Jacob crossed his arms as he reached out to lay his hands on the boys ' heads . He put his right hand on the head of Ephraim , though he was the younger boy , and his left hand on the head of Manasseh , though he was the firstborn .

ID:	162
INPUT:	E'asdzą́ą́ yá'át'éehii bee baa ha'niihii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	A Wife of Noble Character

ID:	163
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , azhą́ da'ołjił nidi , Júdah dine'é ádił da'oolziih lágo . Kin shijaa' Gílgal góyaa doo doohkah da índa Beth-éíven góde ałdó' dooda . Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii hiná ; doo t'áá ádzaagóó ádee hadidoohdzih da .
PRED:	But you people of Israel , have sinned against Judah , and Judah has not sinned against Gilgal . You will not go up to Gilgal . As surely as the Lord lives , you will not swear .
GOLD:	“ Though you , Israel , are a prostitute , may Judah not be guilty of such things.Do not join the false worship at Gilgal or Beth-aven , and do not take oaths there in the Lord 's name .

ID:	164
INPUT:	Háálá díí jį́ ákóyaa ííyá , áko béégashii áádóó béégashii yáázh daneesk'ahígíí índa dibéda t'óó ahayóí neistseed , áko aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké t'áá ałtso áádóó siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í danilíinii índa náá'iiłniihii Abáíyathar ałdó' , Nidahidoohkah , yidííniid ; jó , binááł da'ayą́ índa da'adlą́ągo ádaaní , Adonáíjah aláahgo naat'áanii as'ahgóó hináa le' .
PRED:	For this day he went down to this day , and killed cattle , and sheep , and cattle , and all the princes of the king 's sons , and Abiathar the princes of the army , and Abiathar , and Abiathar the priest , and Abiathar , and all the host of the king commanded .
GOLD:	Today he has sacrificed many cattle , fattened calves , and sheep , and he has invited all the king 's sons to attend the celebration . He also invited the commanders of the army and Abiathar the priest . They are feasting and drinking with him and shouting , ‘ Long live King Adonijah ! '

ID:	165
INPUT:	háálá shizaad t'áadoo dazdiizts'ą́ą' da , ní Bóhólníihii ; shá nidaal'a'í Diyin God yá dahalne'ii hach'į' t'áá ahą́ą́h ałnáádaash'aah nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo deísóołts'ą́ą' da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	For they did not listen to my words , says the Lord : I have spoken to my servants the prophets , but have not listened to them , but have not listened to them , says the Lord .
GOLD:	For they refuse to listen to me , though I have spoken to them repeatedly through the prophets I sent . And you who are in exile have not listened either , ” says the Lord .

ID:	166
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí shich'ahashkéego nashineeztą́ą́' , nidi anoonééł t'áadoo yaa shidiní'ą́ą da .
PRED:	The Lord hath taught me , but he hath not given me to death .
GOLD:	The Lord has punished me severely , but he did not let me die .

ID:	167
INPUT:	Áádóó jó'akon , nik'éí Elízabeth haastih nidi ałdó' ashkii yééltsą́ , áádóó doo ałchíi da bi'doo'niidii éí k'ad yiltsą́ągo hastą́ą́h nídeezid .
PRED:	And behold , thy brother was very old , but she was a son , and the child was not born , and the child was not born , and she was six months .
GOLD:	What 's more , your relative Elizabeth has become pregnant in her old age ! People used to say she was barren , but she has conceived a son and is now in her sixth month .

ID:	168
INPUT:	índa ha'a'aahjígo nááhoodzo éí Beth-déígan kin shijaa'góó áádóó Zébyulan kin haal'áii bíighahgóó índa <unk> yel yíldzisígíí náhookǫsjígo Beth-íímek kin haal'áádóó Niyáíyel kin shijaa'góó , áádóó náhookǫsjí Kéíbul kin haal'áii bich'į'go nihoodzo ,
PRED:	And the border of the east side , and the border of Zebulun , and the border of Zebulun , and the border of Zebulun , and the border of the north , and the border of the border of the east .
GOLD:	then it turned east toward Beth-dagon , and ran as far as Zebulun in the valley of Iphtah-el , going north to Beth-emek and Neiel . It then continued north to Cabul ,

ID:	169
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Judíyadę́ę́' naaltsoos naa halne'go doo ła' nihaa nína' da , áádóó nihidine'é áádę́ę́' neheeskaígíí nidi ła' doo ákwii ánít'éégóó doo naa ch'ídahaz'ą́ą da .
PRED:	They said to him , “ No one has come from Judea , and there is no one to pass through your people and our people . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ We have had no letters from Judea or reports against you from anyone who has come here .

ID:	170
INPUT:	Áko yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Kót'éego Bóhólníihii dadíínóhsingo áádóó nihada'ahódlíigo índa danihijéí t'áá ákóne' át'éego ádaahníił dooleeł .
PRED:	He answered them , “ This is what the Lord says : Be faithful and faithful and faithful in your heart .
GOLD:	These were his instructions to them : “ You must always act in the fear of the Lord , with faithfulness and an undivided heart .

ID:	171
INPUT:	2Chr . 7 : <unk>
PRED:	King Jeroboam of Judah
GOLD:	's Response to Solomon

ID:	172
INPUT:	Nidi ádííniid , Da' nihideezhí kin yąąh sizíní nahalingo ájiilaaígíísh yá'át'ééh ?
PRED:	But he said , “ Is it good to you like a sister who has built a sister 's sister ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why should we let him treat our sister like a prostitute ? ” they retorted angrily .

ID:	173
INPUT:	Sádamdóó naat'áanii danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii bizaad deísínółts'ą́ą́' ; Gomárahdóó diné danohłíinii , nihíjí nihiDiyin God bibee haz'áanii dadoohts'į́į́h .
PRED:	Listen to the word of the Lord , O princes of Sodom , and hear the law of our God .
GOLD:	Listen to the Lord , you leaders of “ Sodom. ” Listen to the law of our God , people of “ Gomorrah . ”

ID:	174
INPUT:	Trówasdi Christ baa hane' yá'át'éehii baa hodeeshnih biniyé níyáago , Bóhólníihii éí shá bohónéedzą́ągo áyiilaa ,
PRED:	When I came to Macedonia to preach the Good News of Christ , the Lord made for me .
GOLD:	When I came to the city of Troas to preach the Good News of Christ , the Lord opened a door of opportunity for me .

ID:	175
INPUT:	Sálaman bighan haz'ą́ą́dóó éí ła'a jį́ ak'áán kor wolyéhígíí tádiin bíighahgo dabich'iyą' , índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í ak'áán kor wolyéhígíí hastą́diin bíighahgo dabich'iyą' ,
PRED:	In the first day of Solomon 's house , twenty flour mixed with oil , and twenty shekels of grain , and twenty shekels of grain .
GOLD:	The daily food requirements for Solomon 's palace were 150 bushels of choice flour and 300 bushels of meal ;

ID:	176
INPUT:	Áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii t'óó ahayóí áádóó hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii bik'ah t'áá bił índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii didlidgo nááhániihígíí t'áá bik'eh daníką́ągo , kót'éego Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizingi nidahojiłáago ádajiilaa .
PRED:	And the burnt offering , and the oil , and the drink offering , and the drink offering , and the burnt offering , saying , This is the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	There was an abundance of burnt offerings , along with the usual liquid offerings , and a great deal of fat from the many peace offerings.So the Temple of the Lord was restored to service .

ID:	177
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa nihí daat'íinii doo baa nitsídeiikees da , nidi doo daat'íinii baa nitsídeiikees , háálá daat'íinii éí t'óó kónígháníjį' ádaat'é , nidi doo daat'íinii éí doo bá nidahwiizt'i' da .
PRED:	So we do n't think about what we do , but we do n't think about what they do . But they do n't know what they do .
GOLD:	So we do n't look at the troubles we can see now ; rather , we fix our gaze on things that can not be seen . For the things we see now will soon be gone , but the things we can not see will last forever .

ID:	178
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ii'ni' nahalingo yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' biinéé' diists'ą́ą́' , áádóó Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii haadzíí' , áko níló éí tsé nahalingo áádóó tsííd dadiltłi'ii aheesdááz .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord came out of heaven like lightning , and the Most High God spoke to him : and there was hail and hail .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resoundedamid the hail and burning coals .

ID:	179
INPUT:	Háishą' shá yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ ? Ni lá t'éiyá ni . Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'áá ni t'éiyá nídin nishłį́ .
PRED:	Who is there in heaven ? You alone are my only only . I am the only one of the earth .
GOLD:	Whom have I in heaven but you ? I desire you more than anything on earth .

ID:	180
INPUT:	Éí bąą da'neest'ą́ą́ góne' náádeeshdáałgo shitł'oh naadą́ą́' índa wáin ániidíii bits'ą́ą́' nahjį' kónídeeshdlííł áádóó t'áá łichí'ígo bee háázhdiit'įįh doo biniyé aghaa' índa na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo yistł'ónígíí baa deet'ą́ nít'ée'ii bits'ą́ą́' nahjį' kónídeeshdlííł .
PRED:	Therefore I will return to the end of the land , and I will take away my wine , and my wine , and I will take away from them ; and I will cut off his hair from his head .
GOLD:	“ But now I will take back the ripened grain and new wineI generously provided each harvest season.I will take away the wool and linen clothingI gave her to cover her nakedness .

ID:	181
INPUT:	Diyin God , nihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ biTaa' nilíinii t'áá éí aTaa' aa a'ááh nízinii índa diné t'áá ałtsojį' hayi'iyoołníihii , éí baa ha'niih ,
PRED:	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father , and the love , and every man ,
GOLD:	All praise to God , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ . God is our merciful Father and the source of all comfort .

ID:	182
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin hasht'enályaa
PRED:	The Temple
GOLD:	Tattenai 's Letter to King Darius

ID:	183
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah ákǫ́ǫ́ ayííł'a' , áko yił íídéelgo yiyiisxį́ .
PRED:	King Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada , and he killed him .
GOLD:	So King Solomon ordered Benaiah son of Jehoiada to execute him , and Adonijah was put to death .

ID:	184
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God éí t'áá bí diné yaa bił hózhóonii éí hódzą́ áádóó ił ééhózin índa ił hózhǫ́ yeidii'aah . Nidi ádił ni'iilzíihii áłah áda'ale'go áádóó ałk'i da'deesk'idgo ída'alne'go na'anishii yeidii'aah , áko bik'é nijishnishígíí Diyin God yaa bił hózhóonii yeididoo'ááł . Díí ałdó' t'áadoo nánídlíní da , áádóó níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalin .
PRED:	For God has given wisdom , wisdom , and knowledge , and knowledge ; but they have gathered together , and have given to the hills , and to the hills ; and the work of God is like the wind .
GOLD:	God gives wisdom , knowledge , and joy to those who please him . But if a sinner becomes wealthy , God takes the wealth away and gives it to those who please him . This , too , is meaningless — like chasing the wind .

ID:	185
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Report of the Guard

ID:	186
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii hach'į' haadzíi'go ání , Nídiidáahgo kin bita'atiin K'éhézdon hoolyéejį' dínááh , ákwe'é Júdas bighangi ła' Saul joolyéego <unk> dę́ę́' nijighá , éí bína'ídídííłkił , háálá ákwe'é sozdilzin .
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ Get up and walk at the entrance of the house of Judas , and look at the entrance of the house of Saul , for there he prayed . ”
GOLD:	The Lord said , “ Go over to Straight Street , to the house of Judas . When you get there , ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul . He is praying to me right now .

ID:	187
INPUT:	áko t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nilį́į doo ; shiTaa' nílíinii , ts'ídá shii' honílǫ́ áádóó shí ałdó' nii' honishłónígi át'éego bí ałdó' t'ááłá'í nilį́įgo nihii' hólǫ́ǫ doo , áko nihokáá' dine'é éí shííníł'a'ígíí deidoodląął .
PRED:	and they will be one , Father , and I am in you , and I also am in you ; and the world will believe that you sent me .
GOLD:	I pray that they will all be one , just as you and I are one — as you are in me , Father , and I am in you . And may they be in us so that the world will believe you sent me .

ID:	188
INPUT:	Éí bąą , E'elyaii danihíhígíí áát'įįd índa tsin naask'ęę'ii áádóó doolyį́į'go e'elyaii éí haadzíi'go bohoolyaa , doo dadidoohniił daígíí biniyé t'áá bítséedi t'áá náshiinídą́ą'dii bee nihich'į' haasdzíí' áádóó nihich'į' yit'íní áshłaa .
PRED:	Therefore I have spoken to you , saying , “ I have spoken to you , ‘ I have spoken to you before you , ' and ‘ I have made you desolate . ' ”
GOLD:	That is why I told you what would happen ; I told you beforehand what I was going to do.Then you could never say , ‘ My idols did it.My wooden image and metal god commanded it to happen ! '

ID:	189
INPUT:	Éí bąą háá'áyį́į́h Diyin God yee hooł'a'ii biih dadiikahgi t'ahdii nihá ąą át'éhídą́ą́' , haa'íshą' yéego ádeiit'į́įgo biih dahidiikah . Doo baa dahonohsą́ą́góó t'éí nihí ła' ch'ééh yahadaahkáahgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	If we are still alive , we will be able to enter into the synagogue , then we will come to you . Then we will know that no one will come . ”
GOLD:	God 's promise of entering his rest still stands , so we ought to tremble with fear that some of you might fail to experience it .

ID:	190
INPUT:	Náhodi'nilghałgo áádóó nahodi'ditehgo bee hojiyąąh , nidi áłchíní doo baa hwiinít'į́į́góó t'áá bí nízinígi ááníi łgo bimá baa yánízin łeh .
PRED:	And when thou art filled with thee , and rebuke , and rebuke , and rebuke them , but thou art ashamed of thy mother .
GOLD:	To discipline a child produces wisdom , but a mother is disgraced by an undisciplined child .

ID:	191
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí ak'ah bik'i yaadziidgo bee yilzį́į́' bijį́į́dą́ą́' naat'áanii danilíinii éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bidáahgi náádeidiyoołnihígíí nidayiizhjaa' .
PRED:	And it came to pass on that day , that the princes of the altar brought it before the altar .
GOLD:	The leaders also presented dedication gifts for the altar at the time it was anointed . They each placed their gifts before the altar .

ID:	192
INPUT:	Pííkah łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáii t'áá át'é éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Baasha , and all that he did , are they not written in the book of the Kings of Israel ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Pekah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	193
INPUT:	Áko i'íí'ą́ągo siláo dah deínéehii bitahgóó hane' dideezdláadgo á<unk> ní , Diné t'áá ałtso danihikin hadaas'áágóó índa danihikéyahgóó nídadohkááh .
PRED:	And when evening the army was divided in the midst of the camp , he said , “ Go to every city , and return to your own cities . ”
GOLD:	Just as the sun was setting , the cry ran through his troops : “ We 're done for ! Run for your lives ! ”

ID:	194
INPUT:	Doo honíyą́ą́góó alą́ąjį' ni'ádííníltį́įgo áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó tsídííníkéezgo nizéé' dáádidíílnih .
PRED:	You have put a fool before you , and you will give your mouth to your mouth .
GOLD:	If you have been a fool by being proud or plotting evil , cover your mouth in shame .

ID:	195
INPUT:	Áko hadzoodzíi'go kójíníigo naz'neeztą́ą́' :
PRED:	And he answered them , and taught them :
GOLD:	and he began to teach them .

ID:	196
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bá chohoo'į́ nílíinii , bide áhoot'įįhgo yisdáyiiníiłii nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá biniyé Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi dé'éyóní nílį́ , áádóó ha'át'íí lá biniyé ła' háádę́ę́' dayigáałii atiin ts'áníyáago t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ biiłkaahígíí nahonílin ?
PRED:	O house of Israel , thou art a stranger , and a stranger in Israel : and why art thou a stranger in the land of Israel ? For thou art like a man that goeth out of the way ?
GOLD:	O Hope of Israel , our Savior in times of trouble , why are you like a stranger to us ? Why are you like a traveler passing through the land , stopping only for the night ?

ID:	197
INPUT:	Nihí ła' áshididoohniił , Diyin God t'áá hó íiznízinígíí t'éiyá bik'ehgo diné ááníiłgo , ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'ahdii bik'íhoji'ááh ? Jó , háishą' íiznízinígíí yich'į' naaldzilgo yíneel'ą́ ?
PRED:	But you will say to me , ‘ Who is able to do the will of God , and what is he who is able to have mercy on him ? '
GOLD:	Well then , you might say , “ Why does God blame people for not responding ? Have n't they simply done what he makes them do ? ”

ID:	198
INPUT:	daal'aadii dayiiłtsoodgo awáalyaa góne' yah adeiznil .
PRED:	The apostles took him and put him in prison .
GOLD:	They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail .

ID:	199
INPUT:	Nidi bik'éí ádingo t'áadoo bá kéyah ninéiyółniihígóó áádóó t'áá bí ninéidiyoołnihgo yíneel'ą́ą́ ládą́ą́'
PRED:	But if he does not send his family to him , then he shall offer his own land , and if he is able to redeem him ,
GOLD:	If there is no close relative to buy the land , but the person who sold it gets enough money to buy it back ,

ID:	200
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo náá'iiłniihii nídii'na'go áhodííniid , Da' doósh ák'ihadidíídzih da ? Díí dinéshą' ha'át'íí yee naa dahalne' ?
PRED:	The high priest rose up and said to him , “ Do n't you say this man ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus , “ Well , are n't you going to answer these charges ? What do you have to say for yourself ? ”

ID:	201
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' t'áadoo ákódaaht'íní , háálá Bóhólníihii bich'į' ts'ídá doo haldinígi ádáát'įįdgo bąą bijoołxáhígíí bidiyin dabidi'níinii yá ádáát'įįd ; jó , biye'ké índa bitsi'ké deidiłidgo bidiyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' náádayiiłniihgo yaa naaskai .
PRED:	Do not be afraid of the Lord your God , because they did not worship the Lord your God , because they served other gods , and they offered sacrifices to other gods .
GOLD:	You must not worship the Lord your God the way the other nations worship their gods , for they perform for their gods every detestable act that the Lord hates . They even burn their sons and daughters as sacrifices to their gods .

ID:	202
INPUT:	Dá'ák'eh ałníí'góó bi<unk> dookah biniyé diyingo áda'dilnéehgo ádąąh da'aldéehii , éí bisóodi bitsį' áádóó doo daadáanii índa na'ats'ǫǫsí deildeełgo éí t'áá łahjį' ázhdoodįįł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ The people who are in the land will be holy . They will eat the meat , the meat , the meat , the meat , the meat , the Lord , have spoken . ”
GOLD:	“ Those who ‘ consecrate ' and ‘ purify ' themselves in a sacred garden with its idol in the center — feasting on pork and rats and other detestable meats — will come to a terrible end , ” says the Lord .

ID:	203
INPUT:	Táir dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa hane'
PRED:	The People of Tyre
GOLD:	A Message for Tyre

ID:	204
INPUT:	Num . 9 : <unk>
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	's Glory Fills the Tabernacle

ID:	205
INPUT:	hódahooł'aahii ła' Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo yílá tánágisígíí t'áadoo yida'aléhí ida'niiyą́ą́' nít'éé' , éí dayiiłtsą́ągo [ doo bił adaaníi da] .
PRED:	And when his disciples saw that they had not eaten , they would not eat .
GOLD:	They noticed that some of his disciples failed to follow the Jewish ritual of hand washing before eating .

ID:	206
INPUT:	Hakaláíyah biye' Niihemáíyah díí saad yee hahaasdzíí' . Naadiin náhááh góne' <unk> lev yiziłígíí binih Shúshan kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii bighan góne' sédáago
PRED:	This is the word of Jeremiah , the son of Shaphan , who was in the house of the king 's house , and I sat in the palace of the king 's house .
GOLD:	These are the memoirs of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah.In late autumn , in the month of Kislev , in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes ' reign , I was at the fortress of Susa .

ID:	207
INPUT:	Néíhor jiináago naadiin náhást'éí honááhaigo Tíírah há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	Abram lived thirty years old when he became the father of Abram .
GOLD:	When Nahor was 29 years old , he became the father of Terah .

ID:	208
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é dabizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii ana'al'į́ yídaneel'áanii t'áá ałtso Ízrel dine'é bitahgi yí<unk> tah .
PRED:	All the house of Israel , from twenty years old and upward , from twenty years old and twenty years old and twenty years old and upward .
GOLD:	“ From the whole community of Israel , record the names of all the warriors by their families . List all the men twenty years old or older who are able to go to war . ”

ID:	209
INPUT:	Nihits'ą́ą́' dah diiyáádóó bik'ijį' mą'iitsoh báádahadzidii nidahalingo diné nihitah hidookahgo shił bééhózin , áko da'oodlání doo yaa daazid da dooleeł .
PRED:	And I know that there is no rain among you ; and I know that the church shall not be taken away .
GOLD:	I know that false teachers , like vicious wolves , will come in among you after I leave , not sparing the flock .

ID:	210
INPUT:	Ákohgo diyingo naal'a'í shich'į' yáłti'ii áshidííniid , Hadílgháásh , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Jerúsalem índa Záíyan t'áá íiyisí haa łe'nisin .
PRED:	Then the angel who spoke to me said to me , “ Sing , cry out , ” says the Lord of hosts , “ I am very angry with you . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel said to me , “ Shout this message for all to hear : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : My love for Jerusalem and Mount Zion is passionate and strong .

ID:	211
INPUT:	háálá yóó'adashideez'ą́ągo Sáídan dine'é éí asdzą́ą́ diyin deiłníinii Áshtoreth daolyéii , áádóó Mó'ab dine'é bidiyin bidi'níinii Kíímash wolyéii índa Áman dine'é bidiyin bidi'níinii Mólek wolyéii éí díí yich'į'go nidahałáago doo shik'ehgóó deíkáah da . Bizhé'é David yę́ę shich'į' t'áá ákogi át'éego ááníiłgo bee nihoyí'áanii áádóó bee nihodiish'aahii yik'eh hół'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi át'éego doo dajíkáah da .
PRED:	For they forsaken me , and the god of Sidon , and the god of Moab , and the god of Ammon , and have walked in my ways , and have walked in my ways , and have walked in my statutes , and have walked in my statutes , as David did .
GOLD:	For Solomon has abandoned me and worshiped Ashtoreth , the goddess of the Sidonians ; Chemosh , the god of Moab ; and Molech , the god of the Ammonites . He has not followed my ways and done what is pleasing in my sight . He has not obeyed my decrees and regulations as David his father did .

ID:	212
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyolígíí bee Társhishdóó tsinaa'eeł ál'ínígi át'éii nidahíníti' .
PRED:	O God , we speak unto thee as the east wind of Tyre , O God .
GOLD:	You destroyed them like the mighty ships of Tarshishshattered by a powerful east wind .

ID:	213
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é yik'i déez'į́į'go ádajít'éegi yaa ákoniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And when God saw that he had looked upon Israel , he looked upon them .
GOLD:	He looked down on the people of Israel and knew it was time to act .

ID:	214
INPUT:	Áko Eihazáíyah éí Samériyadi adeídi haghangi tsin yistł'ǫ́ǫgo tsésǫ'gi dáádiníbaalígíí bigházhnítłizh , áko bits'ą́ą́dóó hatah doo hóóts'íid da , áádóó hane' yił nidaal'a'íii ajííł'a'go ábijiní , Nílááh , Ékran kin haal'áagi diyin Béíyalzííbab shá nidabídółkid , Díí naałniih daats'í bits'ą́ą́dóó náádideeshdááł , dooda daats'í .
PRED:	And Ahaziah told him that he was in Samaria in Samaria , and he sent messengers out of the window , and sent messengers to him , saying , “ Go , and tell the gods of Ekron , and I will not return from them . ”
GOLD:	One day Israel 's new king , Ahaziah , fell through the latticework of an upper room at his palace in Samaria and was seriously injured . So he sent messengers to the temple of Baal-zebub , the god of Ekron , to ask whether he would recover .

ID:	215
INPUT:	Áko áyah nii'áii naakigo bii' tá'ádígisí nitsaaígíí áádóó dóola naakits'áadahgo béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaago bii' tá'ádígisí biyaa sinilígíí éí aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman yę́ę Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin yiniyé áyiilaii ayííyį́ ; éí béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaii t'áá át'é doo dah hizhdooleehígi aníłdáás .
PRED:	And the two pillars , and twelve oxen , and twelve oxen , which the king Solomon had made for the house of the Lord ; and all the bronze were before him .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea with the twelve bronze oxen beneath it , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of King Solomon .

ID:	216
INPUT:	T'áadoo íits'a'í ádił handzooł ; daneeznáanii t'áadoo baa yínííł nanináhí ; nitsii' biná'íłt'ih áádóó kééh ni'éés ; nizéé' doo bich'ą́ą́h ni'dííłbał da índa yínííł danilíinii bibááh doo dííyį́įł da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , you who are troubled ! Do n't look on your head , and your feet will be covered with your feet , and you will not eat bread .
GOLD:	Groan silently , but let there be no wailing at her grave . Do not uncover your head or take off your sandals . Do not perform the usual rituals of mourning or accept any food brought to you by consoling friends . ”

ID:	217
INPUT:	Áko éí Férisii hágo hodííniidii díí yiyiiłtsą́ągo , t'áá biyi'ídi ání , Díí diné Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo , díí asdzání hódílnihígíí át'íinii hoł bééhózin doo nít'éé' , háálá asdzání bąąhági ááníiłii nilį́ .
PRED:	When the Pharisees saw this , he said , “ This man is a prophet , because he is a woman . ”
GOLD:	When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this , he said to himself , “ If this man were a prophet , he would know what kind of woman is touching him . She 's a sinner ! ”

ID:	218
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham éí Diyin God yoosdląądgo bik'ihojidlíhígi át'éego Diyin God dayoodlánígíí t'áá ałtso bik'idahojidlí .
PRED:	And Abraham was blessed in God , as God believed in him .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	219
INPUT:	Áádóó naanish binanit'a'í danilíinii índa bik'ehgo nida'anishí ch'íkaigo diné ádeidííniid , Féro kóní , Tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz doo nihaa náádeeshjoł da .
PRED:	And the princes of his work went out , and said unto the people , I will not give thee bread .
GOLD:	So the slave drivers and foremen went out and told the people : “ This is what Pharaoh says : I will not provide any more straw for you .

ID:	220
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Férisii honíł'į́įgo t'áadoo átsé Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo tá'ázdígisí izh'niiyą́ą'go t'óó bił ahóóyóí .
PRED:	And when the Pharisees saw it , it was very many that they had not been circumcised by the Jews .
GOLD:	His host was amazed to see that he sat down to eat without first performing the hand-washing ceremony required by Jewish custom .

ID:	221
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso kódaat'éii yaa nidaakaii índa doo t'áá ákogi ádaat'íinii éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God doo bíłdin da .
PRED:	The Lord your God is not able to do what is right and right .
GOLD:	All who cheat with dishonest weights and measures are detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	222
INPUT:	Bisóodi éí bikéshgaan hałgizh áádóó doo bita' nideezbaal da , nidi doo ná'át'aał da ; éí nihił t'óó baa'ih .
PRED:	He that hath broken the flesh , and hath not broken his tent , but he hath not eaten ; he is unclean with you .
GOLD:	The pig has evenly split hooves but does not chew the cud , so it is unclean .

ID:	223
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Haash dahóót'įįd ? Áádóó ábizhdííniid , Jó , Názarethdóó Jesus ábi'dool'įįdígíí éí Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo Diyin God índa diné t'áá ałtso binááł ayóó ádaat'éii áyoolíiłgo áádóó bizaad ayóó át'éego na'iiłnáago baa nitsáhákees nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they said unto him , What is it ? And he said unto them , Behold , Jesus was a prophet of Nazareth , a prophet of God and of all the people , and the words of all men .
GOLD:	“ What things ? ” Jesus asked. “ The things that happened to Jesus , the man from Nazareth , ” they said . “ He was a prophet who did powerful miracles , and he was a mighty teacher in the eyes of God and all the people .

ID:	224
INPUT:	Jó , nibik'ehgo iináanii bídin nishłį́ . Nit'áá ákogi é'ét'é bee náshiiłnaah !
PRED:	For I am the law of thy precepts ; give me life to me .
GOLD:	I long to obey your commandments ! Renew my life with your goodness .

ID:	225
INPUT:	Diyingo naal'a'í naakidi haa náánádzáá góne' hodeelchidgo ání , Nídiidáahgo íyą́ , háálá ayóó ánízáágóó díníyá .
PRED:	Then the angel appeared to him another second angel , saying , “ Get up and eat , for she is far away . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord came again and touched him and said , “ Get up and eat some more , or the journey ahead will be too much for you . ”

ID:	226
INPUT:	Áko Gíliyad hwe'asdzą́ą́ haye' há niyiishchį́ , índa hwe'asdzą́ą́ biyáázhké daneeyą́ągo Jéfthah ch'ídei<unk> <unk> go ádeidííniid , Nihizhé'é ba'áłchíní bitahdóó nihíí' dadooleełígíí doo ła' níí' dooleeł da , háálá asdzání dé'éyóní nilíinii biyáázh nílį́ .
PRED:	And Gilead gave birth to his son , and they said to Jephthah , “ No one will inherit the inheritance of your father 's sons , for you are a stranger . ”
GOLD:	Gilead 's wife also had several sons , and when these half brothers grew up , they chased Jephthah off the land . “ You will not get any of our father 's inheritance , ” they said , “ for you are the son of a prostitute . ”

ID:	227
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya dine'é bisiláo t'áá ałtso Éífek kin shijaa'ígi áłah silį́į́' , índa Ízrel dine'é éí Jézriyel nahós'a' tó háálínígi dah yinééł .
PRED:	And all the Philistines gathered together together together , and gathered together together at Jezreel , and the children of Israel went up to the waters of Jezreel .
GOLD:	The entire Philistine army now mobilized at Aphek , and the Israelites camped at the spring in Jezreel .

ID:	228
INPUT:	Shidine'é Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íní'eezh bijį́į́dóó kin haal'áagi Ízrel dine'é bitahgi doo ła' kin bii' sohodizinii shá íidoolíiłgo ákwii shízhi' baa ha'niih doo biniyé bik'i diishnii' da , doodaii' doo ła' shidine'é Ízrel binazhnit'áa doo biniyé náhodiiłtį́į da .
PRED:	When I brought my people out of the land of Egypt , I chose them out of the city of Israel to build a temple for my name , so that no one would make a house for my name for my name .
GOLD:	‘ From the day I brought my people out of the land of Egypt , I have never chosen a city among any of the tribes of Israel as the place where a Temple should be built to honor my name . Nor have I chosen a king to lead my people Israel .

ID:	229
INPUT:	Tónteel aháíyííłk'olgo ákóne' tsé'naa ho'níłnii' , áádóó tó ałts'ą́ą́hjí ní'áago áyiilaa .
PRED:	He divided the sea to the sea , and set it on each side .
GOLD:	For he divided the sea and led them through , making the water stand up like walls !

ID:	230
INPUT:	Éíbraham éí Filístiya dine'é bikéyahgi t'óó átsééd kééhojit'į́įgo lą'í yiską́ .
PRED:	Abraham lived in the land of the Philistines for many days .
GOLD:	And Abraham lived as a foreigner in Philistine country for a long time .

ID:	231
INPUT:	Áádóó éí yoołkáałdi t'áá dáda'ak'ehígi miilgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii éí miilgo béésh łigaii bą́ą́h ná'ádleehii bitsásk'ehgi ch'il ahoshí áádóó ch'il deeníní hodooleeł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that it shall come to pass in that day , that it shall be mine , and I shall be the vine of silver .
GOLD:	In that day the lush vineyards , now worth 1,000 pieces of silver , will become patches of briers and thorns .

ID:	232
INPUT:	Áádóó łį́į́' yee nídahastį́įgo Jerúsalem éí David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaagi yóó'ádahojiilaa .
PRED:	And they took him , and buried him in the city of David his father , which was in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	They brought his body back to Jerusalem on a horse , and he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David .

ID:	233
INPUT:	Gííbal áádóó Áman índa Ámalek dine'é ; Táir kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii éí Filístiya dine'é yił ałch'odaos'ne' ;
PRED:	The Amalekites , and the Amalekites , and the Amalekites who dwell in Tyre are joined together with the Philistines .
GOLD:	Gebalites , Ammonites , and Amalekites ; and people from Philistia and Tyre .

ID:	234
INPUT:	Jó , t'áadoo le'é ániidíígíí baa nideeshaał ; k'ad hadínóosééł . Nił bééhodoozįįł . Jó , honoojíidi nidi , honít'i'go índa halgaidi tooh danílį́įgo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	Behold , I will do what you have said , and I will do . Behold , I will make you known in the wilderness , in the wilderness , and in the wilderness .
GOLD:	For I am about to do something new.See , I have already begun ! Do you not see it ? I will make a pathway through the wilderness.I will create rivers in the dry wasteland .

ID:	235
INPUT:	Ahastiin t'áá bí bits'íís ayóó'ádayó'nínígi át'éego be'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'ádayó'níi doo . Be'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'áyó'nínígíí t'áá bí ałdó' ayóó'í'dó'ní .
PRED:	They love their husbands as they love their own body , and love their wife .
GOLD:	In the same way , husbands ought to love their wives as they love their own bodies . For a man who loves his wife actually shows love for himself .

ID:	236
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Nóah áyidííniid , Ats'íís k'ehgo yildahii nináneel'ą́ąjį' bá nihonít'i' dooleeł , háálá nahasdzáán bikáá'góó hó hwee t'áá át'éé nít'éé' ádílááh nihinéést'e' , áko k'ad nahasdzáán bikáa'gi áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	God said to Noah , “ The breath of the flesh will come to you , for the whole earth is full more than all the earth , and I will destroy the earth . ”
GOLD:	So God said to Noah , “ I have decided to destroy all living creatures , for they have filled the earth with violence . Yes , I will wipe them all out along with the earth !

ID:	237
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bits'ąą Ámor dine'é yóó'aheezhjée'go Beth-hóran kin shijaa' góyaa dayíjeehgo Bóhólníihii éí wódahdę́ę́' yik'ijį' nílótsoh Azííkah kin shijaa'jį' ayóó át'éego nayííłtą́ągo nidahastseed ; Ízrel dine'é danilíinii diltłish yee nidahastseedígíí biláahdi át'éego nílótsoh yee nahwésdįįd .
PRED:	And the children of Israel fled from the Amorites , and went down to the top of the Amorites , and smote them by the hand of the Lord ; and the Lord smote them with the sword of the children of Israel , than the sword .
GOLD:	As the Amorites retreated down the road from Beth-horon , the Lord destroyed them with a terrible hailstorm from heaven that continued until they reached Azekah . The hail killed more of the enemy than the Israelites killed with the sword .

ID:	238
INPUT:	Diyin God éí , aTaa' nílíinii , dabidohníigo , nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'ah dahinohnáago dahodíínóhsingo bá dahinohná . Diyin God doo ał'ohgo aa nitsíkeesii éí t'ááłá'í jinítínígo ádajíít'įįdii bik'ehgo haa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	If you say to the Father , “ If you live on the earth , you will live in the world . God will judge each one according to his deeds . ”
GOLD:	And remember that the heavenly Father to whom you pray has no favorites . He will judge or reward you according to what you do . So you must live in reverent fear of him during your time here as “ temporary residents . ”

ID:	239
INPUT:	T'áadoo ádaa dahoh'niihí
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Warning about Self-Confidence

ID:	240
INPUT:	Áádóó bił dahóózhǫǫdgo béeso haa deidooniłgo há dahodeez'ą́ .
PRED:	And they were filled with them , and gave them their money .
GOLD:	They were delighted , and they promised to give him money .

ID:	241
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Mózes éí Éran áyidííniid , Díí dinéshą' ha'át'íí daniłníigo biniinaa ayóó át'éego ádił ni'iidzííh biih yínínil ?
PRED:	Moses said to Aaron , “ Why have you brought these people into sin ? ”
GOLD:	Finally , he turned to Aaron and demanded , “ What did these people do to you to make you bring such terrible sin upon them ? ”

ID:	242
INPUT:	Pérgamasgi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii bidiyingo naal'a'í kót'éego bich'į' ak'e'íłchí : Diltłish t'áá ałch'ishjigo deeníinii dah yootį́įłii kóní :
PRED:	“ Speak to the angel of the church , and write to the angel of the church : ‘ This is what the sword says :
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Pergamum . This is the message from the one with the sharp two-edged sword :

ID:	243
INPUT:	Shí t'éiyá nihiDiyin God nishłį́į doo biniyé Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' dah nihidii'eezh ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ .
PRED:	I alone brought you out of Egypt to be your God . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	It was I who rescued you from the land of Egypt , that I might be your God . I am the Lord . ”

ID:	244
INPUT:	Áádóó Jórdan tooh nílínígíí biláahdi Átad hoolyéego ha'é'él'ésígi jinínáago ákwe'é t'áá íiyisí yínííł dajílį́įgo yínííł bił t'áá íiyisí dajíícha ; Jóseph bizaad k'ehgo tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' dajicha nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when they came into the midst of the Jordan , they wept , and wept , and wept for seven days .
GOLD:	When they arrived at the threshing floor of Atad , near the Jordan River , they held a very great and solemn memorial service , with a seven-day period of mourning for Joseph 's father .

ID:	245
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Now this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	246
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá dah oonééł nít' éé' éí níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ą́góó éí diné yił adaaskaigo tsé yee yił nidadzisne'go daaztsą́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniidígíí yida'iilaa .
PRED:	And all the congregation went out of the camp , and told the people , and they died , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So the whole community took the man outside the camp and stoned him to death , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	247
INPUT:	Nidi ni , doodaii' na'áłchíní shikéé' deínóhkáhígíí bits'ą́ąjigo dah doohkaigo shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii índa bee nihoní'áanii nihidáahgi nihá niníláhígíí doo bik'eh dahonoł'į́į́góó áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii ła' bá nidaał'a'go índa bich'į' nidahołáago ,
PRED:	But if you turn away from following me , and do not obey my commandments , and my statutes , and do not obey them , and serve other gods ,
GOLD:	“ But if you or your descendants abandon me and disobey the commands and decrees I have given you , and if you serve and worship other gods ,

ID:	248
INPUT:	Doo ádaa hashne'góó shá bíighah dishnínígíí shits'íís yąąh niníyá .
PRED:	I have come to my body all day long .
GOLD:	When I refused to confess my sin , my body wasted away , and I groaned all day long .

ID:	249
INPUT:	Ákohgo Marííshah kin haal'áagi kéédahoht'íinii nihił ałts'ą́ą́' ałk'iiz dooleełii nihaa deesłóós ; éí Ízrel dine'é binaat'áanii nilíinii Adálam kin haal'áajį' adoogááł .
PRED:	Then bring your inheritance to you , all your inhabitants who live in Ashdod , and the princes of Israel will come to Jericho .
GOLD:	O people of Mareshah , I will bring a conqueror to capture your town.And the leaders of Israelwill go to Adullam .

ID:	250
INPUT:	Siláo neeznádiingo binanit'a'í éidíígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go , siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í yaa níyáago yił hoolne'go ání , Ha'át'íishą' baa nídinidzá ? Éí diné yee' Rome dine'é nilį́į́ lá .
PRED:	When the captain of the soldiers heard this , he went to the commander of the army and told them , “ What do you come to us ? ”
GOLD:	When the officer heard this , he went to the commander and asked , “ What are you doing ? This man is a Roman citizen ! ”

ID:	251
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákózhdííniid nidi , nida'ał'eełii táłts'á da'diil'oł daznízin , nidi ch'ééh ádajíít'įįd , háálá tónteel t'áá íiyisí hak'ijį' náádadiidáahgo yilk'ooł .
PRED:	But when he had said these things , they could not escape from the sea , but they could not escape against the sea .
GOLD:	Instead , the sailors rowed even harder to get the ship to the land . But the stormy sea was too violent for them , and they could n't make it .

ID:	252
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Géídai biye' Ménahem éí Térzah kin haal'áádóó Samériyajį' níyá , áádóó ákwii Jéíbesh biye' Shálam atíyiilaago yiyiisxį́ , áko éí bitsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Then Sisera the son of Elah came to Samaria , and struck him there , and killed him . And he reigned him in his place .
GOLD:	Then Menahem son of Gadi went to Samaria from Tirzah and assassinated him , and he became the next king .

ID:	253
INPUT:	Áádóó łą'ídi ninálí ła' nídeididooniłgo yúnak ádabi'didoolníiłgo éí Bábilan kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii bighandi yá nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	And some of them shall be put to death , and they shall be put to death in the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	‘ Some of your very own sons will be taken away into exile . They will become eunuchs who will serve in the palace of Babylon 's king . ' ”

ID:	254
INPUT:	Áko wóne'dę́ę'go bikáá' adání dį́į́' sinil ; tł'óó'dę́ę'go ałdó' dį́į́' sinil , áko bikáá' adání bikáa'gi náádahidoonihii nidaatseed dooleeł biniyé tseebíí sinil .
PRED:	And he set the table on the four sides , and on the four corners of the table , to kill them on the table .
GOLD:	So there were eight tables in all — four inside and four outside — where the sacrifices were cut up and prepared .

ID:	255
INPUT:	Kódaadzaadóó bik'ijį' Gálilii be'ek'id tsé'naagóó Jesus bił dah nídii'éél , t'áá éí Taibííriyas be'ek'id wolyé .
PRED:	After these things Jesus went to the sea of Galilee , to the sea of Galilee .
GOLD:	After this , Jesus crossed over to the far side of the Sea of Galilee , also known as the Sea of Tiberias .

ID:	256
INPUT:	Áko hoos'įįdgo Peter doo bééhoozinígíí biniinaa siláo bitahgóó ayóó át'éego hahodíídláád .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when Peter saw that there was a great multitude among the army .
GOLD:	At dawn there was a great commotion among the soldiers about what had happened to Peter .

ID:	257
INPUT:	Jó yoołkáłígíí , áádóó nídahidizíidii , áádóó dahwéelzhíishiida índa nináháháahiida nihił dadiyingo ádeínóhsin lá !
PRED:	For in the days , and in the days , and in the times , and in the times , and in the holy place .
GOLD:	You are trying to earn favor with God by observing certain days or months or seasons or years .

ID:	258
INPUT:	Nidine'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii bá yóó'adííní'ą́ ; ádił da'asziihii t'áá ałtso bá bik'i hwiiniziid . Síilah .
PRED:	You have forgiven your people , and you have poured out all their sins . Selah .
GOLD:	You forgave the guilt of your people — yes , you covered all their sins.Interlude

ID:	259
INPUT:	T'áá aaníinii éí há díní'į́į́' , Bóhólníihii nílíinii . Naa abídziyíníłhaal nidi , t'áadoo yaa ákodaniizį́į' da . Atídeinilaa nidi , hasht'e'dabidi'doolníłígíí doo deinízin da . Binii' tsé nitł'izígíí bilááh át'éego dayííłtł'is . Łahgo át'éego tsíńdadookos yę́ę nidi , doo deinízin da .
PRED:	You have seen the truth , O Lord , you have spoken in your mouth , but they have not rejected them ; they have rejected them , but they have not forgotten them , but they have not turned their faces , but they have not known .
GOLD:	Lord , you are searching for honesty.You struck your people , but they paid no attention.You crushed them , but they refused to be corrected.They are determined , with faces set like stone ; they have refused to repent .

ID:	260
INPUT:	Diné nininísáanii nahalingo k'ad áká nílzisnanídídéeshkiłgo shił hodíílnih .
PRED:	You are like a young man , and I will ask you , and I will ask you .
GOLD:	“ Brace yourself like a man , because I have some questions for you , and you must answer them .

ID:	261
INPUT:	Áádóó Áshįįh Bił Honíts'aa' hoolyéé góyaa Íídam dine'é bisiláo neeznáadi míilgo nidzistseed , índa Síílah kin haal'áii anaa' bee dzisná , áádóó díí jį́įjį' <unk> hiyel bee hojíízhi' .
PRED:	And he killed ten thousand men of Edom , which is in the valley of Hamath , and they set up the city of Caesar , and set up a name to this day .
GOLD:	Amaziah also killed 10,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt . He also conquered Sela and changed its name to Joktheel , as it is called to this day .

ID:	262
INPUT:	Óola t'áá bízhání bik'ídííłtihgo ła' bibąąhgóó ahééhiníkaadgo ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt make it of pure gold , and shalt make it with pure gold .
GOLD:	Overlay it with pure gold and run a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	263
INPUT:	Ła' nidzistseed nidi , daadzíi'ii háká daat'į́įgo t'ą́ą́' ninákaigo Diyin God t'áá íiyisí há daat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	But some of them returned and found God .
GOLD:	When God began killing them , they finally sought him.They repented and took God seriously .

ID:	264
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	265
INPUT:	áádóó náhodiiniichii'go doo naagháhígóó haz'ánígi kéyah bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo , índa ákwii ch'il hadínóot'į́į́ł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ nídahodiłtį́į́h .
PRED:	and the land shall rejoice in a high place , and the land shall be glad , and there shall be no rain in it .
GOLD:	Who sends rain to satisfy the parched groundand make the tender grass spring up ?

ID:	266
INPUT:	Ákwii Íímim dine'é kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' ; éí diné ayóó ádaat'éii áádóó t' óó adahayóí nít'éé' índa Ánakim dine'égi ádaníłnééz nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the children of Ethiopia dwelt there ; and they made them a great and great ; and they made them like a nation .
GOLD:	( A race of giants called the Emites had once lived in the area of Ar . They were as strong and numerous and tall as the Anakites , another race of giants .

ID:	267
INPUT:	Nidi oodlání nohłį́įgo éí doo oodlání ánihwii'aahii nilíinii náánáła' oodlání nilíinii nihá yaa nídóot'įįłgo biniyé bich'į' nidahoh'éésh .
PRED:	But if you are not a judge , bring another judge to judge the church .
GOLD:	But instead , one believer sues another — right in front of unbelievers !

ID:	268
INPUT:	áádóó éí diné bił neezhtéezhgo áádóó ájíít'įįdígíí hahastiin bits'ąą nanil'ingo ázhdoolchxǫ'ígíí t'áadoo bééhoozingóó índa oo'íinii ádingo t'áadoo hahodeel'į́'ígóó
PRED:	and if a man lies with her , and she hath not been defiled from her husband , and hath not seen her husband , and hath not been hid from her husband ,
GOLD:	and has sex with another man , but neither her husband nor anyone else knows about it . She has defiled herself , even though there was no witness and she was not caught in the act .

ID:	269
INPUT:	Naat'áanii danilíinii t'óó daho'di<unk> go honoojíidi doo nida'aztiindi t'áá ádzaagóó t'óó ahii' naaníjookah nít'éé' .
PRED:	The princes did not let them live in the wilderness , but in the wilderness they did not turn back .
GOLD:	the Lord pours contempt on their princes , causing them to wander in trackless wastelands .

ID:	270
INPUT:	tsííd yááhiiltaałígi át'éego ach'į' nahwii'ná biniyé diné bi'dichííh .
PRED:	A man was born in trouble , and a man was born in trouble .
GOLD:	People are born for troubleas readily as sparks fly up from a fire .

ID:	271
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é bitahdę́ę́' diné shaa hínínilígíí bich'į' nízhi' bee ánít'éii bééhózingo íishłaa ; éí t'áá ałtso níí' nít'ée'go shaa hínínil , índa nizaad yik'eh dahół'į́ .
PRED:	I have made known your name , which you gave me from the earth , which you have given me , and I have given them all , and have obeyed your word .
GOLD:	“ I have revealed you to the ones you gave me from this world . They were always yours . You gave them to me , and they have kept your word .

ID:	272
INPUT:	T'áá hó Diyin God yee ayóó át'éii bee bits'ádi'nílíidii bee hats'ádi'nídíín , índa Diyin God át'éhígíí ts'ídá t'áá éí jílį́įgo , t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' hazaad ayóó ábóodziilii bee hoogááł . Nihibąąhági át'éii nihąąh táádzízgizdóó bik'ijį' aghánáhóó'áadi Diyin God Ayóó'át'éii binish'náájígo dasneezdá .
PRED:	He was the light of God , and the glory of his glory , and the glory of God , and the whole world , and he washed us with a great power , and washed us from the right hand of the Most High God .
GOLD:	The Son radiates God 's own glory and expresses the very character of God , and he sustains everything by the mighty power of his command . When he had cleansed us from our sins , he sat down in the place of honor at the right hand of the majestic God in heaven .

ID:	273
INPUT:	Kintah góne' ada'iiztiingi nidilghaash łeh ; dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó chánahgo yáłti'
PRED:	She cry out in the streets , and she speaks in the gates ;
GOLD:	By the gates at the entrance to the town , on the road leading in , she cries aloud ,

ID:	274
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , shoo , Bóhólníihii hinishnáago áshósin , t'áá ádííniidígi át'éego , dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' nááhaijį' Bóhólníihii díí saad yee Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'ii bee Ízrel dine'é honoojíidi naaldeeh yę́ędą́ą́' hinishnáago áshósingo hoolzhiizh , áko k'ad , shoo , díí jį́ tseebídiindóó ba'aan ashdla' shinááhai .
PRED:	Now , behold , I live in the wilderness , as the Lord had commanded Moses , and behold , I live in the wilderness , as the Lord had commanded Moses . Now , behold , I have lived in the wilderness , and behold , a hundred and forty years .
GOLD:	“ Now , as you can see , the Lord has kept me alive and well as he promised for all these forty-five years since Moses made this promise — even while Israel wandered in the wilderness . Today I am eighty-five years old .

ID:	275
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph índa hazhé'é ba'áłchíní bił Ííjip kéyahgi kéédahojit'į́į́ nít'éé' , ákohgo Jóseph t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan neeznáá honááhai .
PRED:	Joseph and his father dwelt in Egypt , and Joseph was a hundred and ten years .
GOLD:	So Joseph and his brothers and their families continued to live in Egypt . Joseph lived to the age of 110 .

ID:	276
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii éí Daniel ayóó át'éego ił nilį́įgo áyiilaa índa ayóó ádaat'éii t'óó ahayóí t'áá jíík'eh haa yiiznil ; Bábilangi t'áá át'é binazh'nt'áago áhoolaa índa Bábilandóó diné dahóyáanii binanit'a'í jílį́įgo áhoolaa .
PRED:	Then the king gave Daniel great glory , and gave him many miracles , and he put him in Babylon , and put him in all the wise men of Babylon .
GOLD:	Then the king appointed Daniel to a high position and gave him many valuable gifts . He made Daniel ruler over the whole province of Babylon , as well as chief over all his wise men .

ID:	277
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ła' kééhojit'į́įgo éí kéyah doo hohóóghah da ; t'áá íiyisí bidziilgo dah ajooléełgo biniinaa doo t'áá ła' kééhojit'į́į le' át'ée da .
PRED:	And there is no one to dwell in it , because of the power of his strength , and there is no one to dwell in it .
GOLD:	But the land could not support both Abram and Lot with all their flocks and herds living so close together .

ID:	278
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah éí nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é dayíłkiin dooígíí yeidiní'ą́
PRED:	Hezekiah gave the priests and Levites
GOLD:	Hezekiah 's Religious Reforms

ID:	279
INPUT:	Éí bitahdi nihí ałdó' Jesus Christ bíí' dadoohłeełgo nihíká ádahodoo'niid .
PRED:	And he called for you also , that ye may receive the inheritance of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And you are included among those Gentiles who have been called to belong to Jesus Christ .

ID:	280
INPUT:	Bąąhági át'éii lá bich'į' nidaałdzil ni , nidi t'ah doo biniinaa nihidił dadinéeh da .
PRED:	For you have sinned against us , but you have not sinned .
GOLD:	After all , you have not yet given your lives in your struggle against sin .

ID:	281
INPUT:	Didlidgo náádahidoonihii éí alį́į́' t'áá át'é éí dóola yázhí naakits'áadahgo , deenásts'aa' naakits'áadahgo , dibé yázhí biką' ii ła' béédááhaii naakits'áadahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii bił náádahaaz'nii' áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh naakits'áadahgo ádił oodzíí'jí náádahaaz'nii' .
PRED:	All the cattle for a burnt offering , twelve bulls , twelve rams , twelve lambs , twelve lambs , and twelve lambs a year old , and twelve male goats , for the sin offering of the goats .
GOLD:	Twelve young bulls , twelve rams , and twelve one-year-old male lambs were donated for the burnt offerings , along with their prescribed grain offerings . Twelve male goats were brought for the sin offerings .

ID:	282
INPUT:	áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii doo bikéé' dashdidoogááłgóó Bóhólníihii díí yee hach'į' haadzí'ígíí t' áadoo bik'eh hojííł'įįd da .
PRED:	And he did not obey the word of the Lord , to go after other gods .
GOLD:	He had warned Solomon specifically about worshiping other gods , but Solomon did not listen to the Lord 's command .

ID:	283
INPUT:	Áko Jiisháíman honoojíijigo Hakíílah yanáalk'idgi atiin bąąhgóó Saul bisiláo yił dah yinééł . Nidi David éí honoojíidi nijigháago honoojíígóó Saul hakéé' heedzáago baa ákozniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And Saul saw that Saul was in the wilderness of Olives , in the wilderness of Olives , which is in the wilderness , and Saul saw that Saul was in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Saul camped along the road beside the hill of Hakilah , near Jeshimon , where David was hiding . When David learned that Saul had come after him into the wilderness ,

ID:	284
INPUT:	Léímek jiináago Nóah há yizhchį́į́dóó bik'ijį' ashdladi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiindóó ba'aan ashdla' honínáánááhaígíí biyi' haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	After he became the father of Noah , he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Noah , Lamech lived another 595 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	285
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Záíyandóó ne'ayóó át'éii naat'á gish yił dah doolnihgo ádidooniił , Ni'ana'í bitahgi nanít'á !
PRED:	The Lord will put his hand on Zion , and he will say , “ You are king among your enemies . ”
GOLD:	The Lord will extend your powerful kingdom from Jerusalem ; you will rule over your enemies .

ID:	286
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Dá'ák'ehgi niinéé' diséts'ą́ą'go nísísdzííd , háálá t'áá łinishchí'í ; éí bąą nídísht'į́į́' .
PRED:	He said , “ I heard a voice in the field , because I am naked ; therefore I hid your face . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ I heard you walking in the garden , so I hid . I was afraid because I was naked . ”

ID:	287
INPUT:	Diyin God bidiyį́į́' nihokáá' dine'é yaa nídadóot'įįłígíísh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Áko nihokáá' dine'é baa nídadóoht'įįłgo kóníshéhégo haz'ánígíí baa nídadóoht'įįłgi nidiísh bi'oh danooł'ą́ ?
PRED:	Do you not know that if you do not know that the saints judge the world ? If you are judged , then you are able to judge him ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that someday we believers will judge the world ? And since you are going to judge the world , ca n't you decide even these little things among yourselves ?

ID:	288
INPUT:	Bóhólníihiigi át'éego doo ła' náádíyin da , háálá nigi át'éii doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da ; nihiDiyin God éí tsé bine' na'adzi'ígi át'éego doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	There is no other god like the Lord , for there is no other God like the rock .
GOLD:	No one is holy like the Lord ! There is no one besides you ; there is no Rock like our God .

ID:	289
INPUT:	nidi aninéédę́ę́' náádi'yiijée'go atah dadooleełgo yą́ą́h da'nilíinii éí doo nááda'doogeh da , doo nidi ahaa dabi'dii'níił da doo ,
PRED:	But if they are raised from the dead , they will not have sexual immorality , but they will not be given to them .
GOLD:	But in the age to come , those worthy of being raised from the dead will neither marry nor be given in marriage .

ID:	290
INPUT:	nidi , Łah atínihił'į́įgo Jesus baa hane' doo t'áá aaníi da , níí nít'éé' yę́ę k'ad índa yoodlą́ągo yaa nahalne' , ha'níigo shaa dahodiits'a' .
PRED:	But we hear that there is no one to say to you , “ I have heard that it was true and faith . ”
GOLD:	All they knew was that people were saying , “ The one who used to persecute us is now preaching the very faith he tried to destroy ! ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	Náánáła' bee yisdá'doodáałii doo nááhódlǫ́ǫ da , háálá yádiłhił biyaagi yízhí náánáła' bee yisdáhiikáah dooleełii ts'ídá doo ła' nihokáá' dine'é baa náádeet'ą́ą da .
PRED:	There is no one to save another ; for there is no one to save the world .
GOLD:	There is salvation in no one else ! God has given no other name under heaven by which we must be saved . ”

ID:	292
INPUT:	Áádóó be'awéé' biyaałáii bijáágiizhdę́ę́' haalts'idígíí índa niyiiłchíhígíí yíká dichin yéé'oo'níihgo nitsinádáahgo doo boo'ínígóó t'áá bizááká néídą́ągo t'áá ałtsoní yéé'oo'níihgo ana'í t'éí binídahaashzhiizh góne' índa bich'į' dahodiisnáá' góne' nihi'ana'í ti'nidanihiyoołníihgo nihikin hadaas'áagi ákódahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	And he shall cast out his hand from the hand of the child , and cast out his hand , and cry out to the hungry , and to the famine , and to the end of all things , and to the enemy , and to the cities of our enemies .
GOLD:	She will hide from them the afterbirth and the new baby she has borne , so that she herself can secretly eat them . She will have nothing else to eat during the siege and terrible distress that your enemy will inflict on all your towns .

ID:	293
INPUT:	Ákohgo Rábshakeh áhodííniid , Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ayóó át'éii ání , K'ad Heziikáíyah ádabidohní , Ha'át'íí ba'ahódlíí shį́įshą' baa dzíínílí ?
PRED:	Then the captain of Assyria said to him , “ Why do you say to Hezekiah the king of Assyria , ‘ Why do you trust in your faithfulness ? '
GOLD:	Then the Assyrian king 's chief of staff told them to give this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the great king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in that makes you so confident ?

ID:	294
INPUT:	T'ááłáhígi át'éego danołdzilgo na'nitin woodláanii bee nisoozį́įgo , áádóó hane' yá'át'éehii biyi'dóó dasidoots'ą́ą'ii bee ił chohoo'íinii doo bits'ánáhóhkááhgóó t'éiyá ákódanoht'ée doo . Yá biyaagi nihokáá' dine'é t'áadoo ła' doo<unk> díí hane' yá'át'éehii bee bił dahóóne' . Shí Paul díí baa hashne' doogo shi'dool'aad .
PRED:	As you stand in one faith , so that you may be able to go away from the light of the Good News that is in heaven . I am sent to you this Good News in heaven .
GOLD:	But you must continue to believe this truth and stand firmly in it . Do n't drift away from the assurance you received when you heard the Good News . The Good News has been preached all over the world , and I , Paul , have been appointed as God 's servant to proclaim it .

ID:	295
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdígíí yee Jerúsalem dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é hólónídóó áts'ą́ąjį' nahjį' kóhoolaajį' ákóhóót'įįd ; nít'éé' Zedekáíyah éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yich'į' naastee' .
PRED:	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Jerusalem and Judah from his hand . And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	These things happened because of the Lord 's anger against the people of Jerusalem and Judah , until he finally banished them from his presence and sent them into exile.Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon .

ID:	296
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' hamá Méíyakah asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nilį́įgo éí nidi nahjį' hayííłt'e' , háálá asdzání be'elyaii doo daaldinii áyiilaa , áko éí asdzání be'elyaii áyiilaaígíí hats'ą́ą́' Éísa niyiishchǫ'go Kídran tó nílínígi yidííłid .
PRED:	And his mother did not take away his mother 's wife , because he had made an image , because he had made the image of the image of the woman ; and Asa burned them in the valley , and burned them in the valley .
GOLD:	He even deposed his grandmother Maacah from her position as queen mother because she had made an obscene Asherah pole . He cut down her obscene pole and burned it in the Kidron Valley .

ID:	297
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é yik'ee Ízrel dine'é dadínéezhchą́ą́' , áko Diyin God éí Júdah dine'é yaa hodiní'ą́ .
PRED:	And Judah fled before the children of Israel , and God gave them to Judah .
GOLD:	The Israelite army fled from Judah , and God handed them over to Judah in defeat .

ID:	298
INPUT:	Áádóó ída'oołdįįłii yee anadaat'íinii nihiniyé hasht'edadeeshłíiłgo danihigad agháago yá'ádaat'éehii deidootsxiłgo tsídza deidiyoołkał .
PRED:	I will make you a fire for you , and they will kill all the best trees that are good , and they will kill them .
GOLD:	I will call for wreckers , who will bring out their tools to dismantle you.They will tear out all your fine cedar beamsand throw them on the fire .

ID:	299
INPUT:	Heródiyan shikwá'ásiní shá k'é bijiniih . <unk> sas bighan haz'ą́ą́dóó Bóhólníihii dayoodlánígíí shá k'é dabijiniih .
PRED:	Blessed be my brother 's house , who believe in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Greet Herodion , my fellow Jew . Greet the Lord 's people from the household of Narcissus .

ID:	300
INPUT:	áko nida'niłkaadii éí yaa dahalne'go dazdiizts'ą́'ígíí t'áá ádzíłtso bik'ee t'óó hoł adahóóyóí .
PRED:	And all the shepherds were amazed at the words of the shepherds .
GOLD:	All who heard the shepherds ' story were astonished ,

ID:	301
INPUT:	Dah dadinóohchééh ; yisdá'ádóh'níiłgo honoojíidi k'ai' łichíí' íí'áhígíí nidahonohłin le' .
PRED:	Take away your salvation , and save them , as a garden in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Flee for your lives ! Hide in the wilderness !

ID:	302
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii nááda'iiłniihii Júdahgi kin hadaas'áhídóó áádóó Jerúsalem binaagóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii náádayiiłniih yiniyé nidayiiznilígíí éí Josáíyah nahjį' hayíínil ; éí nááda'iiłniihii ałdó' Béíyal bich'į' áádóó jį́honaa'éí bich'į' áádóó tł'ééhonaa'éí bich'į' áádóó sǫ' bich'į' índa yót'ááh hiníláii t'áá át'é yich'į' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii náádayiiłniih .
PRED:	And he removed all the kings of Judah , and the high places of Judah , and all the high places , and the high places of Jerusalem , and burnt incense to Josiah , and to the moon , and to the moon , and to the moon , and to the moon .
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	303
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa hashchíinii ádííniid , Jó , nizninísą́ , t'áá hó nidahódółkid .
PRED:	Therefore I said to his parents , “ Behold , you are afraid , and you will know him . ”
GOLD:	That 's why they said , “ He is old enough . Ask him . ”

ID:	304
INPUT:	Áádóó náábíkéé' góne' éí siláo binanit'a'í Jiihohéínan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tseebídiindi mííl siláo yił dah yinééł .
PRED:	And it came to pass after him , the captain of the captain of the army , two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and two hundred .
GOLD:	Next in command was Jehohanan , who commanded 280,000 troops .

ID:	305
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii bi'diisyį́
PRED:	John the Baptist
GOLD:	The Death of John the Baptist

ID:	306
INPUT:	Nidi doo Jew dine'é danilíinii da'oosdląądígíí kódabidii'níigo bich'į' naaltsoos ádeiilyaa , [ Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo bee nahaz'ánígíí doo t'áá ałtso bik'eh dahonoł'į́į da , ni<unk> eda'alyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii áádóó dił áádóó bizák'ídadii'nii'ii t'áadoo daohsání , índa na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá bits'ą́ąjį' ádanoht'éego yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	But we wrote this letter to the Jews , saying , “ You must not obey all the law of the Jews , nor have any sin , nor have we sinned , nor drink , nor drink . ”
GOLD:	“ As for the Gentile believers , they should do what we already told them in a letter : They should abstain from eating food offered to idols , from consuming blood or the meat of strangled animals , and from sexual immorality . ”

ID:	307
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ deisiidląądgo baa da'iisiidlį́į́' yę́ędą́ą́' Níłch'i Diyinii nihaidiní'ánígi át'éego bí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego beidiní'ą́ , da' Diyin God bich'į' naasdzil dooleełgoósh bą́ą́h nishłį́ ? Dooda lą́ą !
PRED:	In this way , when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ , did he give us the Holy Spirit as he gave us the Holy Spirit , that we might be able to do it for God ?
GOLD:	And since God gave these Gentiles the same gift he gave us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ , who was I to stand in God 's way ? ”

ID:	308
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí yii'dę́ę́' t'eesh háádayiikáahgo índa na'at'ą́hí tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bikáá' náá'iiniihí yik'ínídeiłtih doo ,
PRED:	And they shall take the ashes of the altar , and they shall cover the altar of linen , and they shall cover it .
GOLD:	“ They must remove the ashes from the altar for sacrifices and cover the altar with a purple cloth .

ID:	309
INPUT:	Áko aneest'ą' índa yá'ádaat'éehii daohsą́ą dooleeł biniyé kéyah bikáá' áda'azįįdii biih nihíí'eezh , nidi yah oonáago shikéyah daołchxǫ' , áádóó shíí' nilíinii doo yildinii ádaohłaa .
PRED:	You have brought it into the land , that you may eat good fruit and good fruit ; but you have defiled my land , and have made it holy .
GOLD:	“ And when I brought you into a fruitful landto enjoy its bounty and goodness , you defiled my land andcorrupted the possession I had promised you .

ID:	310
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehgóó tséhígíí doo nide át'ée da doo ; nihokáá'góó naaldlooshii da'ałchinii doo naa nídaat'į́į da doo .
PRED:	The field is not like the field , and the wild beasts of the earth shall not dwell in thee .
GOLD:	You will be at peace with the stones of the field , and its wild animals will be at peace with you .

ID:	311
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán jilįhígi át'éego ajaa' bee saad dzółts'ą́'ígíí bééhodzoosįįh .
PRED:	You do not know the words that you do not listen to them .
GOLD:	The ear tests the words it hearsjust as the mouth distinguishes between foods .

ID:	312
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus áháłní , T'áá aaníígóó ándishní , T'áá díí tł'éé' naa'ahóóhai biką'í t'áadoo naakidi ániihí , táadi , Doo hwééhasin da , náshididíí'niił .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I tell you the truth that night , you must say , ‘ You must not know me three times . '
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , Peter — this very night , before the rooster crows twice , you will deny three times that you even know me . ”

ID:	313
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , hazhó'ó nihíísísts'ą́ą́' nít'éé' , áko jó , nihí ła' t'áadoo Job bíni' bá áhoołaa da , índa saad yee hahaasdzí'ígíí t'áadoo ła' bich'į' saad bee bighadinoht'ą́ą da .
PRED:	But I have heard you , and there was none of you for Job , and you did not take any of the words of him .
GOLD:	I have listened , but not one of you has refuted Jobor answered his arguments .

ID:	314
INPUT:	( hastą́ą́h nídeezidjį' Íídam dinéhígíí t'áá ashiikéjį' ałtso nidajistseedjį' Jó'ab áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é bił t'áá ákwe'é nijikai nít'éé' )
PRED:	For it came to pass in the sixth month , that Joab and Joab and all Israel were with him ,
GOLD:	Joab and the army of Israel had stayed there for six months , killing them .

ID:	315
INPUT:	Díí yinaha'áhígíí nahasdzáán t'áá át'éé nít'éé' yee yinahaz'áanii át'é ; díí ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso yik'ijį' dah doolnihii át'é .
PRED:	This is the law of all the earth ; it is a law against all nations .
GOLD:	I have a plan for the whole earth , a hand of judgment upon all the nations .

ID:	316
INPUT:	T'áá ánéelt'e'go hasht'enídaał'įįhígíí bik'ehgo t'áá ałtso ádanéelt'e'ígíí bik'ehgo ákónídaał'įįh doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt do according to all that thou hast prepared , according to all that thou hast done .
GOLD:	Follow these instructions with each offering you present .

ID:	317
INPUT:	Diné dahóyáanii t'ááłá'í nítínígo bił bééhózinígíí yaa nidaakai , nidi diné doo áhályáanii bidoo áháyą' bééhózínígo ádeile' .
PRED:	Every wise man knows his works , but a fool makes his food .
GOLD:	Wise people think before they act ; fools do n't — and even brag about their foolishness .

ID:	318
INPUT:	Shidine'é éí yá'ádaat'éehii bíí' danilíinii baa nídiní'ą́ągo , Júdah nílíinii , ni ałdó' niba' aneest'ą́ągo ná haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	I have given to my people that are good , O Judah , and you also will have peace .
GOLD:	“ O Judah , a harvest of punishment is also waiting for you , though I wanted to restore the fortunes of my people .

ID:	319
INPUT:	Íífreiyim ádidooniił , Eda'alyaiishą' haa náádeeshdlííł ? Shí hach'į' ééhosésįįd áádóó haa áháshyą́ . Shí ch'ó t'áá dootł'izhgo sikaadii nahonishłin . Shits'ą́ą́dóó nineest'ą' nąąh náhoodleeł .
PRED:	The people of Ephraim will say to them , “ What will I do to them ? I have called to you ? I am like a tree , and I am like a tree , and you will bear fruit from me . ”
GOLD:	“ O Israel , stay away from idols ! I am the one who answers your prayers and cares for you.I am like a tree that is always green ; all your fruit comes from me . ”

ID:	320
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii dajijoołxáii t'óó ádahozhdil'į́įgo Bóhólníihii biyaa ni'ízhdeejaa' doo nít'éé' áádóó atídaal'į́įgo ahool'áa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	And he that hate the Lord shall turn his face to the Lord , and he shall destroy them for ever .
GOLD:	Those who hate the Lord would cringe before him ; they would be doomed forever .

ID:	321
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é da'iidoołtséełgo dabidziilii yaa yádadínóozįįł , áko bizéé' dádadidoolnih , índa bijééhkał dadooleeł .
PRED:	The nations will see the strength of the nations , and their mouth will open their mouth , and the deaf will open their mouth .
GOLD:	All the nations of the world will stand amazedat what the Lord will do for you.They will be embarrassedat their feeble power.They will cover their mouths in silent awe , deaf to everything around them .

ID:	322
INPUT:	T'áá bí t'éiyá tsé shá nilį́ áádóó bee yisdáhásháahii índa bine' ahinishchéehii nilį́ . Doo nahjį' kóshidi'doolníił da .
PRED:	He alone is my rock , my salvation , my salvation , and my salvation shall not be cut off .
GOLD:	He alone is my rock and my salvation , my fortress where I will not be shaken .

ID:	323
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán áyiilaa bijį́į́dą́ą́' nahasdzáán índa yádiłhił bił niilyáii dahodideezlį́į́' .
PRED:	On that day the Lord God made heaven and earth and heaven .
GOLD:	This is the account of the creation of the heavens and the earth.When the Lord God made the earth and the heavens ,

ID:	324
INPUT:	Diné dahóyáanii ił ééhózin hasht'e'nideidiyii'nííł , nidi diné doo áhályą́ą́góó yáłti'ii éí hodoołchxǫǫłii koshídę́ę́' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The lips of the wise are cut off , but the mouth of the fool is near .
GOLD:	Wise people treasure knowledge , but the babbling of a fool invites disaster .

ID:	325
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa diné bizhé'é índa bimá yits'ą́ą́' dah didoogáałgo be'asdzą́ą́ yił ahididoo'ash ,
PRED:	Therefore he shall turn away from his father and mother 's mother , and take his wife ,
GOLD:	‘ This explains why a man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife ,

ID:	326
INPUT:	Áádóó Géed dine'é éí Dáíban , Átarath áádóó Aró'er dahoolyéegi kin hadaas'áago ádayiilaa ,
PRED:	And the children of Gad built Heshbon , and they built cities at Aroer ,
GOLD:	The descendants of Gad built the towns of Dibon , Ataroth , Aroer ,

ID:	327
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Shí bááh bee iináanii nishłį́ ; shaazhníyáhígíí éí doo dichin náázhdoodleeł da , áádóó shijoodlą́ągo sheidzólíii éí doo dibáá' náázhdoodleeł da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I am the bread of life , and those who come to me will not be hungry , and those who believe in me will not drink . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I am the bread of life . Whoever comes to me will never be hungry again . Whoever believes in me will never be thirsty .

ID:	328
INPUT:	Nidi yá'ąąshdę́ę́' iinéé' náádiséts'ą́ą'go ánááshidi'ní , Diyin God ha'át'íhída hasht'eyiilaii t'áadoo t'áá bóhólníhígíí át'é bidiníní .
PRED:	But I heard a voice from heaven , saying , “ You must say to me all the things that God created . ”
GOLD:	“ But the voice from heaven spoke again : ‘ Do not call something unclean if God has made it clean . '

ID:	329
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bił haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'íhodooleełgo nahasdzáán bikáá' wódahgo nahaz'ą́ąjį' hadahodooleełgo yik'i nidoogaał , jó'akon .
PRED:	And behold , he shall come out of the kingdoms of the Lord , and shall come down to the earth .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord is coming ! He leaves his throne in heavenand tramples the heights of the earth .

ID:	330
INPUT:	Daal'aadii áłah daazlį́į'ii binaaltsoos
PRED:	The Church of the apostles
GOLD:	The Letter for Gentile Believers

ID:	331
INPUT:	Jó , hane' yá'át'éehii baa hashne'ii bik'ehgo ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi hajéí biyi'di nidazhnił'inii Jesus Christ binahjį' Diyin God há nihodiyoo'ááł .
PRED:	For in the day of the Good News shall be given to you in the heart of the Good News , according to the word of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And this is the message I proclaim — that the day is coming when God , through Christ Jesus , will judge everyone 's secret life .

ID:	332
INPUT:	Síriya dine'é , Mo'ab dine'é , Áman dine'é , Filístiya dine'é , Ámalek dine'é índa Rííhob biye' Hadadíízer éí Zóbah kéyahgi aláahgo naat'áanii yik'eh deesdlį́į́' yę́ę bindaalye'é diyingo niidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	And he took the spoil of Aram , and the Philistines , and the sons of Ammon , the son of Ammon , and the children of Ammon , and the spoil ; and he took the spoil of the king of Syria .
GOLD:	from Edom , Moab , Ammon , Philistia , and Amalek — and from Hadadezer son of Rehob , king of Zobah .

ID:	333
INPUT:	David bidiné ayóó ádaat'éii
PRED:	David 's Death
GOLD:	David 's Mightiest Warriors

ID:	334
INPUT:	Áko Aghánáhóó'áadi Hólóonii áádóó Ayóó'át'éii , éí hool'áágóó hólóonii áádóó bízhi' diyinii kóní , Wódahgo áádóó diyingo haz'ą́ągi honishłǫ́ ; ąąh bíni'ígíí áádóó a'ohgo á'dólzinígíí ałdó' bił honishłǫ́ , áko a'ohgo át'éhígíí índa ąąh bíni'ígíí bijéí náhiidoo'<unk> .
PRED:	He said to the Most High , “ I am with him , the Most High , and the name of the Most High . He is poor and poor . He is poor and poor . He is poor and poor . ”
GOLD:	The high and lofty one who lives in eternity , the Holy One , says this : “ I live in the high and holy placewith those whose spirits are contrite and humble.I restore the crushed spirit of the humbleand revive the courage of those with repentant hearts .

ID:	335
INPUT:	Áko jíl'áhígíí bits'ą́ądi t'áá sáhí hoł nizhní'áázh , áko áadi bijeeyi' góne' azhdoolchid áádóó azhdíízhée'go bitsoo' bizhdeelchid ,
PRED:	And he took him away from the four , and went into the midst of them , and touched her tongue , and touched her tongue .
GOLD:	Jesus led him away from the crowd so they could be alone . He put his fingers into the man 's ears . Then , spitting on his own fingers , he touched the man 's tongue .

ID:	336
INPUT:	Jiifáneh biye' Kéíleb éí Júdah dine'é bitahgi Jáshowa wolyéii kéyah ła' haidiní'ą́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa yich'į' t'áá ákót'éego yee haadzíí' ; éí Éínak dine'é Árba wolyéii bizhé'é bikin haal'áii Hííbran hoolyéii yeidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	And Caleb the son of Caleb gave him a land of Judah , according to the word of the Lord , as the Lord had commanded Joshua , which was in Hebron .
GOLD:	The Lord commanded Joshua to assign some of Judah 's territory to Caleb son of Jephunneh . So Caleb was given the town of Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , which had been named after Anak 's ancestor .

ID:	337
INPUT:	Haza'aleeh hadeigéedgo índa ch'il naazkaadígíí behétł'óól hadeigéedgo dabich'iyą' nít'éé' .
PRED:	They were food from their mouth , and the fig tree were out of them .
GOLD:	They pluck wild greens from among the bushesand eat from the roots of broom trees .

ID:	338
INPUT:	Áko ła'da yínahódídóołkiłgo áhodidooniił , Ha'át'íishą' ninághahdę́ę́' bee tídááná ? Áko ádidooniił , Shik'isóó bighangi níyáago atídashiilaa .
PRED:	He asked him , “ What have you done ? ” He asked , “ What have you done ? ” He said , “ My brothers have come to my house . ”
GOLD:	And if someone asks , ‘ Then what about those wounds on your chest ? ' he will say , ‘ I was wounded at my friends ' house ! '

ID:	339
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii shijaayi'jį' haadzíi'go diséts'ą́ą́' , T'áá aaníí , nida'soołdįįd bijį́įjį' díí nihibąąhági át'éii doo nihąąh dadooldah da , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	I have heard the word of the Lord of hosts , saying , “ Surely you will not be forgiven from your sins until this day , ” says the Lord God of hosts .
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has revealed this to me : “ Till the day you die , you will never be forgiven for this sin. ” That is the judgment of the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	340
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Éran biye'ké éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi kǫ' iididoołt'áałgo ákwii hazhó'ó chizh deididoonił .
PRED:	And the sons of Aaron the priest shall burn the fire upon the altar , and they shall put it on the wood .
GOLD:	The sons of Aaron the priest will build a wood fire on the altar .

ID:	341
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii nahalne'
PRED:	John the Baptist
GOLD:	John the Baptist Prepares the Way

ID:	342
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é
PRED:	The Levites
GOLD:	The Tribe of Simeon

ID:	343
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílam éí Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í ííłní , Ádił asésiih ; jó , shidáádíínízínígíí doo shił bééhózin da lá , nidi k'ad yisháłígíí doo nił yá'át'ééhgóogo t'óó t'ą́ą́' nihéédeeshdááł .
PRED:	Balaam said to the angel of the Lord , “ I have sinned . I do n't know what you have sent me , but now I will return to you . ”
GOLD:	Then Balaam confessed to the angel of the Lord , “ I have sinned . I did n't realize you were standing in the road to block my way . I will return home if you are against my going . ”

ID:	344
INPUT:	T'áadoo nánídlíníii t'áadoo nídandlíní da , ní halne'í , T'áadoo nánídlíníii t'áadoo nídandlíní da ; t'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nídandlíní da .
PRED:	They are vain , and they are vain ; they are vain . All things are vain .
GOLD:	“ Everything is meaningless , ” says the Teacher , “ completely meaningless ! ”

ID:	345
INPUT:	Da' Diyin God bich'ijísh dadoohłeełgo bá yádaałti' ? Diyin Godshą' , da' éísh bá ałghada'doht'áah doo ?
PRED:	How can you speak to God ? What will you say ? Can you make peace for him ?
GOLD:	Will you slant your testimony in his favor ? Will you argue God 's case for him ?

ID:	346
INPUT:	Áko da'jiyą́ągo nidzíiztą́ , nít'éé' Jesus ání , T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Nihí nihił da'ashánígíí ła' nináshididooh'ááł .
PRED:	When they were eating , Jesus said to them , “ I tell you that one of you will give me some of you . ”
GOLD:	As they were at the table eating , Jesus said , “ I tell you the truth , one of you eating with me here will betray me . ”

ID:	347
INPUT:	Béthlehemdóó hananit'a'í hodooleełgo bee nihoot'ą́
PRED:	The Death of Bethlehem
GOLD:	A Ruler from Bethlehem

ID:	348
INPUT:	Ákohgo t'ah abíínígo jį́honaa'éí t'óó hááyáhígo nídidoohjahgo kin haal'áhígíí bik'i dah doohjahgo diné yił naakaígíí nihá hashjada'doolíiłgo t'áá nínízinígi át'éego atídadíílííł .
PRED:	And when the sun rise up early in the morning , take the sun , and set it upon the city , and do it to the men that are with him .
GOLD:	In the morning , as soon as it is daylight , attack the city . When Gaal and those who are with him come out against you , you can do with them as you wish . ”

ID:	349
INPUT:	doo diné t'áá ałtso dahoołtsą́ą da , nihí Diyin God nánihiizláa'ii t'éiyá dabíínáałii daniidlį́įgo , dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náázdiidzáádóó bik'ijį' doodį́įłii índa doodlį́įłii hoł deiidą́ą́' .
PRED:	All the people have not seen him , but God himself is the only one who has raised up from the dead , and from the dead .
GOLD:	not to the general public , but to us whom God had chosen in advance to be his witnesses . We were those who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead .

ID:	350
INPUT:	Bee nani'diiniihii doo nídidííléeł da , háálá éí dahóyáanii bíni' ádeiłdįįh , áádóó t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bizaad łahgo ádeile' .
PRED:	Do n't forget your laws , for the words of the wise are cut off , and let the words of the righteous be cut off .
GOLD:	“ Take no bribes , for a bribe makes you ignore something that you clearly see . A bribe makes even a righteous person twist the truth .

ID:	351
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii t'áágééd , naat'áanii t'áágééd , nááhániihii t'áágééd , tsé bich'į' nahadláii t'áágééd , íífad wolyéii t'áágééd , eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadláii t'áágééd Ízrel dine'é kééhat'į́įgo t'óó ahayóí yidoołkááł .
PRED:	And the king shall not make a covenant offering , nor a ephod , nor an ephod , nor an ephod , neither shall the children of Israel dwell in many days .
GOLD:	This shows that Israel will go a long time without a king or prince , and without sacrifices , sacred pillars , priests , or even idols !

ID:	352
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é diyingo bits'ąą dahasti'
PRED:	The Levites and the Levites
GOLD:	The Levites Dedicated

ID:	353
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí nahasdzáán bee niłdzilgo dah si'ą́ ? Éí doodaii' háí tsé bee naaná'ástł'inii niiní'ą́ ?
PRED:	Who has set the earth in its place ? Or who has set a stone on its head ?
GOLD:	What supports its foundations , and who laid its cornerstone

ID:	354
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'óó báhádzidgo bich'į' sháhóóchįįdgo t'áá íiyisí dooyoł ; hach'į' sháhóóchįįdgo tó yajiiłį́ nahalingo nahodoołtį́į́ł ; t'óó báhádzidgo sháháchį'go nílótsoh nááłtánígíí bee ádooldįįł .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord God : I am angry with my anger , and I will pour out my anger against them , and I will pour out my anger like water , and I will pour out my wrath upon them .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will sweep away your whitewashed wall with a storm of indignation , with a great flood of anger , and with hailstones of fury .

ID:	355
INPUT:	Ch'ilátah hózhóón áádóó bee dahool'iní índa tsííd bee náhádláhí éí óola t'áá bízhání yee ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And they made the lampstand , and the lampstand , and the lampstand , and the lampstand of pure gold .
GOLD:	the flower decorations , lamps , and tongs — all of the purest gold ;

ID:	356
INPUT:	Áko niha'áłchíní nidahołchíhígíí , éí nihiye'ké índa nihitsi'ké danilíinii Bóhólníihii t'áá bí yee nihik'ijisdli'ii nídaohdą́ą doo ; éí nihi'ana'í nihinídahaashzhiizhgo áádóó nihich'į' dahodiyiisnáa'go éí binih ákódadoohnííł .
PRED:	The Lord has blessed you , your sons , your daughters , your daughters , your daughters , your daughters , and your daughters , which he has commanded you , and you shall offer it to your enemies .
GOLD:	“ The siege and terrible distress of the enemy 's attack will be so severe that you will eat the flesh of your own sons and daughters , whom the Lord your God has given you .

ID:	357
INPUT:	Ákohgo Diyin God hahoyííłhalgo tó hahaasnilgo dziiłtsą́ ; ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago tó abid bii' tó hazhdééłbįįdgo ashkii baazhníłtsoozgo yoodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then God opened the water , and saw it , and he went and filled the mouth of the mouth , and gave it to the boy .
GOLD:	Then God opened Hagar 's eyes , and she saw a well full of water . She quickly filled her water container and gave the boy a drink .

ID:	358
INPUT:	Aląąjį' naazíinii ádajit'į́ dahodi'nínígíí , ( doo haash yit'éegoda haa nitséskees da , Diyin God doo ła' a'ohgo yaa nitsékees da , ) aląąjį' naazíinii dahodi'nínígíí t'áadoo ha'át'éhígoda shighą́ą́h dazh'deeshjée' da .
PRED:	And the elders of the elders , behold , I do not think of God , nor of the elders , nor of the elders , nor of the elders .
GOLD:	And the leaders of the church had nothing to add to what I was preaching . ( By the way , their reputation as great leaders made no difference to me , for God has no favorites . )

ID:	359
INPUT:	Éí bijį́įdi díí baa hodoolzhish : Jerúsalemdóó tó hináanii háálį́įgo ha'a'aahjį' tónteel biih yílį́į doo áádóó ła' e'e'aahjį' ałdó' tónteel biih yílį́į doo ; éí t'áá áłahjį' háálį́įgo nináháhááh áádóó nináháshį́įh doo .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that the living waters of Jerusalem shall come into the sea to the east , to the sea , and to the sea , until the end of the sea , and it shall be a year .
GOLD:	On that day life-giving waters will flow out from Jerusalem , half toward the Dead Sea and half toward the Mediterranean , flowing continuously in both summer and winter .

ID:	360
INPUT:	Héírim biye' Malkáíjah áádóó Péíhath-mó'ab biye' Háshab éí łahjiígíí áádóó bii' déédadiljahgo bá ch'íláyi' yaa'áhígíí hasht'éyiidlaa .
PRED:	The son of Hilkiah , and Joab the son of Zeruiah , and the rest of them on the other side of the four corners .
GOLD:	Then came Malkijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-moab , who repaired another section of the wall and the Tower of the Ovens .

ID:	361
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' t'áá háiida kin dá'deelkaal yę́ędą́ą́' ákóne' yah ajííyáhígíí éí i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didoodah da .
PRED:	If you enter the house , you will not be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	Those who enter the house during the period of quarantine will be ceremonially unclean until evening ,

ID:	362
INPUT:	bee ni'dootsiłígíí biniyé hááhaashk'aazh ; bik'i nizdidlaad dooleeł biniyé ákót'éego ályaa . Ákoósh nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo ? Shiye' binaat'á gish éí gish tsin bee ádaalyaii t'áá ałtso yiz'įįd .
PRED:	Let it be like a rod , so that you may be glad , so that you may be glad , my son , has broken all the wood of wood .
GOLD:	It is sharpened for terrible slaughterand polished to flash like lightning ! Now will you laugh ? Those far stronger than you have fallen beneath its power !

ID:	363
INPUT:	Job bi'dizhchínígíí yąąh bíni'
PRED:	Job 's Death
GOLD:	Job 's First Speech

ID:	364
INPUT:	Nidi hánaaí yę́ę bá áłchíní doo hodooleeł da biniyé hánaaí yę́ę be'asdzą́ą́ bił yah ajííyáago t'óó ni'jį' hwíígąsh hadziistł'ííd .
PRED:	But when his brother came in to the house of his brother 's brother 's brother , he cast him into the ground , and cast him down to the ground .
GOLD:	But Onan was not willing to have a child who would not be his own heir . So whenever he had intercourse with his brother 's wife , he spilled the semen on the ground . This prevented her from having a child who would belong to his brother .

ID:	365
INPUT:	T'áá áko Philip áadi yílwod , nít'éé' Diyin God yá halne'ii Aizéíyah binaaltsoos yółta' lágo jidiizts'ą́ą'go ábijiní , Yíníłta'ígíísh t'áá bik'idi'yiitįįh ?
PRED:	Philip went to Philip , and he heard the book of Isaiah the prophet , and said to him , “ Have you read ? ”
GOLD:	Philip ran over and heard the man reading from the prophet Isaiah . Philip asked , “ Do you understand what you are reading ? ”

ID:	366
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í ádadííniid , Díí Hííbrew dine'éshą' kwe'é ha'át'íí yaa naakai ? Áko Éíkish éí Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í áyidííniid , Díísh doo David át'į́į da ? Éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Saul yá naal'a'í , t'áá shił tádí'aashgo díí jį́į́góó yoołkááł áádóó nináháháahgo hoolzhish , áko t'áá shich'į' dah diiyáádóó díísh jį́įjį' doo aaníinii doo ła' bá shił bééhoozin da .
PRED:	The princes of the Philistines said to him , “ What is the Hebrew ? ” And Achish said to the princes of the Philistines , “ Is it not this ? ” And David said to the king of Israel , “ It is not this day to this day , and I will not know that I am going to this day . ”
GOLD:	But the Philistine commanders demanded , “ What are these Hebrews doing here ? ” And Achish told them , “ This is David , the servant of King Saul of Israel . He 's been with me for years , and I 've never found a single fault in him from the day he arrived until today . ”

ID:	367
INPUT:	Jeremáíyah áádóó Gedaláíyah yił diné daadzíi'ii
PRED:	Jeremiah and Gedaliah
GOLD:	Gedaliah Governs in Judah

ID:	368
INPUT:	Ákohgo Job bik'isóó tált'éego éí doo yá'áshóonii t'áá át'é Job bik'i hoole'ígíí dayíínii'go t'ááłá'í nítínígo kéédahat'į́į́dę́ę́' haa yíkai : Élifaz wolyéii Tííman kin haal'áádę́ę́' áádóó Shúwah dine'é Bíldad wolyéii índa Zófar wolyéii Néíyama hoolyéédę́ę́' éí díí ahada'deest'ą́ągo , Hak'édí daniidlį́į doo áádóó hadah ho'ayiilniih doo , daaníigo biniyé haa yíkai .
PRED:	And when Job heard of all the evil that Job had spoken against Job , he came to him every man according to his own words ; and they went to him : and they went to him , and blessed him , and blessed him .
GOLD:	When three of Job 's friends heard of the tragedy he had suffered , they got together and traveled from their homes to comfort and console him . Their names were Eliphaz the Temanite , Bildad the Shuhite , and Zophar the Naamathite .

ID:	369
INPUT:	Bee ída'diiljeehí tsosts'idígíí
PRED:	The Death of the Temple
GOLD:	The Lamb Breaks the Seventh Seal

ID:	370
INPUT:	Áádóó Ííjip dine'é honeetehee éí kéyahdóó t'óó hatsxį́įłgo diné yida'as'nii' , háálá ádaaní , Nihí ałdó' t'áá áníiltso dadíníi'nééł , sha'shin .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the Egyptians came out of the land of Egypt , that it came to pass , saying , We will die .
GOLD:	All the Egyptians urged the people of Israel to get out of the land as quickly as possible , for they thought , “ We will all die ! ”

ID:	371
INPUT:	Nidi Christ ti'hwiidoonihgo , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii t'áá ałtso t'áá átséedi yaa dahoolne'ígíí , t'áá ákót'éego yi'iilaa .
PRED:	But he told all the prophets , just as the prophets had been told .
GOLD:	But God was fulfilling what all the prophets had foretold about the Messiah — that he must suffer these things .

ID:	372
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é ábizhdííniid , Nihílááh , díí kin haal'áhígíí bináhkááh , áko diné nidaabaahii éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii yilą́ąjį' yikah doo .
PRED:	And he said unto the children of Israel , Go ye into this city , and the men shall go before the ark of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then he gave orders to the people : “ March around the town , and the armed men will lead the way in front of the Ark of the Lord . ”

ID:	373
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	374
INPUT:	Yiską́ągo Hérad bizaad k'ehgo ch'íhodi'doodlóosgo , t'áá éí bitł'éé' Peter , siláo naaki bita'gi béésh da'ahólzha'í naaki bee daho'diistł'ǫ́ǫgo ajiłhosh , índa siláo ła' awáalyaa bidáádílkał yaa ádahalyą́ .
PRED:	On the third day Herod will be put to death by night . They will be bound with two soldiers . They will put them in chains . They will keep the doors of the prison .
GOLD:	The night before Peter was to be placed on trial , he was asleep , fastened with two chains between two soldiers . Others stood guard at the prison gate .

ID:	375
INPUT:	Nihitsilí nihitah díníł'a'go t'éiyá ákóyaa diikahgo ch'iyáán ła' nináádahidiilnih .
PRED:	But we have sent our brother away , that we may go down and buy food .
GOLD:	If you send Benjamin with us , we will go down and buy more food .

ID:	376
INPUT:	Nidi shí éí Diyin God néideeshkąął , áádóó Bóhólníihii yisdáshidoołtééł .
PRED:	But I will call to God , and the Lord will deliver me .
GOLD:	But I will call on God , and the Lord will rescue me .

ID:	377
INPUT:	áko tsin t'ááłá'í dooleeł biniyé ahidiiníiłgo ahííníłtą'go dahíjih .
PRED:	So take one tree to each tree , and put them to death .
GOLD:	Now hold them together in your hand as if they were one piece of wood .

ID:	378
INPUT:	áádóó tsídiitsoh ástrich wolyéii áádóó ná'áshjaa' áádóó tábąąsdísí índa giní ał'ąą ádaat'éii
PRED:	and the beasts , and the after its kind , and all its kind ,
GOLD:	the eagle owl , the short-eared owl , the seagull , hawks of all kinds ,

ID:	379
INPUT:	Da'ayą́ą doo nidi , doo hwiih dadooleeł da . Adilyé yaa naakai doo nidi , ba'áłchíní ádaadin doo , háálá Diyin God dadzółts'ą́ą́' yę́ę doo dazniizį́į' da .
PRED:	They will eat them , but they will not be filled with them ; but they will not be able to love their children because they have rejected their God .
GOLD:	They will eat and still be hungry.They will play the prostitute and gain nothing from it , for they have deserted the Lord

ID:	380
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii yaa níyáago ííłní , Nílááh , nidziilgo í'dílnééh , áádóó hazhó'ó baa nidíínaałígíí hazhó'ó baa nanítá , háálá nááhaigo Síriya dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii nich'į' nídidoobah .
PRED:	The prophet came to the king of Israel , and said to him , “ Go and look for what you do , and seek what you have done , for it will come to the king of Aram . ”
GOLD:	Afterward the prophet said to King Ahab , “ Get ready for another attack . Begin making plans now , for the king of Aram will come back next spring . ”

ID:	381
INPUT:	Áko Mary Mágdaliin índa Mary , Jóses bimá éí niho'deeltínígi bił bééhoozin .
PRED:	Mary , Mary , Mary , and Mary the mother of Mary .
GOLD:	Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joseph saw where Jesus ' body was laid .

ID:	382
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee aa a'ááh hasinii , áádóó bibee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'ii , índa bibee ayóó'ó'ó'níinii k'ee'ąą yilzhishgo yee nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	May God 's mercy be with you , peace , and peace , and love .
GOLD:	May God give you more and more mercy , peace , and love .

ID:	383
INPUT:	Ákohgo Tówii haye' Jóram dashdiił'a' , áko aláahgo naat'áanii David k'é yididooniił áádóó nizhónígi íinidzaa yididooniił jinízin , háálá David éí Hadadíízer yił ana'ahishchį́įgo yik'eh deesdlį́į́' . Jó , Hadadíízer éí Tówii yił anaa' ahil'į́į́ nít'éé' . Jóram éí béésh łigaii áádóó óola índa béésh łitsoii bee łeets'aa' ádaalyaii yiníjaa' .
PRED:	So Festus sent his son , and he said to him , “ The king will say to David and to him , ‘ David has fought against him , because David has fought against him , and he has fought against him , and he has given him silver and silver .
GOLD:	he sent his son Joram to congratulate King David for his successful campaign . Hadadezer and Toi had been enemies and were often at war . Joram presented David with many gifts of silver , gold , and bronze .

ID:	384
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí ana'í dabitsi'ké bida'asdzą́ą doo biniyé t'áá bí ádá nídayiisdláá' , áádóó dahatsi'ké éí dabiye'ké bił ahaa dayii'nííł nít'éé' , índa bidiyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' nidahojiłáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the children of Israel took the daughters of the children of Israel , and they took their sons and daughters , and served other gods .
GOLD:	and they intermarried with them . Israelite sons married their daughters , and Israelite daughters were given in marriage to their sons . And the Israelites served their gods .

ID:	385
INPUT:	Tsé ahénátł'in jílį́įgo bikáá'dóó béésh łigaii bee ya'niiltł'ǫ́ǫgo ádadiilníí ł , índa dáádílkał jílį́įgo dilk'is tsin neheesh<unk> go hak'i nidadiilzhosh .
PRED:	I will call them out of the house of silver , and they will cry out for silver , and the doors shall be broken , and the doors shall be broken .
GOLD:	If she is a virgin , like a wall , we will protect her with a silver tower.But if she is promiscuous , like a swinging door , we will block her door with a cedar bar .

ID:	386
INPUT:	Áádóó David ázhdííniid , Ízrel biBóhólníihii Diyin God , ná naal'a'í nishłíinii éí Saul shíká dínéeztą́ą'go Kii'áílah kin haal'áajį' doogáałgo baa hodiséts'ą́ą́' . Éí shiniinaa kin haal'áhígíí ábizhniiłdįįd lá .
PRED:	David said , “ Lord , the God of Israel , I have heard that your servant Saul will come to Keilah to Keilah , and he has destroyed the city . ”
GOLD:	Then David prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , I have heard that Saul is planning to come and destroy Keilah because I am here .

ID:	387
INPUT:	<unk> dzihgo doo shich'į' hanádziihí da nít'éé' ; shizaad dahak'ijį' naałtin nít'éé' .
PRED:	He would not speak to me , and my words would not speak against me .
GOLD:	And after I spoke , they had nothing to add , for my counsel satisfied them .

ID:	388
INPUT:	Paul áádóó Jerúsalemdi da'oodlání yá naazíinii
PRED:	Paul and the Church in Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Apostles Accept Paul

ID:	389
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá ákwii hoolzhishgo Kaldíya dine'é ła' daaskaigo Jew dine'é yik'ídahaz'ah .
PRED:	At that time there came a certain Jews in that time , and found some Jews .
GOLD:	But some of the astrologers went to the king and informed on the Jews .

ID:	390
INPUT:	Áko Húshai éí David bik'is nilíinii kin haal'áajį' yah ííyá , áádóó Ábsalam éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áajį' yah ííyá .
PRED:	Then Hushai went to the city of David his brother , and Absalom went to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So David 's friend Hushai returned to Jerusalem , getting there just as Absalom arrived .

ID:	391
INPUT:	Háálá bááh Diyin God bíhígíí éí yá'ąąshdę́ę́' hadahóóle'go nihokáá' dine'é iiná yeidii'aah .
PRED:	For the bread of God came down from heaven , and gave life to the world .
GOLD:	The true bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world . ”

ID:	392
INPUT:	hoł wót'ááh néí'ááh áádóó níléí góyaa hoł taah náyii'aah , áko hach'į' nidahwii'nánígíí hoł áńdahadįįh .
PRED:	He brought them down to the sky and down to the sea , and they destroyed them .
GOLD:	Their ships were tossed to the heavensand plunged again to the depths ; the sailors cringed in terror .

ID:	393
INPUT:	Tósiil éí k'os diłhił yii' háidiłbį́į́h , índa k'os diłhił biyi' da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó atsiniltł'ish anídahata'go ííł'į́ .
PRED:	He makes the clouds of clouds in the clouds , and he makes the lightning between the lightning .
GOLD:	He loads the clouds with moisture , and they flash with his lightning .

ID:	394
INPUT:	Aghádahideezíinii t'óó yeidloh ; ayóó ádaat'éii dabidziilii doo dabidziilgóó ádeile' .
PRED:	He makes them afraid of the high ; he makes their strength strong .
GOLD:	He pours disgrace upon princesand disarms the strong .

ID:	395
INPUT:	Doo ákwii ádaat'íiniísh ił ééhózin doo bee dahólǫ́ǫ da ? Éí bááh deiyą́ nahalingo shidine'é deildeeł índa Diyin God doo nídayookąąh da .
PRED:	Do n't the wicked have knowledge ? They do n't call to God like bread and bread ?
GOLD:	Will those who do evil never learn ? They eat up my people like breadand would n't think of praying to God .

ID:	396
INPUT:	Ákwii Ííjip dine'é bee bóhólníihii doo bee bóhólnííhgóó áshłaago Tahápaniizdi chahałheełgo oo'áał doo ; ayóó ájít'éego bee ádaa hoji'niihii éí ninít'i' doo ; k'os éí hak'i dah yilzhoł doo áádóó hach'é'é danilíinii éí yisnáágóó ałtso adahidoonééł .
PRED:	In that time I will set the king of Egypt in darkness , and in darkness shall be a cloud ; and the glory of a cloud shall come upon it , and all the daughter shall fall .
GOLD:	When I come to break the proud strength of Egypt , it will be a dark day for Tahpanhes , too.A dark cloud will cover Tahpanhes , and its daughters will be led away as captives .

ID:	397
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jázadak biye' Jéshuwa yiizį' áádóó bik'isóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Zerábabel éí Shiyáltiyel biye' jílį́įgo hak'isóó bił jíkaigo Diyin God yá naal'a'í Mózes bibee haz'áanii t'áá yee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God bibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi didlidgo náádahaniihii náádahidoonih biniyé ádajiilaa .
PRED:	Then Joshua the son of Jeshua stood up , and his brethren , and Zerubbabel the son of Zerubbabel , and with his brethren , and with his brethren , as it is written in the law of Moses the God of Israel , as it is written in the law of the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Jeshua son of Jehozadak joined his fellow priests and Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel with his family in rebuilding the altar of the God of Israel . They wanted to sacrifice burnt offerings on it , as instructed in the Law of Moses , the man of God .

ID:	398
INPUT:	Adziil áádóó ił ídlį́ yee hadít'é , áádóó náás hoolzhishgóó yaa bił nihoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	He will rejoice in glory and majesty , and in the end of the end .
GOLD:	She is clothed with strength and dignity , and she laughs without fear of the future .

ID:	399
INPUT:	Áko ashdla'ígi daats'í oolkiłgo naanish baa dadeest'ánígíí yíkaigo , t'ááłá'í nítínígo denériyas t'ááłá'í bich'į' nidahaasya' .
PRED:	And when the fifth hour came , they came to ask him , each man according to his hand .
GOLD:	When those hired at five o'clock were paid , each received a full day 's wage .

ID:	400
INPUT:	Áko hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , Ła' John Tó Yee Asį́įhii yę́ę át'į́ ; náánáła' éí Iiláíjah yę́ę át'į́ , nidi náánáła' éí Diyin God yá halne'ii yę́ę ła' át'į́ , daaní .
PRED:	They told him , “ Some are John the Baptist , but others say , ‘ He is Elijah the prophet . '
GOLD:	“ Well , ” they replied , “ some say John the Baptist , some say Elijah , and others say you are one of the other prophets . ”

ID:	401
INPUT:	Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é dah diikaigo Júdahgi nidahaazná índa Lííhai haz'ání bóhoneel'ą́ągo nidahaazná .
PRED:	So the Philistines went out and camped in Judah and camped in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	The Philistines retaliated by setting up camp in Judah and spreading out near the town of Lehi .

ID:	402
INPUT:	Nidi Lat , diné t'áá ákogi át'éii jílíinii , Diyin God díí yits'ą́ąjį' ho'níłnii' . Lat éí diné doo yá'ádaashóonii t'áá íiyisí baa'ihgo naaldeehii doo bee a<unk> doos'įįd da .
PRED:	But Lot , the righteous man , has delivered them away from God . They have not been able to stop doing evil things .
GOLD:	But God also rescued Lot out of Sodom because he was a righteous man who was sick of the shameful immorality of the wicked people around him .

ID:	403
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Asíriya dine'é choyoos'įįd
PRED:	The People of Assyria
GOLD:	Judgment against Assyria

ID:	404
INPUT:	Niha'áłchíní yázhí áádóó nihida'asdzą́ą́ índa nihiníbaal haal'áagi dé'éyóní nidaakaii éí nihá chizh nídeidiyiiłniihdóó nihá tó ninádayiiłjiidjį' nihool'áago bił nidasoozį́ .
PRED:	“ Take your little ones , your children , your wives , your wives , and the foreigners in the camp , and the foreigners in the camp .
GOLD:	Your little ones and your wives are with you , as well as the foreigners living among you who chop your wood and carry your water .

ID:	405
INPUT:	Áádóó Abímelek bidine'é kót'éego yi'níłnii'go ání , Díí diné índa be'asdzą́ąda t'áá bizhdeelchidígíí éí t'áá aaníí hodi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	And Abimelech sent his hand to the Amalekites , saying , This man and his wife shall surely be put to death .
GOLD:	Then Abimelech issued a public proclamation : “ Anyone who touches this man or his wife will be put to death ! ”

ID:	406
INPUT:	áko diné , Hasht'ehodít'ée yee' áádóó yá'ádahoot'ééh , daaníi nidi t'áadoo hooyání bee í'dooldįįłii bik'i hwiidooleeł , asdzání i'niiłchíihgo bił náhodíníigahígi át'éego , áko ts'ídá t'áadoo bee yisdáhóót'i'í da doo .
PRED:	And if the man is peace , and it is good , but it shall come to pass , as a woman , and it shall not be saved .
GOLD:	When people are saying , “ Everything is peaceful and secure , ” then disaster will fall on them as suddenly as a pregnant woman 's labor pains begin . And there will be no escape .

ID:	407
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbel ałdó' hadibé áłtsé deishchíinii aláahgo łik'aii ła' jiníłtį́ . Áko Éíbel áádóó náájiisnii'ígíí éí Bóhólníihii bił yílįįd ,
PRED:	And he gave him a little lamb in the first of Ekron . And he offered sacrifices to the Lord , and the burnt offering was pleased with him .
GOLD:	Abel also brought a gift — the best portions of the firstborn lambs from his flock . The Lord accepted Abel and his gift ,

ID:	408
INPUT:	Doo <unk> da'ídééłkidii , doo hadashineeztą́ą'ii shik'ídaaskai , dadine'é doo shízhi' bee dabi'dééji'ii ábidishní , Dashinół'į́ , dashinół'į́ .
PRED:	I said to them , “ Look at my name , those who have not found me in my name . ”
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ I was ready to respond , but no one asked for help.I was ready to be found , but no one was looking for me.I said , ‘ Here I am , here I am ! 'to a nation that did not call on my name .

ID:	409
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' báhóóchįįdgo , Mesopotéímiya kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Kúshan-rishathéíyim wolyéii hasnáago Ízrel dine'é éí Kúshan-rishathéíyim yinaalte' danilį́įgo tseebíí nááhai .
PRED:	So the Lord was angry with Israel , and he became angry with him . He ruled over Israel for eight years .
GOLD:	Then the Lord burned with anger against Israel , and he turned them over to King Cushan-rishathaim of Aram-naharaim . And the Israelites served Cushan-rishathaim for eight years .

ID:	410
INPUT:	Diné t'óó ahayóí éí bił hadlee'ii shich'odooniił danízingo łídeidilchí , áádóó diné t'áadoo le'é t'áá jíík'eh nijiniihígíí binahjį' diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo hak'is danilį́ .
PRED:	And they shall write to me in the sight of many men , and every man is his brother , and every man is his brother .
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	411
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus t'áadoo ák'ihazdoodzíi' da . Nít'éé' aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ánááhodoo'niid , Diyin God hináanii binahjį' ándishní , Christ , Diyin God biYe' daats'í nílínígíí bee nihił hólne' .
PRED:	But Jesus did not answer . Then the high priest said to him , “ I tell you that the living God lives , tell you what the Son of God is saying . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus remained silent . Then the high priest said to him , “ I demand in the name of the living God — tell us if you are the Messiah , the Son of God . ”

ID:	412
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį'ígíí ábizhdííniid , Shínaaí Íísa nidááh níyáago áádóó nanídééłkidgo , Háishą' bíí' nílį́ ? Háágóoshą' díníyá ? índa , Díí nííłkałígíishą' háí bí ? nidííniidgo
PRED:	He said to the first , “ My brother Esau came to meet you and asked him , ‘ Who are you ? Who are you ? Who are you ? '
GOLD:	He gave these instructions to the men leading the first group : “ When my brother , Esau , meets you , he will ask , ‘ Whose servants are you ? Where are you going ? Who owns these animals ? '

ID:	413
INPUT:	bizhé'é áádóó bimá éí kin haal'áagi kééhat'į́įgi hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii yah a'atiiníjį' yich'į' niidoolóós .
PRED:	He shall bring his father and his mother to the elders of the city , to the elders of the city gate .
GOLD:	In such a case , the father and mother must take the son to the elders as they hold court at the town gate .

ID:	414
INPUT:	Kéyah éí Bóhólníihii bá ats'ádeet'ánígíí índa kéyah kin haal'áago ádoolníiłgo bá ats'ádeet'ánígíí éí kéyah bił ahóóltą'go tseebíídóó náá'áłníí' t'įįhí bi'ohgo tsin sitą́ ákónízah áádóó naaniigo ałdó' tseebíídóó náá'áłníí' t'įįhí bi'ohgo tsin sitą́ ; éí ałts'ą́ą́hjígo bíighahgi kéyah hoodzooígíí áádóó e'e'aahjigo tónteeljį' kéyah niní'áhígíí áádóó ha'a'aahjigo kéyah niní'áhígíí t' áá át'é éí t'áá áłah naat'áanii bikéyah doo . Kin bii' sohodizin índa kéyah t'áá bóóltą'go Bóhólníihii bá ats'ádeet'ánígíí éí t'áá ałtso kéyah ahééhoodzooígíí ałníi'gi sinil doo ;
PRED:	And the border of the land shall be for the Lord , and for the border of the city , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and the border of the sea , and the border of the east side of the sea , and the border of the east , and the east side of the east .
GOLD:	“ The areas that remain , to the east and to the west of the sacred lands and the city , will belong to the prince . Each of these areas will be 81/3 miles wide , extending in opposite directions to the eastern and western borders of Israel , with the sacred lands and the sanctuary of the Temple in the center .

ID:	415
INPUT:	Nidi Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí diné tseebílt'éego yił Johéínan yits'ąą dadínéezhchą́ą'go Áman dine'é yich'į' ííjéé' .
PRED:	But Ishmael the son of Ishmael had eight men , and fled from the children of Ammon .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Ishmael and eight of his men escaped from Johanan into the land of Ammon .

ID:	416
INPUT:	Nidi dine'é dadéesxéelgo saad t'ááłá'í nidi , t'áadoo yee yich'į' hadaasdzíi' da , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go ání , Doo bich'į' háádadoohdzih da .
PRED:	But the people were silent , but they did not answer him , because the king said , “ Do n't speak to you . ”
GOLD:	But the people were silent and did not utter a word because Hezekiah had commanded them , “ Do not answer him . ”

ID:	417
INPUT:	Bijáád éí béésh nitł'izii bee ályaa índa bikee'jį' béésh nitł'izii áádóó hashtł'ish bił ałta' nínilgo ályaa .
PRED:	His feet were made of iron , iron , iron , iron , and iron .
GOLD:	its legs were iron , and its feet were a combination of iron and baked clay .

ID:	418
INPUT:	Háálá diné doo yá'ádaashóonii náásgóó bada'iideełgo yiiłtsą́ągo éí yee ádaa daha'niihgo wooshch'į́į́d nít'éé' .
PRED:	For I have seen the wicked , and have seen the evil , and have seen it in shame .
GOLD:	For I envied the proudwhen I saw them prosper despite their wickedness .

ID:	419
INPUT:	Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin índa eda'alyaiishą' ha'át'íí yee t'ááłá'í nilį́įgo aha'didoot'ááł ? Jó , nihí Diyin God hináanii bikin bii' sohodizin daniidlį́ , háálá Diyin God t'áá bí ádííniid , Hatah kééhasht'į́į doo , áádóó hataasháa doo , áádóó haDiyin God nishłį́į doo , índa hó shidine'é dajílį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	What shall the covenant of God be given to the temple of the living God ? For we are the temple of the living God , and I will dwell in them , and I will dwell in them , and I will be their God , and they shall be my people .
GOLD:	And what union can there be between God 's temple and idols ? For we are the temple of the living God . As God said : “ I will live in themand walk among them.I will be their God , and they will be my people .

ID:	420
INPUT:	Yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' doo naaznilgi náhookǫs yiníłbaal ; nahasdzáán t'áadoo bótą'ígóó dah yiz'ą́ .
PRED:	The stars is in the sky , and the earth does not turn away from it .
GOLD:	God stretches the northern sky over empty spaceand hangs the earth on nothing .

ID:	421
INPUT:	Éí baa dahideest'ánígíí Shííkem hoolyéii dahootsooígíí t'áá bił Íífreiyim dine'é bidziłgo nahaz'ánígi kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichéehii iisxíinii bá át'é , áádóó Gíízer kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił yaa deideez'ą́ ,
PRED:	And they gave their lands to Shechem , with their pasture lands , in the hill country of Ephraim , a refuge for refuge in the hill country of Ephraim , and its suburbs with its suburbs .
GOLD:	Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim ( a city of refuge for those who accidentally killed someone ) , Gezer ,

ID:	422
INPUT:	Áko tsé dį́į́' hasht'e'nibída'astséelgo didlidgo náádahidoonihii bá sinil ; nááseego naakidi ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódaníłtso ; naaniigo ałdó' t'áá ákódaníłtéél , dego éí t'ááłá'í ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' t'įįhdí biláhígo ákódanízah ; éí bikáa'gi didlidgo náádahaniih dooleełii bee naatseedígíí ákwii ninádaa'nił doo .
PRED:	And it shall be for the four corners of the wood , two cubits , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof shall be two cubits , and the breadth thereof shall be for the burnt offering .
GOLD:	There were also four tables of finished stone for preparation of the burnt offerings , each 311/2 inches square and 21 inches high . On these tables were placed the butchering knives and other implements for slaughtering the sacrificial animals .

ID:	423
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Nan biye' Jáshowa bił nídiit'aash ; éí yá'át'éehgo diné bii' honít'i'ii bik'i dah didíílnihgo
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Take Joshua son of Nun , and take his hand on the people ,
GOLD:	The Lord replied , “ Take Joshua son of Nun , who has the Spirit in him , and lay your hands on him .

ID:	424
INPUT:	Ats'á'ázhdeeltį́įgo hóyoołkááł biyi' ch'il na'atł'o'ii sikaadii bits'ą́ą́dóó doo<unk> go ályaii éí bílástsii' índa bikágí nidi doo jiyą́ą da doo .
PRED:	In the days of his appeared , he shall not eat the vine of the vine , nor shall he eat it .
GOLD:	As long as they are bound by their Nazirite vow , they are not allowed to eat or drink anything that comes from a grapevine — not even the grape seeds or skins .

ID:	425
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii éí dadine'é ił danilį́įgo áyoolííł , nidi bąąhági át'éii éí dadine'é yáhásin yénéínił .
PRED:	The righteous are a people of glory , but the wicked hate the people .
GOLD:	Godliness makes a nation great , but sin is a disgrace to any people .

ID:	426
INPUT:	Éí bąą hó hwee Diyin God yaa hakáhígíí t'áá nihonít'i'jį' yisdájiiníiłgo bízhneel'ą́ , háálá bá na'ak'íyájíłti' doo biniyé t'áá áłahjį' jiiná .
PRED:	Therefore he will deliver them from the end of God , for he will always be able to speak with him .
GOLD:	Therefore he is able , once and forever , to save those who come to God through him . He lives forever to intercede with God on their behalf .

ID:	427
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí diné nididooltałgóó yiyoołááł , áádóó joogááłgóó Bóhólníihii haa bił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	The Lord makes a man clean , and the Lord is pleased with joy .
GOLD:	The Lord directs the steps of the godly.He delights in every detail of their lives .

ID:	428
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bik'ijį' asdzání bił nihéézhdoot'ash biniyé náájoodááł nít'éé' ; náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bits'íís jidínóoł'įįł biniyé naanii hajííyá . Nít'éé' jó , tsés'ná éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bits'íís yiih yínáá lá áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh bii' hazlį́į́' lá ,
PRED:	And it came to pass after the woman , that the woman went to see the body of a lion , that he might see the body of a lion , and honey , and honey .
GOLD:	Later , when he returned to Timnah for the wedding , he turned off the path to look at the carcass of the lion . And he found that a swarm of bees had made some honey in the carcass .

ID:	429
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	430
INPUT:	Áádóó Ábsalam éí David yá nidaal'a'í yił ałk'ą́ą́h yikai , áko Ábsalam éí dzaanééz bił yilwołgo chéch'iltsoh bits'áoz'a' ałtaanáneez'áá léi' hoł bik'ą́ą́h yilwodgo biishdinoolne'go yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán bita'gi t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ dah nijil<unk> ; dzaanééz éí hayaa haalwodgo eelwod .
PRED:	And Absalom went up with his servants , and Absalom fell down with the branches of a tree , and cast them into the midst of a tree , and cast them into the midst of the sky , and he fled , and fled , and fled .
GOLD:	During the battle , Absalom happened to come upon some of David 's men . He tried to escape on his mule , but as he rode beneath the thick branches of a great tree , his hair got caught in the tree . His mule kept going and left him dangling in the air .

ID:	431
INPUT:	T'áá azhé'é ba'áłchíní yaa a'ááh nízinígi át'éego Bóhólníihii dabidísinii yaa a'ááh nízin .
PRED:	The mercy of the Lord is merciful to those who love him , just as their father 's children .
GOLD:	The Lord is like a father to his children , tender and compassionate to those who fear him .

ID:	432
INPUT:	Shiníłch'i doo bidziil da yileehgo yishááłgóó nił bééhózin ! Yishááłgóó łoh shiniyé nídeidees'į́į́' nít'éé' .
PRED:	You know that my spirit is weak , and I have hid my way in a net .
GOLD:	When I am overwhelmed , you alone know the way I should turn.Wherever I go , my enemies have set traps for me .

ID:	433
INPUT:	Yínííł doo t'áá íiyisí bide ádooníił da biniyé yee ádił asziih yę́ę bá yóó'adadidooh'ááł , áádóó hadabidi'yoołnih .
PRED:	You will forgive their sins , so that they will be punished .
GOLD:	Now , however , it is time to forgive and comfort him . Otherwise he may be overcome by discouragement .

ID:	434
INPUT:	yá'át'ééh ó'oo'níiłii bídahooł'aah ; doo haada yit'éii hádaaht'į́ ; bide ádahoot'éii bíká anídaahjah áádóó áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii bich'ą́ą́h yádaałti' índa asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii bá nída'oohkąąh .
PRED:	Give the commandment to the Lord , and do not seek justice , for the fatherless , and for the fatherless , and for the widow .
GOLD:	Learn to do good.Seek justice.Help the oppressed.Defend the cause of orphans.Fight for the rights of widows .

ID:	435
INPUT:	Łóó' t'óó ahayóí haadlo'
PRED:	The Death of the People
GOLD:	The First Disciples

ID:	436
INPUT:	K'é ha'níinii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Greetings from Paul

ID:	437
INPUT:	Áízak be'asdzą́ą́ dooleełígíí bá nídiiltį́
PRED:	Isaac 's Death
GOLD:	A Wife for Isaac

ID:	438
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' saadígíí t'áá ałtso deidiizts'ą́ą'go nídaasdzíidgo da'ahinéél'į́į́' , áádóó Bérak ádeidííniid , Díí saadígíí t'áá át'é aláahgo naat'áanii nilíinii bee bił dahodiilnih .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when all the words of the words of the words of the words , that they were afraid , and said , We shall tell the king all these words .
GOLD:	When they heard all the messages , they looked at one another in alarm . “ We must tell the king what we have heard , ” they said to Baruch .

ID:	439
INPUT:	T'áá bí yii' sitínígíí ałdó' ádá ííł'į́ ; bi'éé' áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bił bee ályaa .
PRED:	He also hath done the same thing ; he hath made of fine linen , purple , and scarlet .
GOLD:	She makes her own bedspreads.She dresses in fine linen and purple gowns .

ID:	440
INPUT:	Áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' daats'í nááhozhdidoołááł danízingo bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii hak'i dahodidoo'ááł biniyé hadahasííd .
PRED:	And behold , that he might heal him on the Sabbath day , and the Pharisees and the Pharisees might heal him .
GOLD:	The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely . If he healed the man 's hand , they planned to accuse him of working on the Sabbath .

ID:	441
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é t'ááłá'í jinítínígo doo aaníígóó ájít'íinii hach'į' nahwii'náa doo , áádóó ti'hojooníih doo , Jew dine'é nilíinii áłtsé , áádóó doo Jew dine'é nilíinii ałdó' .
PRED:	Everyone who does not know the truth will suffer trouble and trouble , first first , and Gentiles also also .
GOLD:	There will be trouble and calamity for everyone who keeps on doing what is evil — for the Jew first and also for the Gentile .

ID:	442
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ííjip kéyahgi tó yich'į' Éran bigish yił dah didiilnii' , áko áádę́ę́' ch'ał haaldee'go Ííjip kéyah ałtso yik'i diilkǫ' .
PRED:	And he stretched out his hand upon Aaron in the land of Egypt , and the frogs poured out upon them .
GOLD:	So Aaron raised his hand over the waters of Egypt , and frogs came up and covered the whole land !

ID:	443
INPUT:	Áko Líyah ázhdííniidígíí Diyin God yidiizts'ą́ą'go izh'niiltsąąd , áádóó Jéíkab bá ashkii náájíshchį́ ; éí bił ashdladi ajishchį́ .
PRED:	When Leah heard that God had spoken , she became pregnant , and Jacob gave birth to Jacob a son .
GOLD:	And God answered Leah 's prayers . She became pregnant again and gave birth to a fifth son for Jacob .

ID:	444
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haa áhályą́ągo jiináago áhósin . Éí nihokáa'gi hak'ihojidlíi dooleeł . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , hwe'ana'í laanaa danízinígíí baa hodóó'ááł lágo .
PRED:	The Lord is wise , and he will bless you on the earth ; do n't let them judge your enemies .
GOLD:	The Lord protects themand keeps them alive.He gives them prosperity in the landand rescues them from their enemies .

ID:	445
INPUT:	áádóó kin hadaas'á t'áá ałtsogóó índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi baa nidahodołdlaadgo ádadohní , T'áá bik'e'ashchínígi át'éego chaha'oh ádadoohłííł biniyé dziłgóó dadohkáahgo áliv bits'áoz'a' , nídíshchíí' bits'áoz'a' , mértal sikaadii áádóó páam sikaadii bits'áoz'a' índa tsin naazkaadii t'áá íiyisí bi'iil díłch'ilii ch'ídahidoohxééł .
PRED:	and say to them in all the cities and in Jerusalem , ‘ Go up to the mountain , ' and say to them , ‘ As it is written , ‘ Go up to the mountains , ' and cut off the olive tree , and cut branches from its branches .
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	446
INPUT:	Áko ba'áłchíní daniidlį́įgo , ba'áłchíní yá dah yooléełii nihíí' dadooleeł , éí Christ bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz doo . Christ bił ti'dahwii'nííh ládą́ą́' yee ayóó át'éii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz doo .
PRED:	And if we have children , we will possess the glory of Christ , if the glory of Christ is in him .
GOLD:	And since we are his children , we are his heirs . In fact , together with Christ we are heirs of God 's glory . But if we are to share his glory , we must also share his suffering .

ID:	447
INPUT:	Áko dashdii'áázh , nít'éé' t'áá aaníí t'áá áhodííniidígi át'éego bik'ízhní'áázh , áko atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihgo dadoodį́łígíí t'áá áłdįįłt'éego ájiilaa .
PRED:	And they went , and found him just as he had said , and he prepared the Passover .
GOLD:	They went off to the city and found everything just as Jesus had said , and they prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	448
INPUT:	Diyin God t'ááłá'í hólǫ́ǫgo yinídlánígíí éí yá'át'ééh . Jó , níłch'i bida'iiníziinii ákót'éego da'oodlą́ą nidi yik'ee bił daayée'go bitah dahoditłid .
PRED:	It is good for one God who believes in him , because the devil tremble and fear .
GOLD:	You say you have faith , for you believe that there is one God . Good for you ! Even the demons believe this , and they tremble in terror .

ID:	449
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii áshíłní , Ízrel dine'é t'ą́ą́' anáhátłíishii éí Júdah dine'é doo bazh'dí'nóodlíí át'éii yiláahgo t'áá ákogi át'éego í'diilyaa .
PRED:	The Lord said to me , “ The children of Israel are a wife of Israel , and the tribe of Judah is more righteous than they are .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Even faithless Israel is less guilty than treacherous Judah !

ID:	450
INPUT:	Áko doo da'ahiji<unk> góó Éísa nant'áago tádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' nááhai .
PRED:	And Asa reigned in his way , and reigned forty years .
GOLD:	So there was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa 's reign .

ID:	451
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahaniihii náádayiisnii' .
PRED:	Then the king and all Israel offered sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	452
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é yéego hak'ijį' nidaalteehii hach'į' ninádookah .
PRED:	And the children of Israel shall come near against the house of Israel , and they shall return unto him .
GOLD:	Though you are such wicked rebels , my people , come and return to the Lord .

ID:	453
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Éran biye'ké nízhdii'eezhgo ayaadi éé' nineezígíí biih jiiłteehgo sis bee áká dabidzisas , áádóó ch'ah bitsiinídadzist'i' ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí yi'iilaa .
PRED:	And Moses took the sons of Aaron , and put them on his robe , and put on his head , and put on his head , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Next Moses presented Aaron 's sons . He clothed them in their tunics , tied their sashes around them , and put their special head coverings on them , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	454
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iyísíi'ii nich'į' bee ádaa ákoniiszį́į́' , áádóó doo ákwii áát'įįdii t'áadoo nídíł'į́į' da ; Bee haz'áanii híti'ii éí Bóhólníihii bee bił hodeeshnih , dííniid ; ákohgo doo ákwii át'éii bee ádił ni'iyísíi'ii shá yóó'ańdííní'ą́ . Síilah .
PRED:	I have seen your sins , and do n't look at your sins . I will tell the Lord , and I will tell you what I have done . Selah .
GOLD:	Finally , I confessed all my sins to youand stopped trying to hide my guilt.I said to myself , “ I will confess my rebellion to the Lord. ” And you forgave me ! All my guilt is gone.Interlude

ID:	455
INPUT:	Jóseph bínaaíké Bénjamin Ííjipgi yił nákai
PRED:	Joseph 's brothers in Egypt
GOLD:	The Brothers Return to Egypt

ID:	456
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Jerúsalemdi ats'ááhoníłt'e' , áko kéyah éí béésh łigaii tálent wolyéii neeznádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo índa óola t'ááłá'í tálent bíighahgo ák'é ninádazhdoodléełgo áhoolaa .
PRED:	And the king of Egypt cast them into the midst of Jerusalem ; and the land was thirty shekels of silver , and a half of gold .
GOLD:	Then he was deposed by the king of Egypt , who demanded that Judah pay 7,500 pounds of silver and 75 pounds of gold as tribute .

ID:	457
INPUT:	Áko baa nidziizyeelígíí áádóó ááhyiłnínígíí dzidiizts'ą́ą'go Gídiyan sodoolzin , áádóó Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígóó nídzídzáago ájíní , Hasht'e'ádadołnééh , háálá Mídiyan dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó dah deínéehii Bóhólníihii nihílák'eidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	When he heard the dream and the dream , Gideon went to the camp and said , “ Be quiet , for the Lord has given them into the hand of Midian . ”
GOLD:	When Gideon heard the dream and its interpretation , he bowed in worship before the Lord . Then he returned to the Israelite camp and shouted , “ Get up ! For the Lord has given you victory over the Midianite hordes ! ”

ID:	458
INPUT:	Dooda lą́ą ! Jó , Christ ayóó'ánihó'níinii bee ak'eh hididleehii biláahdi ádaniit'éego át'é !
PRED:	No ! It is better than we love the love of Christ .
GOLD:	No , despite all these things , overwhelming victory is ours through Christ , who loved us .

ID:	459
INPUT:	Áádóó łahjį' ałníí'dóó Ízrel dine'é baa dahaas'nilígíí t'áá ha'át'íhída ashdladiin ánéelą́ą'go bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ááłá'ígo ats'ádahidoołtééł : éí bíla' ashdla'ii nilíinii áádóó béégashii áádóó télii áádóó dibé índa da'alį́'ígíí t'áá ał'ąą ádaat'éii éí Líívai dine'é Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzinii yaa ádahalyáanii baa dadidooh'ááł .
PRED:	And from the half of the people of Israel shall take one hundred men from one hundred and fifty , and fifty , and his cattle , and his cattle , and his cattle , and all that are in the tabernacle of the Lord .
GOLD:	From the half that belongs to the people of Israel , take one of every fifty of the prisoners and of the cattle , donkeys , sheep , goats , and other animals . Give this share to the Levites , who are in charge of maintaining the Lord 's Tabernacle . ”

ID:	460
INPUT:	Nizhé'é bilah doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da ; éí nizhé'é áhánígo bik'éí nilį́ .
PRED:	You shall not take the nakedness of your father 's sister 's sister , and you shall not have sex with your father 's family .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father 's sister , for she is your father 's close relative .

ID:	461
INPUT:	Áádóó Rúben áhodííniid , T'áadoósh kódíshníigo nihich'į' haasdzíi' da ? Ashkii t'ááká haada daohłe' yíila' ; bąąhági ádaohłe' lágo , nihidííniid , nidi t'áadoo dashisidoots'ą́ą' da . Éí bąą bidiłígíí biniinaa bá naniideeh .
PRED:	Reuben said to them , “ Do n't I speak to you ? Do n't let the boy sin , but do n't listen to me because of their sins . ”
GOLD:	“ Did n't I tell you not to sin against the boy ? ” Reuben asked . “ But you would n't listen . And now we have to answer for his blood ! ”

ID:	462
INPUT:	áko kin góne' yah ajookai nít'éé' ashkii áłts'íísígíí bimá Mary t'áá bił dajiiłtsą́ , áko Jesus bich'į' nitsidazdeezgo'go bich'į' nidahodzisá , índa hanaalye'é da'ílíinii ąą ádajiilaago , óola áádóó tsin bijeeh łikání halchinii fránkinsens índa mir wolyéii baa dajiiznil .
PRED:	And when they entered into the house , the little child saw Mary 's mother , they bowed down before Jesus , and worshipped him , and gave it to him , and with gold , and with gold .
GOLD:	They entered the house and saw the child with his mother , Mary , and they bowed down and worshiped him . Then they opened their treasure chests and gave him gifts of gold , frankincense , and myrrh .

ID:	463
INPUT:	Áko táá' nááhaijį' nihoolzhiizhgo deisná ; Heziikáíyah aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo hastą́ą́h náhááh góne' índa Hoshíya éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo náhást'éí náhááh góne' Samériya kéyah yisná .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the third year of the reign of Hezekiah , that Hezekiah reigned in the sixth year of king of Israel , and in the seventh year of the reign of Samaria .
GOLD:	Three years later , during the sixth year of King Hezekiah 's reign and the ninth year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , Samaria fell .

ID:	464
INPUT:	Nidi Peter índa John ázhdííniid , T'áá nihí baa nitsídaahkees , Diyin God yiníł'į́įgo nihíjí nihik'eh dahoniil'į́įgo daats'í yá'át'ééh , doodaii' Diyin God bik'eh honiil'į́įgo daats'í yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	But Peter and John said , “ Be careful to obey God , whether we do what is good or good . ”
GOLD:	But Peter and John replied , “ Do you think God wants us to obey you rather than him ?

ID:	465
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Diné bił ałch'į' ádant'į́ yę́ę bił ahidadílyéego bee baa yánínízin yę́ę t'áadoo bahat'aadí íinilaago t'áá łiníchí'í sínílį́'ígíí biniinaa áádóó eda'alyaii t'áá ałtso bił doo ni'dóldin yę́ę biniinaa índa eda'alyaii bich'į' na'áłchíní náádahíłniihgo bidił dadeezna' yę́ę biniinaa ,
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord God : Because thou hast sinned against the people , because thou hast made them afraid of their abominations , and hast sinned against them , and hast committed all their idols , and their idols ,
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have poured out your lust and exposed yourself in prostitution to all your lovers , and because you have worshiped detestable idols , and because you have slaughtered your children as sacrifices to your gods ,

ID:	466
INPUT:	Áko Sáíras aláahgo naat'áanii náádoodleełii átsé baa yíhááh biná Daniel nijil'a' nít'éé' .
PRED:	In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia , Daniel was in the first year of Cyrus .
GOLD:	Daniel remained in the royal service until the first year of the reign of King Cyrus .

ID:	467
INPUT:	Sálaman bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Héídad ach'į' nahwiiłná yę́ęgi át'éego ákót'éego ałdó' Ríízan éí Ízrel dine'é yi'ana'í nilį́įgo hoolzhiizh , áko Ízrel dine'é ayóo yijoołáá nít'éé' índa Síriya kéyahgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the days of Solomon , as it was in the days of Haman , that he reigned over Israel , and he served them in the land of Aram .
GOLD:	Rezon was Israel 's bitter adversary for the rest of Solomon 's reign , and he made trouble , just as Hadad did . Rezon hated Israel intensely and continued to reign in Aram .

ID:	468
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran áyidííniid , Ízrel dine'é índa Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro bich'į' hadoohdzih , Ííjip kéyahdóó Ízrel dine'é ch'ídiit'ish , bididoohniił .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt , and to the people of Israel , saying , ‘ They will go out of Egypt . ' ”
GOLD:	But the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them orders for the Israelites and for Pharaoh , the king of Egypt . The Lord commanded Moses and Aaron to lead the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	469
INPUT:	áádóó , Ha'át'íísh yíní'į́ ? shidííniid . Áko ádíshní , Déé'į́į́' nít'éé' , jó'akon , áko bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áhígíí áádóó bílátahgi dah azkánígíí áádóó éí bikáá'dóó bee dahool'iní tsosts'idgo dah naaznil índa t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo óola níyizgo biih dahasdzą́ągo bidadii'áago yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	What do you look at me ? ” I said , “ Behold , I looked , and behold , there was a lamp in the midst of the lampstand , and in the midst of the lampstand , and in one gold . ”
GOLD:	“ What do you see now ? ” he asked.I answered , “ I see a solid gold lampstand with a bowl of oil on top of it . Around the bowl are seven lamps , each having seven spouts with wicks .

ID:	470
INPUT:	Nidi Yuráíyah binanit'a'í bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso bił aláahgo naat'áanii bich'éédą́ą'gi da'iiłhaazhgo t'áadoo bighangóó anáádzáa da .
PRED:	But Uriah and all his servants did not return to the king 's house at the entrance of the king 's house .
GOLD:	But Uriah did n't go home . He slept that night at the palace entrance with the king 's palace guard .

ID:	471
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bisiláo yił Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Jííbas dine'é éí kéyah yii' kéédahat'ínígíí baa jíkai ; éí David yich'į' yádaałti'go ádeidííniid , Doo da' oo'íinii áádóó nida'niłhodii doo nahjį' bi'ííníłnii'góó doo kojį' yah adíínéeł da . Éí David yah azhdoonéłígíí doo bízhneel'ą́ą da , dahó'ní .
PRED:	And they went to the king 's army in Jerusalem , which dwelt in the land of the Hittites , saying to David , “ If you do not let the blind and the blind , you will not go into the land . ”
GOLD:	David then led his men to Jerusalem to fight against the Jebusites , the original inhabitants of the land who were living there . The Jebusites taunted David , saying , “ You 'll never get in here ! Even the blind and lame could keep you out ! ” For the Jebusites thought they were safe .

ID:	472
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa Jew dine'é bitahdóó alááh dahideezíinii Paul yee yaa nídaat'íinii yee hoł dahoolne' áádóó nídahooskango ,
PRED:	And the chief priests and the Jews told the counsel of Paul , and they cried out to him ,
GOLD:	where the leading priests and other Jewish leaders met with him and made their accusations against Paul .

ID:	473
INPUT:	Áko ánáádadi'ní , Bóhólníihii baa áłah ná'ádleeh t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh néit'aahígíí éí Sháíloh haz'ánígi éí Béthel kin shijaa' náhookǫsjígo , Bétheldóó Shííkem kin haal'áajį' atiinígíí ha'a'aahjígo índa Lebónah kin shijaa' shádi'ááhjígo t'éí bá náhoot'aah .
PRED:	They said , “ In the first year of the month of the month of the Lord , he brought up Bethel to Bethel , and to the south side of Shechem , and to the south side of the south .
GOLD:	Then they thought of the annual festival of the Lord held in Shiloh , south of Lebonah and north of Bethel , along the east side of the road that goes from Bethel to Shechem .

ID:	474
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus joogááł , nít'éé' diné naaki doo oo'į́į́góó hakéé' yi'ashgo , dilwoshgo kóní , David biYe' nílíinii , nihaa jiiníbaah .
PRED:	As Jesus was walking along , the two men followed him , saying , “ Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”
GOLD:	After Jesus left the girl 's home , two blind men followed along behind him , shouting , “ Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	475
INPUT:	Ízrel bidine'é bik'ehgo nida'anishígíí bis t'áá ákwíí jį́ ádaahłe' nít'éé' yę́ę t'áadoo bi'oh ánéelt'e'go á<unk> e'í , hodoo'niidgo t'áá íiyisí hach'į' nidahwii'náago baa ákodazniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And the children of Israel commanded them all the work of the house of Israel in the field , that they could not make them a few days . And they saw that they were very great distress .
GOLD:	The Israelite foremen could see that they were in serious trouble when they were told , “ You must not reduce the number of bricks you make each day . ”

ID:	476
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	477
INPUT:	áko t'ah abínídą́ą́' náádiish'nahgo Diyin God yá dahalne'ii shá nidaal'a'í danilíinii bá deínółts'ą́ą' dooleeł biniyé nihich'į' ahéł'a' , nidi t'áadoo bá dasidoots'ą́ą' da ,
PRED:	And in the morning I raised up the morning , and sent unto you the prophets , that ye might hear them , but ye would not hear .
GOLD:	and if you will not listen to my servants , the prophets — for I sent them again and again to warn you , but you would not listen to them —

ID:	478
INPUT:	Áádóó hamá índa hatsilíké ákwe'é yíkai , áko tł'óo'di naazį́įgo hágo dahałníigo hach'į' yah ada'as'a' .
PRED:	And his mother and his brethren came to the place , and they sent him to him , and they sent him into the court .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him . They stood outside and sent word for him to come out and talk with them .

ID:	479
INPUT:	Diné yá'át'éehii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ach'oha'né shóyoołt'eeh , nidi diné doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó binahagizii Bóhólníihii baa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	A good man is found in the sight of the Lord ; but the hand of the wicked shall judge the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord approves of those who are good , but he condemns those who plan wickedness .

ID:	480
INPUT:	T'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí yee nant'áa doo
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The

ID:	481
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó eda'alyaii yich'į' nidahałáii jooshłá , nidi Bóhólníihii baa jííníshłí .
PRED:	I hate idols , but I trust in the Lord .
GOLD:	I hate those who worship worthless idols.I trust in the Lord .

ID:	482
INPUT:	Nidi Hánnah éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ deeyáa da , háálá hahastiin ábizhdííniid , Shí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ deesháał da , awéé' i'díít'óodgo índa ákǫ́ǫ́ bił deesh'ash , áko bíni'dii Bóhólníihii yich'į' nidoogáałgo be'iina' ninít'i'jį' ákwii hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	But she did not go with her , because she said to her husband , “ I will not go with her , and I will go with her , and I will go with her , and let her return to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But Hannah did not go . She told her husband , “ Wait until the boy is weaned . Then I will take him to the Tabernacle and leave him there with the Lord permanently . ”

ID:	483
INPUT:	T'áá háiida jiinánígíí t'áá hó ádá shójoost'e'go éí yóó'azhdoołdił , áádóó t'áá háiida shí shiniinaa jiinánígíí yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo éí jiinánígíí <unk> doołt'eeł .
PRED:	Anyone who hates his own own own own own own life , and whoever does not turn away from my sake .
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it ; but if you give up your life for me , you will find it .

ID:	484
INPUT:	hasht'edadíníit'éego índa k'é daniidzingo Diyin God k'ehgo índa t'áá ałtsojį' nihił da'ílį́įgo dahinii'náa doo biniyé aláahgo naat'áanii índa bídahólníihii t'áá ałtso bá sodadołzin .
PRED:	pray for the king , and for all things , that we may live in every way , and in every way , and in all things .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	485
INPUT:	Háálá doo ákwii ájooníiłii nabik'ítsídzízkéezgo ałtso yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo doo dazhdootsaał da ; ts'ídá t'áá aaníí jiináa doo .
PRED:	For if he sees the wicked , he shall not die ; he shall surely live .
GOLD:	They will live because they thought it over and decided to turn from their sins . Such people will not die .

ID:	486
INPUT:	Bánai , Ázgad , Bííbeiyai ,
PRED:	able to do what was said :
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	487
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago atiingóó ats'íís sitį́įgo áádóó télii índa náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bíighahgóó sizį́įgo baazhníyá , áko náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ats'íís t'ah doo yiyą́ą da lá , télii nidi doo niyiizhnizh da lá .
PRED:	When he came to the road , he took the body , a lion , a lion , and a lion standing beside them . He did not eat the body of a lion , but the donkey was not broken .
GOLD:	and he went out and found the body lying in the road . The donkey and lion were still standing there beside it , for the lion had not eaten the body nor attacked the donkey .

ID:	488
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí índa ooljéé' , sǫ' nihídazdilidii t'áá ánółtso , baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Praise the sun and the stars , all the stars ,
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	489
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Gídiyan ánéídoo'niid , Táadi neeznádiingo diné da'ííłch'alígíí éí áádeesįįłgo Mídiyan dine'é nílák'ee dideesh'ááł , áádóó ła'ígíí t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bí dabinághangóó bíni'dii nídeíkááh .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Gideon , “ I will give them four hundred men , and I will give them into the hand of Midian , and all the other return to their own house . ”
GOLD:	The Lord told Gideon , “ With these 300 men I will rescue you and give you victory over the Midianites . Send all the others home . ”

ID:	490
INPUT:	Nidayiizh'eezhígíí nídiiníiłgo éí níbaal bii' dahozdísingi chodao'į́į doo ; Líívai dine'é t'ááłá'í nízínígo bindaanishígíí bik'ehgo baa hidíínił .
PRED:	And thou shalt take away the vessels of the tabernacle of meeting , according to the work of the Levites according to the work of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Receive their gifts , and use these oxen and wagons for transporting the Tabernacle . Distribute them among the Levites according to the work they have to do . ”

ID:	491
INPUT:	Háishą' bílák'eegi tónteel yí'nééł'ąądgo ánéelt'e'gi bił bééhózin , doodaii' háishą' yíládeests'ǫ́ǫ́d bee yádiłhił yí'nééł'ąądgo áníłtsogi bił bééhózin , doodaii' háishą' nihokáá' łeezh yiyííłta'go ánéelt'e'gi bił bééhózin , doodaii' háishą' dził áádóó deílk'idígíí dah deidiyiilo'go ádaníłdáasgi bił bééhózin ?
PRED:	Who knows that it is like the sea , or who knows it in the midst of the sea , or who knows it in the earth , or in the dust , or in the dust , or among the mountains , or among the hills , and among the hills ?
GOLD:	Who else has held the oceans in his hand ? Who has measured off the heavens with his fingers ? Who else knows the weight of the earthor has weighed the mountains and hills on a scale ?

ID:	492
INPUT:	T'áá áko hágo bizhdííniid , áko bizhé'é Zébedii índa bá nidaalnishígíí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ tsinaa'eeł yii' naháaztą́ągo bits'ą́ą́' dashdii'áazhgo Jesus bikéé' jiní'áázh .
PRED:	And he called them , and he said unto them , The father of his father 's sons , and the servants of the boat , and they followed Jesus .
GOLD:	He called them at once , and they also followed him , leaving their father , Zebedee , in the boat with the hired men .

ID:	493
INPUT:	Nihik'isóó , nihá sodadołzin .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , pray for you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , pray for us .

ID:	494
INPUT:	Da' tsés'ná bitł'izh bik'ííníyá ? Doo bénínánílkoh da dooleełígíí biniyé t'áadoo áde nánídį́hí ; t'áá bee hwiih nánídleehíjį' niyą́ .
PRED:	Have you found the honey with honey ? Do n't you eat it , and eat it with water .
GOLD:	Do you like honey ? Do n't eat too much , or it will make you sick !

ID:	495
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalemgi Júdah áádóó Bénjamin ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ła' kéédahat'į́ . Júdah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii éí díí : Píírez ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ła' , Mahéílalíyel biye' Shefatáíyah , éí biye' Amaráíyah , éí biye' Zekaráíyah , éí biye' Azáíyah , éí biye' Atháíyah wolyéii ákwii kééhat'į́ ,
PRED:	And there were some of the sons of Judah and Benjamin : of the sons of Judah : of the sons of Judah : of the sons of Zechariah , Zechariah the son of Zechariah , the son of Zechariah , the son of Zechariah , the son of Zechariah , the son of Zechariah ,
GOLD:	but some of the people from Judah and Benjamin resettled in Jerusalem . ) From the tribe of Judah : Athaiah son of Uzziah , son of Zechariah , son of Amariah , son of Shephatiah , son of Mahalalel , of the family of Perez .

ID:	496
INPUT:	Ádamah , Réímah , Héízor ,
PRED:	Ramah , Ramah , Ramah ,
GOLD:	Adamah , Ramah , Hazor ,

ID:	497
INPUT:	Néédahósinígíí baa a'ááh nínízingo áánííł , áádóó diné bijéí yee t'áá ákogi át'éii bich'į' t'áá ákogi áánííł .
PRED:	I have mercy on those who hate him , and I have mercy on the righteous .
GOLD:	Pour out your unfailing love on those who love you ; give justice to those with honest hearts .

ID:	498
INPUT:	Ákohgo naakits'áadahígíí éí ídahooł'aahii t'áá át'é áłah ádayiilaago ádeidííniid , Ch'iyáán nidei'niih doo biniyé Diyin God bizaad nahjį' nidadidiit'áłígíí doo bohónéedzą́ą da .
PRED:	Then the twelve disciples gathered together together together and said to them , “ It is better for us to give us the word of God to eat . ”
GOLD:	So the Twelve called a meeting of all the believers . They said , “ We apostles should spend our time teaching the word of God , not running a food program .

ID:	499
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' háhgóóshį́į́ anídeidloh nít'éé' , áádóó nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dahwiitaał nít'éé' . Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó ádahodoo'niid , Bóhólníihii éí ayóó ádaat'éii há yaa naayá .
PRED:	At that time they looked at him , and they sing for joy . They said to him , “ The Lord has done great things . ”
GOLD:	We were filled with laughter , and we sang for joy.And the other nations said , “ What amazing things the Lord has done for them . ”

ID:	500
INPUT:	Éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' nahasdzáán bikáa'gi yé'iitsoh dahólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' , áádóó bik'ijį' Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' aye'ké danilíinii nihokáá' dine'é bitsi'ké yił ahaa dahaaskaigo ba'áłchíní dahazlį́į́' ; éí ałk'idą́ą́' diné ayóó ádaat'éii índa ch'ídabi'dit'áahii danilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	In those days there was hail on the earth , and the sons of God came with him , sons of men , and children of men , and great .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	501
INPUT:	Níyol nahalingo łahjigo ádooníiłgo ch'ídookah ; bihodiit'i'ii dine'é danilį́ ; t'áá bí bibee adziilii t'éí bidiyin ádayósin .
PRED:	They will turn away like a wind , and they will go out like a nation ; they are their own power .
GOLD:	They sweep past like the windand are gone.But they are deeply guilty , for their own strength is their god . ”

ID:	502
INPUT:	Tsosts'id yiską́ą́ góne' éí dahodíínóhsingo áłah náhdleeh doo ; éí bijį́ doo nidoołnish da .
PRED:	On the seventh day you shall have a holy assembly ; you shall not do any work .
GOLD:	The seventh day of the festival will be another official day for holy assembly , and no ordinary work may be done on that day .

ID:	503
INPUT:	Éí dine'é t'óó báádahadzid danoolnin ; éí hadaastihii doo yaa daazid da doo , doodaii' ániid nidaakaii doo yich'odaaníi da doo .
PRED:	The people are afraid , and they do not love the young or the young .
GOLD:	a fierce and heartless nation that shows no respect for the old and no pity for the young .

ID:	504
INPUT:	Héírad dine'é Shámmah ałdó' , Héírad dine'é Iiláíka ałdó' ,
PRED:	And Bildad the son of Jesse , who was not of them ,
GOLD:	Shammah from Harod ; Elika from Harod ;

ID:	505
INPUT:	Áko t'áá áłah nídiiłts'į́įhgo níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'gi t'áá ałtso naa áłah nádleeh doo .
PRED:	When you hear , all the assembly will come together at the entrance of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	When both trumpets are blown , everyone must gather before you at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	506
INPUT:	nihokáá' nijigháá nít'éé' , áádóó hwee nahasdzáán hazlį́į́' , nidi nihokáá' dine'é t'áadoo hwéédahoosįįd da ;
PRED:	He lived in the world , and the world did not know him .
GOLD:	He came into the very world he created , but the world did n't recognize him .

ID:	507
INPUT:	Áko Jiihó'ash łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáhígíí t'áá át'é Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	And the rest of the acts of Joash , and all that he did , are they not written in the book of the Kings of Judah ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	508
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí łį́į́' baa neelkaadígíí éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' áádóó Kwéi hoolyéédę́ę́' shóozt'e' ; aláahgo naat'áanii bá nida'iiłniihígíí Kwéi hoolyéédę́ę́' łį́į́' nideiniiłkaadígíí t'áá bą́ą́h da'ílínígíí bíighahgo nída<unk> nii' .
PRED:	And Solomon had a horses from Egypt , and from the king of Egypt ; and the king sent for a price of money .
GOLD:	Solomon 's horses were imported from Egypt and from Cilicia ; the king 's traders acquired them from Cilicia at the standard price .

ID:	509
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad ádaaníinii bik'eh honíł'įįh , nidi ni éí ts'ídá t'áadoo naaki nilíní bi'dííłnih , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii át'ée dooígíí bił ííshjání ádíílííł .
PRED:	Now therefore keep the commandments , but you shall not do two things , and make known to the king .
GOLD:	Do as they ask , but solemnly warn them about the way a king will reign over them . ”

ID:	510
INPUT:	Áko doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdígíí t'áá át'é tł'ízí bik'éé diit'áahgo doo na'adáhígóó yił anádáah doo , áko diné éí tł'ízí dah néidiidlóosgo honoojíidi yéidichi' doo .
PRED:	And he shall come near all the sins of the goats , and shall bring them into the field ; and he shall bring them into the wilderness .
GOLD:	As the goat goes into the wilderness , it will carry all the people 's sins upon itself into a desolate land .

ID:	511
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí hodine'é anaa' da'ał'íinii t'áá ałtso bił t'áadoo kót'é'ílíní bik'ijį' hajizhjée'go be'ek'id Mííram hoolyéhí bíighahgi bik'i jiijéé' .
PRED:	So Joshua and all the men of war came up against him , and fought against the sea .
GOLD:	So Joshua and all his fighting men traveled to the water near Merom and attacked suddenly .

ID:	512
INPUT:	Áádóó yaa ádzaago ání , Ná naal'a'í nishłíinii , ha'át'íísh nishłį́ ? Jó , łééchąą'í daaztsáaniigi yee' ánísht'éego ayóogo shíninidlį́įgo shiníníł'į́ .
PRED:	He bowed down and said , “ Your servant , why do you see me like a dead dead dead dead dead woman ? ”
GOLD:	Mephibosheth bowed respectfully and exclaimed , “ Who is your servant , that you should show such kindness to a dead dog like me ? ”

ID:	513
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro éí Jóseph áyidííniid , Neiseełgo , shoo , tooh nílínígíí bibąąhgóó sézį́ , nisin .
PRED:	And Pharaoh said to Joseph , Behold , I am standing by the river .
GOLD:	So Pharaoh told Joseph his dream . “ In my dream , ” he said , “ I was standing on the bank of the Nile River ,

ID:	514
INPUT:	éí ałk'idą́ą́' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii dadiyinii yaa dahoolne'ígi át'éego , t'áá ałtsoní hasht'éédoo'nííł baa hoolzhiizhjį' yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	In those days , as the prophets have spoken , so shall the end of heaven be at the end of the end .
GOLD:	For he must remain in heaven until the time for the final restoration of all things , as God promised long ago through his holy prophets .

ID:	515
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yaa yínííł danilį́įgo yóó'ádeidoolííł , áko Jerobówam bits'ą́ą́dóó hazlį́į'ii t'áá bí t'éiyá yóó'ádoolnííł , háálá Jerobówam ba'áłchíní bitahdóó t'áá bí t'éiyá Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God bich'į' yá'át'éehii bii' hólǫ́ǫgo bééhoozin .
PRED:	And all Israel will bury him , and he will be buried by the house of Jeroboam , because he alone is in the house of the Lord God of Israel .
GOLD:	All Israel will mourn for him and bury him . He is the only member of your family who will have a proper burial , for this child is the only good thing that the Lord , the God of Israel , sees in the entire family of Jeroboam .

ID:	516
INPUT:	Ayóó'áníínísh'níinii , dooládó' ayóó áníínílnin da , shoo , ayóó áníínílnin , jó , hasbídí yinílnáá' .
PRED:	How beautiful is your love , my love , and behold , your eyes are beautiful .
GOLD:	How beautiful you are , my darling , how beautiful ! Your eyes are like doves .

ID:	517
INPUT:	Náhookǫs nidahonees'ą́ądi kééhót'į́į́dę́ę́' díínááł ; ni áádóó diné ayóó ánéelą́ą'go , éí t'áá ałtso łį́į́' bił deíjeehgo , ayóó ánéelą́ą́' siláo yinéełgo siláo ayóó ánéelą́ą́' bił díínééł .
PRED:	You shall stand before the north , from the north side of the north , and you and all the people of war , with a great army .
GOLD:	You will come from your homeland in the distant north with your vast cavalry and your mighty army ,

ID:	518
INPUT:	Áko índa t'áá ákogi át'éego náádahaniihii áádóó didlidgo náádahaniihii índa t'áá át'é didlidgo nááhániihii baa nił nihoozhǫǫh doo . Áko índa nibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi dóola náádahidoonih .
PRED:	And thou shalt rejoice in righteousness , and in all the burnt offering , and all the burnt offering ; and they shall offer sacrifices upon the altar .
GOLD:	Then you will be pleased with sacrifices offered in the right spirit — with burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings.Then bulls will again be sacrificed on your altar .

ID:	519
INPUT:	Jó , tsénít'i' bighą́ą́'dóó yish'į́ , índa yílk'id bighą́ą́'dóó yish'į́ ; jó , t'áá sahdii kééhat'į́ , áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó doo bił ólta' da .
PRED:	Behold , I see you on the rock , and on the hill , for you dwell on the hills , and you will not be able to drive out of the nations .
GOLD:	I see them from the cliff tops ; I watch them from the hills.I see a people who live by themselves , set apart from other nations .

ID:	520
INPUT:	T'áá háiida saad bee hódzą́ yiyíí'įįdígíí éí atíhodi'doolnííł , nidi bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yidísinígíí bich'į' ni'doolyééł .
PRED:	Whoever speaks wisdom will be punished , but he who keeps his commandments will be given to him .
GOLD:	People who despise advice are asking for trouble ; those who respect a command will succeed .

ID:	521
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Éísa ádííniidígíí Ben-héídad yi'iilaago siláo dah deínéehii bindanit'a'í éí Ízrel bikin hadaas'áágóó Áíjan áádóó Dan áádóó Éíbel-beth-méíyakah índa Kí<unk> dahoolyéégóó t'áá át'é áádóó Náftalai dine'é bikéyah t'áá át'é yich'į' ayiis'a'go yik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	King Asa did as King Asa had commanded . He sent his army to the cities of Israel . He sent messengers to Dan , Dan , and all the land of Naphtali .
GOLD:	Ben-hadad agreed to King Asa 's request and sent the commanders of his army to attack the towns of Israel . They conquered the towns of Ijon , Dan , Abel-beth-maacah , and all Kinnereth , and all the land of Naphtali .

ID:	522
INPUT:	Áko Abáíyathar éí David bił hojoolne'go ájíní , Saul éí Bóhólníihii binááda'iiłniihii neistseed .
PRED:	Then Abiathar told David , “ Saul has killed the priests of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	When he told David that Saul had killed the priests of the Lord ,

ID:	523
INPUT:	Ákohgo t'ahdii ahił hojilne'go áádóó baa níjít'į́įgo , nít'éé' Jesus t'áá bí hwíighahgi yiizį' , áádóó bił nihijíkai .
PRED:	While they were still speaking , Jesus stood by them , and they went with him .
GOLD:	As they talked and discussed these things , Jesus himself suddenly came and began walking with them .

ID:	524
INPUT:	Ábner áádóó diné yił naakaígíí t'áá bił tł'éé' bíighah Árabah dzígaigóó bił jookahgo Jórdan tooh ha'naa nijíkaigo <unk> nahós'a'góó ch'íjíkaigo Méíhanéíyim kin shijaa'jį' nijíkai .
PRED:	Abner and his men were with him all night , and passed through the valley of the Jordan , and passed through the Jordan , and went to the border of Ephraim .
GOLD:	All that night Abner and his men retreated through the Jordan Valley . They crossed the Jordan River , traveling all through the morning , and did n't stop until they arrived at Mahanaim .

ID:	525
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasinii bił haz'áanii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii bidań'dítį́įhgo ádadoohłíiłgo ts'ídá aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ání góne' nidadooh'ááł .
PRED:	You shall put the ark on the ark of the covenant , and put it in the most holy place .
GOLD:	“ Then put the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on top of the Ark of the Covenant inside the Most Holy Place .

ID:	526
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus díidíígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go áhodííniid , T'áadoo nił yé'í ; t'óó iinídlą́ągo shaa dzíínílí , áko náábidi'doodlááł .
PRED:	But when Jesus heard these things , he said to him , “ Do n't be afraid ; believe in me , and be baptized . ”
GOLD:	But when Jesus heard what had happened , he said to Jairus , “ Do n't be afraid . Just have faith , and she will be healed . ”

ID:	527
INPUT:	Éí bąągo nihiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii ts'ídá t'áá ákóne' át'éhígi át'éego , nihí ałdó' ts'ídá t'áá ákóne' ádanoht'ée le' .
PRED:	Therefore , just as your Father is in heaven , so do you also do .
GOLD:	But you are to be perfect , even as your Father in heaven is perfect .

ID:	528
INPUT:	áádóó dé'éyóní nilíinii niyódí ádił haididoolbį́į́ł , áádóó bik'é nishínílnishii dé'éyóní bighan góne' yanáa'áa doo ;
PRED:	and the stranger shall be filled with blood ; and the stranger shall dwell in the house of strangers .
GOLD:	Strangers will consume your wealth , and someone else will enjoy the fruit of your labor .

ID:	529
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é ałníí'dóó bíí' silį́'ígíí éí daho'disnáanii ashdladiin jiníjaa'go hatahdóó t'áá dajíłá'ígo áádóó da'alį́'ígíí ashdladiin níjaa'go bitahdóó t'áá daałá'ígo éí Mózes ats'áyiiznilgo Líívai dine'é danilíinii Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzinii yaa ádahalyánígíí yeinínil . Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniidígíí yik'ehgo ádzaa .
PRED:	And from the half of the children of Israel , one thousand and twenty thousand , and twenty thousand , and twenty thousand of them , according to the commandment of the Lord , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	From the half-share given to the people , Moses took one of every fifty prisoners and animals and gave them to the Levites , who maintained the Lord 's Tabernacle . All this was done as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	530
INPUT:	Bikáá' nááda'jiiłniihígóó índa eda'alyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáhígóó , dah daask'id t' áá ałtso bighą́ą́'góó índa dziłghą́ą'di t'áá ałtsogóó , tsin dootł'izh naazkaadii t'áá át'é dabiyaagóó índa chéch'il díłch'ilgo naazkaadii t'áá ałtso biyaagóó áádóó eda'alyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáhígíí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii t'áá háádę́ę́' shį́į́ bich' į' nááda'jiiłniihgo nahaz'ánígóó hodine'é nidaaztseedii naazhjée'go daołtsą́ągo Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And ye shall see the altars , and all the hills , and all the hills , and all the hills , and every green tree , and every green tree , and every green tree , and every tree , and every green tree , and every green tree , and every green tree , which I am the Lord .
GOLD:	They will know that I am the Lord when their dead lie scattered among their idols and altars on every hill and mountain and under every green tree and every great shade tree — the places where they offered sacrifices to their idols .

ID:	531
INPUT:	Doo yá'áshóonii nahjį' nidizhní'ą́ągo éí t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii be'atiin azdoolkǫ'góó joogáał dooleeł ; diné ádaa áhályą́ągo yigáałii éí bii' sizíinii as'ah naagháago áyósin .
PRED:	The wicked will go through the way of the wicked , and the way of the righteous will come to the way of the righteous ; he will make the soul of the soul .
GOLD:	The path of the virtuous leads away from evil ; whoever follows that path is safe .

ID:	532
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago dízdiin yiską́ągo Nóah éí tsinaa'eeł bitsésǫ' ájiilaii ąą ájiilaago
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Noah opened the ark for forty days , that Noah opened the ark ,
GOLD:	After another forty days , Noah opened the window he had made in the boat

ID:	533
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Jórdan tooh ha'naa Kéínan kéyah góne' oonáago
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , and say unto them , When they go into the land of Canaan ,
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : When you cross the Jordan River into the land of Canaan ,

ID:	534
INPUT:	Díí éí baa naahkai doo : t'ááłá'í nootínígo bił kéédahoht'íinii saad t'áá aaníinii bee bił ałch'į' yádaałti' ; nihił yah ada'iiztiingi t'áá aaníinii índa k'é hwiindzin bee nidahodiyoh'aah ;
PRED:	This is what you shall do : every one of you shall speak to his neighbor , and give peace to him in the gate , and peace .
GOLD:	But this is what you must do : Tell the truth to each other . Render verdicts in your courts that are just and that lead to peace .

ID:	535
INPUT:	Na'iis<unk> dóó ch'éédzídzidígi át'éego , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díldzíiłgo ana'í ádanóolninii dadíí'įį ł .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , as it is gone out of the midst of the mouth of the enemy , so that they may see it .
GOLD:	When you arise , O Lord , you will laugh at their silly ideasas a person laughs at dreams in the morning .

ID:	536
INPUT:	Nikin bii' sohodizin yidahodeeznilgo adeideesk'ą́ą́' ; nízhi' bee wójíigo si'ą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę ahiih nídayiiskaadgo doo hodiyingóó ádahoolaa .
PRED:	They burned up the temple and burned it with fire . They destroyed it in your name , and destroyed it in the holy place .
GOLD:	They burned your sanctuary to the ground.They defiled the place that bears your name .

ID:	537
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Mózes kóyidííniid , éí Dził Sáínai honoojíidi naaki náhááh góne' átsé nídízídígíí binih íídą́ą́' Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ééjí'náago kóní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ In the first year of Sinai , in the first year of the first month , in the wilderness of Sinai , saying ,
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai . In the first month of that year he said ,

ID:	538
INPUT:	Ákohgo David éí Jánathan ábijiní , Nizhé'é t'áá na'níle'dii nich'į' haadzíi'goshą' , éí háí shił hodoolnih ?
PRED:	Then David said to Jonathan , “ Your father came and spoke to you , who can tell me ? ”
GOLD:	Then David asked , “ How will I know whether or not your father is angry ? ”

ID:	539
INPUT:	Áko nihitahgi doo ła'da bahojoobá'í da doo , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii kéyah nihíí' dadooleełgo nihaidiní'ánígíí biyi' Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	No one is poor among you , because the Lord your God will bless you in the land which he has given you .
GOLD:	“ There should be no poor among you , for the Lord your God will greatly bless you in the land he is giving you as a special possession .

ID:	540
INPUT:	T'áá shizááká nisébaa' , ałtso yiishtee' , na'nitin woodláanii ts'ídá t'áá ákót'éego íínísingo ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	How long I have rebelled against you , and you have rebelled against your teaching , and the end of the faith has come .
GOLD:	I have fought the good fight , I have finished the race , and I have remained faithful .

ID:	541
INPUT:	Béégashii yáázh be'elyaii ałdó' aláahgo naat'áanii ayóó át'éii baa dooltééł biniyé Asíriya kéyahgóó eeltį́į doo , áko Íífreiyim t'óó ádaa yánídzin doo , índa Ízrel t'áá bí kót'éego daaníinii bił baa yáhodoosįįł ?
PRED:	The calf also shall be given to the king of Assyria to Assyria , and Ephraim shall be ashamed , and they shall be ashamed , and they shall be ashamed ?
GOLD:	This idol will be carted away to Assyria , a gift to the great king there.Ephraim will be ridiculed and Israel will be shamed , because its people have trusted in this idol .

ID:	542
INPUT:	Éí bąą bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , díí aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké ałtso naaztseed , ha'níigo nijeehwiit'aahígíí t'áadoo yinídlą́ągo ni'diił'áhí ; jó , Ámnan t'éiyá bi'diisyį́ .
PRED:	Therefore , my lord , the king 's sons did not believe that he had slain all the sons of the king , because Amnon was dead .
GOLD:	No , my lord the king , your sons are n't all dead ! It was only Amnon . ”

ID:	543
INPUT:	T'áá háiida daz'diits'a'ii Níłch'i Diyinii éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii kwííłníigo yee yił halne'ígíí háni'dii dajíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	If anyone has ears , let him hear what the Spirit says to the church .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches .

ID:	544
INPUT:	Tsé nástł'inígíí diyingo nideideez'ą́
PRED:	The Lord 's People
GOLD:	Dedication of Jerusalem 's Wall

ID:	545
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Ha'át'íísh biniyé náshiinikąąh ? Ízrel dine'é , Bíni'dii náásgóó wohnééł , bidiní .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Why do you ask me ? Let Israel go through your way . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you crying out to me ? Tell the people to get moving !

ID:	546
INPUT:	Nidi bee nitsíníkeesii ná dadidiits'į́į́ł daniidzin , háálá díí nahadlá bee ałts'á'áldah ha'nínígíí t'áá ałtsogóó dooda daha'níigo bee yádaati'go nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	But we will hear your thoughts , for we know that this is the glory of this covenant .
GOLD:	But we want to hear what you believe , for the only thing we know about this movement is that it is denounced everywhere . ”

ID:	547
INPUT:	Nááshidi'yoolnihígíí koshídę́ę́' hoolzhish ; dadeestsaałii baa hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	The end of my life is near , and the time of death is at hand .
GOLD:	As for me , my life has already been poured out as an offering to God . The time of my death is near .

ID:	548
INPUT:	Áko Neiyómii hahastiin yę́ę Elímelek wolyéii ła' diné ayóó át'é at'íinii yik'éí nilį́ ; éí Bó'az wolyé .
PRED:	Now Naomi , the husband of Boaz , was a great man named Boaz , who was of Boaz .
GOLD:	Now there was a wealthy and influential man in Bethlehem named Boaz , who was a relative of Naomi 's husband , Elimelech .

ID:	549
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee bi'dójíigo yigáłígíí bik'ihojidlíi doo ! Bóhólníihii bikin si'ą́ą́dóó naa dahwii'niih .
PRED:	Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord ! Blessed is the house of the Lord in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Bless the one who comes in the name of the Lord.We bless you from the house of the Lord .

ID:	550
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , haa nízahdishą' índa nihich'į' nínádííyis ? Ná nidaal'a'í daniidlíinii nihaa a'áhí nídíníídzįįł .
PRED:	How long will you answer us , O Lord ? How long will your servants answer us ?
GOLD:	O Lord , come back to us ! How long will you delay ? Take pity on your servants !

ID:	551
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bá dahwéelzhíísh
PRED:	The Death of the People
GOLD:	A Time for Everything

ID:	552
INPUT:	Díí Bóhólníihii bikéyahgi doo náádahojídlǫ́ǫ da dooleeł , nidi Íífreiyim dine'é éí Ííjip kéyahgóó nihéédookah índa Asíriya kéyahgi ch'iyáán dááchǫ'ii deiyą́ą doo .
PRED:	This is the land of the Lord , but Ephraim will return to Egypt , and they will eat food in Assyria .
GOLD:	You may no longer stay here in the Lord 's land.Instead , you will return to Egypt , and in Assyria you will eat foodthat is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	553
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii bii' áhodoo'niidígíí bik'ehgo hasbídí naakigo , doodago hasbídíłgaii biyázhí naakigo nááhizhdoołnih ałdó' biniyé Jerúsalemgóó hozhníłtį́ .
PRED:	And he brought two young lambs to Jerusalem , just as the law of the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	So they offered the sacrifice required in the law of the Lord — “ either a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons . ”

ID:	554
INPUT:	<unk> jiiłniihígíí biláahgo t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó doo haada yit'éégóó ájooníiłgo bee Bóhólníihii bił hojíshǫ́ .
PRED:	The Lord makes the way of justice , and does what is right .
GOLD:	The Lord is more pleased when we do what is right and justthan when we offer him sacrifices .

ID:	555
INPUT:	Ch'il yíl'áagi da'ałchozh doo ; dził<unk> di ch'il yíl'áago éí daabígo ákwii da'ałchozh doo ; ákwii ch'il yíl'áagi náhinoojah doo ; Ízrel dine'é bidził daní'áii bighą́ą́'góó ch'il deíl'áágóó da'ałchozh doo .
PRED:	They will eat grass in the hills , and they will sit in the hills ; they will sit on the hills of Israel .
GOLD:	Yes , I will give them good pastureland on the high hills of Israel . There they will lie down in pleasant places and feed in the lush pastures of the hills .

ID:	556
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí shijéé' góyaa Daniel ahoolghan
PRED:	Daniel 's Death
GOLD:	Daniel in the Lions ' Den

ID:	557
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso yá'át'éehgo nihaa yádaałti'go doo hojooba' ájíníi da , háálá ákódanihił'íinii dabizhé'é yę́ę t'áá ákót'éego t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii yaa yádaałti' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Woe to all the people who speak good things , because the fathers spoke to you .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you who are praised by the crowds , for their ancestors also praised false prophets .

ID:	558
INPUT:	Júdah dine'éésh t'áá óolyéego yóó'adííní'ą́ ? Nii' sizíiniísh Záíyan yiyíí'įįd ? Ha'át'íísh biniyé nihitaa síníłhaalgo <unk> dasiildááz , áko bee nídeidziih dooígíí ádin ? Bee ach'į' hózhóonii há dadéet'į́į'go naháatą́ , nidi yá'át'éehii doo nihee haleeh da . Yá'át'ééh nídadiidleełígíí biba' naháatą́ą nidi , t'óó nihich'į' nídahodii'nááh !
PRED:	Why do you love the people of Judah ? Why have you cast out your soul to Zion ? Why have you put us to death ? We have no joy for us , but we have no peace . ”
GOLD:	Lord , have you completely rejected Judah ? Do you really hate Jerusalem ? Why have you wounded us past all hope of healing ? We hoped for peace , but no peace came.We hoped for a time of healing , but found only terror .

ID:	559
INPUT:	Áadi kééhojit'į́įgo Hérad yę́ę daaztsą́ . Áko , ShiYe' Ííjipdę́ę́' wóshdę́ę́' ch'ínínááh bidííniid , níigo Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God yá halne'ii biniit'aa yee haadzíi'ii bohoolyaa .
PRED:	And Herod died there , and he was dead . And he said unto him , Come out of Egypt , and said , The Lord hath spoken through the prophet of the prophet .
GOLD:	and they stayed there until Herod 's death . This fulfilled what the Lord had spoken through the prophet : “ I called my Son out of Egypt . ”

ID:	560
INPUT:	Áádóó Éísa éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo táá' náhááh binih Aháíjah biye' Béíyasha éí Térzah kin haal'áagi Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é binazhnit'áago naadiin dį́į́' nááhai .
PRED:	In the third year of Asa king of Judah , Baasha the son of Baasha was over all Israel for forty years .
GOLD:	Baasha son of Ahijah began to rule over all Israel in the third year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . Baasha reigned in Tirzah twenty-four years .

ID:	561
INPUT:	Nihoodzoh biyi'jígo hasht'ehodít'éego áyósin ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' agháago yá'ádaat'éehii lą'ígo ná áyósin .
PRED:	He makes peace in thy house ; He makes the grain of wheat .
GOLD:	He sends peace across your nationand satisfies your hunger with the finest wheat .

ID:	562
INPUT:	Áko abínígo diné bich'į' yéíłti' , áádóó i'íí'ą́ągo she'asdzą́ą́ daaztsą́ áádóó , Baa nidíínaał , shi'di'níigo bee shich'į' ha'oodzíi'ii hoos'įįdgo baa niséyá .
PRED:	And in the morning I spoke unto the people in the morning , and my wife died , and I have done according to the commandment that I commanded thee .
GOLD:	So I proclaimed this to the people the next morning , and in the evening my wife died . The next morning I did everything I had been told to do .

ID:	563
INPUT:	Nibee haz'áanii doo baa shił nihoozhǫǫhgóogo éí shich'į' nahwii'náago dasétsą́ą doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	If I had not seen your law , I would have died .
GOLD:	If your instructions had n't sustained me with joy , I would have died in my misery .

ID:	564
INPUT:	Éí , Ííjip dine'é nohłíinii , nihitahgi Féro áádóó bá nidaal'a'í bik'ijį' bee éédahózinii índa t'óó bik'eda'ayóii áyiilaa ni' .
PRED:	And he hath done wonders among you , O Egypt , and upon Pharaoh 's servants , and upon his servants , and upon his servants ,
GOLD:	He performed miraculous signs and wonders in Egyptagainst Pharaoh and all his people .

ID:	565
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ábijiní , Díishą' háí bitsiits'iin bik'i si'ą́ , áádóó háísh bízhi' bikáá' ?
PRED:	He said to them , “ Who is this head ? Who is it sitting on his name ? ”
GOLD:	he asked , “ Whose picture and title are stamped on it ? ”

ID:	566
INPUT:	éí bijį́įdi hazhó'ó dínóosééł biniyé hasht'einilaa áádóó k'idííníláhígíí ła'a jį́ nizhónígo nooséełgo íinilaa , nidi t'óó báhádzidgo yínííł áde nídíníílt'į́įłgo baa yínííł nanináa doo .
PRED:	In that day you have prepared for your life , and you have made the first day , but you will give your joy to your soul , but you will give you sorrow .
GOLD:	They may sprout on the day you set them out ; yes , they may blossom on the very morning you plant them , but you will never pick any grapes from them.Your only harvest will be a load of grief and unrelieved pain .

ID:	567
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biyi'dóó doo bits'ą́ą́' yóó'adoo'dił da biniyé ts'ídá alą́ąjį' diné bídahólníhígíí táá' niinínil ; Daniel éí ajítahgo alą́ąjį' hóhólnííh .
PRED:	Daniel set three princes before the king 's kingdom , so that Daniel would not be forgiven from his kingdom .
GOLD:	The king also chose Daniel and two others as administrators to supervise the high officers and protect the king 's interests .

ID:	568
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iidzííhjí náádahaniihii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Procedures for the Sin Offering

ID:	569
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Christ t'áágééd dahinohnáago Ízrel dine'é doo bídadíínóht'i'góó naałdeeh nít'éé' . Diyin God bił aha'deet'ą́ yee nihoní'áanii doo nihídéét'i' da nít'éé' . Ił chohoo'į́ nihee ádingo Diyin God t'áágééd kééhoht'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę béédaałniih .
PRED:	In that time , you would not be punished in Israel , but you will not remember the covenant of God , but you will not remember his covenant .
GOLD:	In those days you were living apart from Christ . You were excluded from citizenship among the people of Israel , and you did not know the covenant promises God had made to them . You lived in this world without God and without hope .

ID:	570
INPUT:	Diné nabóhonitaahgo ha'ólnínígíí bik'ihojidlí , háálá na'íhonitaah bik'esdeesdlį́į'go bééhoozingo iináájí naat'á ch'ah Diyin God haididoo'ááł , éí Bóhólníihii ayóó'ádabó'níinii bíí' dooleełgo yee yich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	Blessed is the man who is afflicted , because he who sees the water shall give him a crown of life , and the Lord hath spoken to him that loves him .
GOLD:	God blesses those who patiently endure testing and temptation . Afterward they will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love him .

ID:	571
INPUT:	Nidi Neiyómii hazháá'áád nidilt'éhígíí ábijiní , Nílááh , nihimá bighangóó nídóht'aash . Shí áádóó ádajídinígíí nihaa jiinohba' yę́ęgi át'éego Bóhólníihii nihił hólǫ́ǫgo nihaa jooba' doo .
PRED:	But Naomi said to his brothers , “ Go back to your mother 's house . The Lord is with you , just as you have done . ”
GOLD:	But on the way , Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law , “ Go back to your mothers ' homes . And may the Lord reward you for your kindness to your husbands and to me .

ID:	572
INPUT:	Áko ánáázhdoo'niid , Shinanit'a'í nílíinii , ha'át'íishą' biniyé ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo shikéé' nahídá ? Haashą' yisdzaa ? Ha'át'íí doo yá'áshóonii shį́įshą' baa niséyá ?
PRED:	And he said , O my lord , why have thy servant followed me ? What have I done evil ?
GOLD:	Why are you chasing me ? What have I done ? What is my crime ?

ID:	573
INPUT:	T'áadoo aa nídaaht'íní , áko nihí ałdó' doo nihaa nídahódóot'įįł da ; t'áadoo át'éégóó t'áadoo diné bá hadahohdziihí , áko nihí ałdó' t'áadoo át'éégóó diné doo nihá hadadoodzih da ; bąąhági át'éii ahá yóó'adahidoh'aah , áko nihí ałdó' nihibąąhági át'éii nihá yóó'adahididoot'ááł ;
PRED:	Do n't judge you , and you will not judge you . You will not judge anyone . You will not be guilty . You will forgive your sins .
GOLD:	“ Do not judge others , and you will not be judged . Do not condemn others , or it will all come back against you . Forgive others , and you will be forgiven .

ID:	574
INPUT:	Nidi doo dadoohts'į́į́hgóogo nihi'áshodahódli'ígíí biniinaa shii' sizíinii nidahont'ingóó yicha doo , áádóó Bóhólníihii bidibé naakaii bidisnáago yóó'abidoojaa'ígíí biniinaa shinák'eeshto' t'áá íiyisí náálį́įgo yishcha doo .
PRED:	But if you do not listen to me , my soul will weep in a place , and my tears will weep in the flock of the Lord , because of the sheep of the Lord .
GOLD:	And if you still refuse to listen , I will weep alone because of your pride.My eyes will overflow with tears , because the Lord 's flock will be led away into exile .

ID:	575
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bich'į' ádił asisziihígíí biniinaa yee hashkéii yee atíshiilaajį' ha'ííníshníi doo , índa shá na'ak'íyáłti'go bee ádąąh dahosist'ánígíí shá yá'át'ééh neheleeh ; adinídíinjį' shił nidoo'ashgo bit'áá ákogi át'éii yideestsééł .
PRED:	I have sinned against the Lord , because I have sinned against my enemies , and I will see the light of my righteousness .
GOLD:	I will be patient as the Lord punishes me , for I have sinned against him.But after that , he will take up my caseand give me justice for all I have suffered from my enemies.The Lord will bring me into the light , and I will see his righteousness .

ID:	576
INPUT:	Nihił dahółánígíí nahjį' kódabi'dólne' laanaa nisin !
PRED:	And so that they may be ashamed of you , that they may be ashamed .
GOLD:	I just wish that those troublemakers who want to mutilate you by circumcision would mutilate themselves .

ID:	577
INPUT:	Díí kin bii' sohodizin bibee haz'áanii át'é . Dziłghą́ą'gi kin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí éí t'áá bił áádóó bik'i dinaago haz'ánígíí t'áá sahdii ats'ádeet'ą́ , áádóó t'áá íiyisí hodiyingo haz'ą́ą doo . Díí lą́ą kin bii' sohodizin bibee haz'áanii át'é , jó'akon .
PRED:	This is the law of the sanctuary : the temple , and the temple , and the holy place , and the holy place , and the holy place . This is the law .
GOLD:	And this is the basic law of the Temple : absolute holiness ! The entire top of the mountain where the Temple is built is holy . Yes , this is the basic law of the Temple .

ID:	578
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God yá naal'a'í baazhníyáago bił hojoolne' . Áko ání , Nílááh , ak'ah naa nahóniihgo nąąh háá'áhígíí niná'ayídlé , áádóó ni áádóó na'áłchíní ak'ah yidziihígíí bee ákidaahdlá .
PRED:	And he came to the servant of God , and told him . And he said , Go , take away the oil from you , and take away the oil of your children , and the oil of oil .
GOLD:	When she told the man of God what had happened , he said to her , “ Now sell the olive oil and pay your debts , and you and your sons can live on what is left over . ”

ID:	579
INPUT:	Shizhé'é bighangóó nihideesh'nééł t'áá íiyisí bídin nilį́į́ nít'é'ígíí k'ad ákǫ́ǫ́ yínééł , nidi ha'át'íishą' biniyé dinéshchíín shee níní'į́į́' ?
PRED:	But now I will go back to your father 's house , but now , why have you found the gods ?
GOLD:	I can understand your feeling that you must go , and your intense longing for your father 's home . But why have you stolen my gods ? ”

ID:	580
INPUT:	Hoł łá'í nohłį́įgo nihąąh nídahineeshgizhígíí éí doo yílá bee nihąąh nídahineeshgizhii át'ée da , nidi ts'ísee k'ehgo bąąhági ádanoht'éhígíí nahjį' kóyiilaago Christ bee nihąąh nídahineeshgizhii át'é .
PRED:	If you are circumcised , you are not circumcised by the hands of the hands , but if you are circumcised by the flesh , you are circumcised .
GOLD:	When you came to Christ , you were “ circumcised , ” but not by a physical procedure . Christ performed a spiritual circumcision — the cutting away of your sinful nature .

ID:	581
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii atíjíł'íinii índa diné bídahólníihii t'áá ákogi át'éego deíkáahii biniinaa názníłts'ingo doo yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	Moreover , it is not good for the righteous and for the righteous .
GOLD:	It is wrong to punish the godly for being goodor to flog leaders for being honest .

ID:	582
INPUT:	Shí átsé Záíyan ábidideeshniił , Níníł'į́ , níníł'į́ , áko hane' yá'át'éehii yaa halne'ii Jerúsalem baa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	I will say to Zion , “ Look at your eyes , and I will give the Good News to Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	I was the first to tell Zion , ‘ Look ! Help is on the way ! ' I will send Jerusalem a messenger with good news .

ID:	583
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí óola naat'á gish yee Esther yich'į' yideeztsih . Áko Esther nízhdii'na'go aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó jiizį' .
PRED:	So the king gave Esther the gold that he had given to Esther . So Esther rose up and stood before the king .
GOLD:	Again the king held out the gold scepter to Esther . So she rose and stood before him .

ID:	584
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' t'ááká ła'da yah ooya' lágo ; t'áá hazhó'ó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é ninádaalnishii t'éiyá yah anídaakah doo , háálá éí dadiyin , nidi dine'é t'áá ałtso éí Bóhólníihii bá hada'dzisíid doo .
PRED:	But no one shall enter into the house of the Lord except the priests , and the Levites , and the Levites shall enter into the house of the Lord ; for all the people shall know the Lord .
GOLD:	Remember , only the priests and Levites on duty may enter the Temple of the Lord , for they are set apart as holy . The rest of the people must obey the Lord 's instructions and stay outside .

ID:	585
INPUT:	Áádóó Biizáliyel bíni' bíighahgo Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii bii' hólǫ́ǫgo hóyą́ągo áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįhgo áádóó bił ééhózingo índa naanish ał'ąą ádaat'éii yiyiichįįhgo áyósin .
PRED:	And Benaiah made the Spirit of God with wisdom , and understanding , and knowledge , and knowledge .
GOLD:	The Lord has filled Bezalel with the Spirit of God , giving him great wisdom , ability , and expertise in all kinds of crafts .

ID:	586
INPUT:	Áko t'ááłá'í damóo azlį́į'jį' jilą'í bidziilgo hoł aha'didoot'ááł , nidi éí damóo aleehígíí ałníí'góó hoolzhishgo didlidgo nááhániihii índa náá'iiniihígíí áidoosįįł . Áádóó ałtso ábi'didooldįįł nideet'áanii baa hoolzhiizhjį' ni'iiłchǫǫhii éí diyingo haz'ánígi t'áá íiyisí doo haldingóó áhodoolííł .
PRED:	And he shall make a covenant with many years , but half the half thereof shall be cut off ; and the burnt offering and the burnt offering shall be cut off , and the priest shall make an end for the end of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	The ruler will make a treaty with the people for a period of one set of seven , but after half this time , he will put an end to the sacrifices and offerings . And as a climax to all his terrible deeds , he will set up a sacrilegious object that causes desecration , until the fate decreed for this defiler is finally poured out on him . ”

ID:	587
INPUT:	Áádóó jó'akon , diné yíl'áhígíí ła' hadoolghaazhgo ání , Na'nitiní , nánooshkąąh , shiye' nilíinii t'áá éí t'éiyá she'a<unk> 'ígíí shá dínííł'įįł ;
PRED:	And behold , one of the multitude cried out , saying , Master , I pray thee , I pray thee , I pray thee , my son , that I may make a place for me .
GOLD:	A man in the crowd called out to him , “ Teacher , I beg you to look at my son , my only child .

ID:	588
INPUT:	Tł'oh bee yilzhéhí áádóó bee nihwiildlaadí áádóó tł'oh bee naaljoołí áádóó tsénił índa béégashii bee náníljishí bik'ą́ą́h da'iizhaazhii háádahak'ashgo éí naadiin naaki shékel wolyéii bą́ą́h ílį́ .
PRED:	And thou shalt take thy father , and thy grain , and thy oxen , and thy cattle , and thy cattle , and thy ox , and thirty shekels of thirty shekels .
GOLD:	The charges were as follows : a quarter of an ounce of silver for sharpening a plowshare or a pick , and an eighth of an ounce for sharpening an ax or making the point of an ox goad .

ID:	589
INPUT:	Áko ádíshní , Bóhólníihii , ha'át'íishą' baa nideeshaał ? Áko Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíí' , Nídiidáahgo , Damáskasjį' dínááh , baa nidíínaałii biniyé nini'deeltínígíí t'áá ałtso áadi bee nił hodoonih .
PRED:	And I said , Lord , what shall I do ? And the Lord answered me , Arise , and tell me all that thou hast done in Damascus .
GOLD:	“ I asked , ‘ What should I do , Lord ? ' “ And the Lord told me , ‘ Get up and go into Damascus , and there you will be told everything you are to do . '

ID:	590
INPUT:	Mózes éí díí bee haz'áanii yee Ízrel dine'é yich'į' hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	Moses spoke to the people of Israel , saying ,
GOLD:	This is the body of instruction that Moses presented to the Israelites .

ID:	591
INPUT:	Éí bitsį' doo doodį́įł da ; daaztsą́ągo bits'íís doo bídahididoohnáał da ; éí nihidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	You shall not eat the meat of the flesh ; you shall not eat it . You shall not eat it .
GOLD:	You may not eat the meat of these animals or even touch their carcasses . They are ceremonially unclean for you .

ID:	592
INPUT:	Ákohgo Íísa éí hazhé'é bizaad jidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yéego bąą háni'go hajííchah , áko hazhé'é ábijiní , Shizhé'é nílíinii , t'áá shǫǫdí shí ałdó' shik'ijiinídliih .
PRED:	When Esau heard the words of his father , he cried out to him , and said to his father , “ My father , please bless me . ”
GOLD:	When Esau heard his father 's words , he let out a loud and bitter cry . “ Oh my father , what about me ? Bless me , too ! ” he begged .

ID:	593
INPUT:	Éfesasgi Apálas hane' yá'át'éehii yaa halne'
PRED:	The Good News in Ephesus
GOLD:	Apollos Instructed at Ephesus

ID:	594
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii t'áá ákogi ájít'éhígíí yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo , áko doo ákwii é'ét'éii baa nijigháago , índa diné t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii doo daaldinii yaa naakaígíí baa nijiyáago , da' éísh diné jiináa doo ? T'áá ákogi ádaat'éii baa nijiyáhígíí doo há bééhodoonih da , háálá hoł nilíinii bik'ijį' dzizlį́į'go índa ádił adzisiihgo ízhdiilyaaígíí t'áá éí biniinaa dazdootsaał .
PRED:	If you do what is right , do you want to do what is wrong . If you do evil things , do you want to do what is wrong . If you do wrong , you will die because he will die .
GOLD:	However , if righteous people turn from their righteous behavior and start doing sinful things and act like other sinners , should they be allowed to live ? No , of course not ! All their righteous acts will be forgotten , and they will die for their sins .

ID:	595
INPUT:	Bí lą́ą nihaa dahojoobá'ígo ádaniit'éego nihénáálnii' ni' , háálá aa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	He remembered us , because his mercy endures forever .
GOLD:	He remembered us in our weakness.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	596
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , níí' nilíinii bitahjį' ał'ąą dine'é anáásą́ągo nidahaazná ; nikin bii' hodílzinii dayííłchǫ' ; Jerúsalem kints'iil ádayiilaa .
PRED:	O God , the nations have become a desolation among your inheritance ; they have built your sanctuary ; Jerusalem has made a desolation .
GOLD:	O God , pagan nations have conquered your land , your special possession.They have defiled your holy Templeand made Jerusalem a heap of ruins .

ID:	597
INPUT:	Shizhé'é bik'éí bidine'é bitahgóó díínááł , áádę́ę́' shiye' be'asdzą́ą́ dooleełígíí bił nídíít'ash .
PRED:	And thou shalt stand among my father 's house , and shalt bring him to my son 's wife .
GOLD:	Go instead to my father 's house , to my relatives , and find a wife there for my son . '

ID:	598
INPUT:	Díí yiziłígíí bee nihá hahodoolzhish ; éí t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh alą́ąjį' nínádízi'ígíí nihá át'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	This will happen to you in the first year . It will happen to you in the first year .
GOLD:	“ From now on , this month will be the first month of the year for you .

ID:	599
INPUT:	Áko Dził Álivz adah góyaa k'adę́ę dashdiigháahgo , t'óó ahayóí bikéé' nidaakaígíí éí ádahooníiłii ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso dayiiłtsánígíí bąą bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dadilwoshgo Diyin God yaa dahaniihgo yaa nídiikai ,
PRED:	And when he came down to the Mount of Olives , many who followed him were following him cried out , and cried out to God , saying ,
GOLD:	When he reached the place where the road started down the Mount of Olives , all of his followers began to shout and sing as they walked along , praising God for all the wonderful miracles they had seen .

ID:	600
INPUT:	Hágo nihidííniid nít'éé' ; dooda danoozį́į́' ; éí bąą nihich'į' dah didiishnii' nít'éé' ; doo ła' shaa ná'áhodéélt'į́'í da .
PRED:	“ Come , ” I said to you , “ and you were not afraid . So I turned my face to you , and no one was among you . ”
GOLD:	“ I called you so often , but you would n't come.I reached out to you , but you paid no attention .

ID:	601
INPUT:	áko áda'ahidoo'niid , Haa'íshą' , díí doo nidahidii<unk> da , nidi háí bíí' dooleeł biniyé yáá'iilt'e' baa nidiikah . Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo kónínígíí bohodoolnííł biniyé ákódzaa : Shi'éé' ałtaadeis'nii' , índa shi'é'ígíí yiniyé yáá'iilt'e' yaa naaskai . Áko siláo ákódáát'įįd .
PRED:	They said to one another , “ Let 's not go to this place , but to whom it is written , ‘ Let 's take away my clothes , ' and the soldiers did so .
GOLD:	So they said , “ Rather than tearing it apart , let 's throw dice for it. ” This fulfilled the Scripture that says , “ They divided my garments among themselves and threw dice for my clothing. ” So that is what they did .

ID:	602
INPUT:	Áádóó akéédę́ę́' naagháhígíí yaa náánádzáago t'áá ákót'éego yich'į' hanáánáádzíí' , áko nít'éé' , Deeshááł , shizhé'é , dííniid , nidi t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ deeyáa da .
PRED:	He went back to the other side and spoke to them . He said , “ I will go , my father , but I did not go . ”
GOLD:	Then the father told the other son , ‘ You go , ' and he said , ‘ Yes , sir , I will . ' But he did n't go .

ID:	603
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí David áyidííniid , Filístiya dine'é bich'į' hidíídáałgo bił ahidíígą́łígíí doo bíninil'ą́ą da , háálá t'ahdii ashkii nílį́ ; bí éí t'áá ániid naagháádą́ą́' ana'ał'íinii nilį́ .
PRED:	Saul said to David , “ You are not able to go back to the Philistines , because the boy is still a boy who is a young man . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be ridiculous ! ” Saul replied . “ There 's no way you can fight this Philistine and possibly win ! You 're only a boy , and he 's been a man of war since his youth . ”

ID:	604
INPUT:	Diné ła'da doo yá'ádaat'éehii bits'ą́ą́dóó ho'díídee'go łeets'aa' ił nilį́įgo choo'íinii nahojílin doo , diyingo áho'diilyaa doo , índa kin bee bóhólníihii bá chojoo'į́į doo , t'áá ałtsojį' yá'át'ééh ájooníił doo biniyé hasht'eho'diilyaa doo .
PRED:	A man shall be clean from evil things , and the vessels of the house shall be prepared for good , and for the sake of the house shall be prepared .
GOLD:	If you keep yourself pure , you will be a special utensil for honorable use . Your life will be clean , and you will be ready for the Master to use you for every good work .

ID:	605
INPUT:	éidí shich'ą́ą́h naazh'áázh , áko doo t'áá shí t'éiyá bich'į' ahééh nisin da , nidi doo Jew dine'é danilíinii da'oodlánígíí áłah nídaadleehgóó t'áá ałtso ałdó' bich'į' ahééh danízin .
PRED:	So I do n't give thanks to you , but I do not give thanks to all the church .
GOLD:	In fact , they once risked their lives for me . I am thankful to them , and so are all the Gentile churches .

ID:	606
INPUT:	Móreshethdóó diné nilíinii Máíkah éí Heziikáíyah Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Júdah dine'é t'áá ałtso yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Dá'ák'ehgóó nihwiildlaadígíí nahalingo Záíyan hoolyéegi nihodiyooldlał , áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áhígíí éiyá t'óó yáádaa'áa dooleeł , áádóó Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ánígi dził éí tsin bee hodíłch'ilgi ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ályaaígíí nahalin dooleeł .
PRED:	In the days of Isaiah the son of Micah , king of Judah , saying , “ Thus says the Lord of hosts , ‘ As a garden in the field , so that it may be cut off as a garden , and the high places of Jerusalem will be like the hill country of God .
GOLD:	They said , “ Remember when Micah of Moresheth prophesied during the reign of King Hezekiah of Judah . He told the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Mount Zion will be plowed like an open field ; Jerusalem will be reduced to ruins ! A thicket will grow on the heightswhere the Temple now stands . '

ID:	607
INPUT:	Shą́ą́' , t'ah nihitah naashá yę́ędą́ą́' díí bee nihił dahweeshne' ni' , t'áásh béédaałniih ?
PRED:	Did you remember what I told you before I was with you before I was among you ?
GOLD:	Do n't you remember that I told you about all this when I was with you ?

ID:	608
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God éí nihokáá' dine'é t'áá íiyisí ayóó'ájó'níigo bąą haYe' t'ááłá'í há yizhchínígíí baazhníłtį́ , áko t'áá háiida boodlą́ągo baa dzólíhígíí éí doo ádoodįįł da , nidi iiná doo ninít'i'ii bee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	For God loved the world , because he loved one son , and whoever believes in him will not be destroyed , but the eternal life will be eternal .
GOLD:	“ For this is how God loved the world : He gave his one and only Son , so that everyone who believes in him will not perish but have eternal life .

ID:	609
INPUT:	Łahgo kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii náánáłahjį' ádeididooniił , Soł<unk> 'éi , Bóhólníihii bibee ak'ihojidlíii bídeídíikił , áádóó t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii há deiit'į́į doo ! Shí ałdó' ákǫ́ǫ́ díyá .
PRED:	And they shall say unto the inhabitants of the city , Come , let us ask the blessing of the Lord of hosts , and let us go .
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	610
INPUT:	Ła' ahijoolchííł éí hazhé'é dadzódziih áádóó dahamá doo bik'ideijidlíi da .
PRED:	Blessed are those who are born to their father , and blessed are not the mother 's mother .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	611
INPUT:	Łah sodizin bá náhoot'aahgóó náánéiikah , nít'éé' ch'ikę́ę́h léi' , naalte' nilį́įgo níłch'i bi'iiníziinii nabiiłáago náásgóó ádahodooníiłii yaa halne' lágo nihidááh níyá , éí yinaalte' nilíinii lą'í yá ní<unk> bįįhgo naagháá lá .
PRED:	And it came to pass on that day , that we went up to meet us , a servant , a servant , a servant of a devil , and he went to meet us . And there was many servants in the field .
GOLD:	One day as we were going down to the place of prayer , we met a slave girl who had a spirit that enabled her to tell the future . She earned a lot of money for her masters by telling fortunes .

ID:	612
INPUT:	Áko bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní , T'áá háiida bi'éétsoh naaki bee hólónígíí , éí bee ádinígíí ła' baazhdoołtsos , áádóó t'áá háiida ch'iyáán bee hólónígíí ałdó' t'áá ákózhdoonííł .
PRED:	And he said unto them , If anyone is in his robe , give him two robe , and he that is in it shall be done , he that is in it shall be done .
GOLD:	John replied , “ If you have two shirts , give one to the poor . If you have food , share it with those who are hungry . ”

ID:	613
INPUT:	Ni'iildlaad baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó ná'álkad baa hwiilzhíísh ; adéesyéél baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó yáti' baa hwiilzhíísh .
PRED:	A time for help and a time , a time for a time , and a time for a time to speak .
GOLD:	A time to tear and a time to mend.A time to be quiet and a time to speak .

ID:	614
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii dílzin yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo . Dayiiłtse'ígíí bik'ehgo doo einít'į́į da doo , índa yidiits'a'ii bik'ehgo doo ánihwii'aah da doo ,
PRED:	The Lord is glad , and he does not judge in the field , neither does he judge his ear according to his ear .
GOLD:	He will delight in obeying the Lord.He will not judge by appearancenor make a decision based on hearsay .

ID:	615
INPUT:	Éí bąą danihoolghalii éí t'áá ałtso dabidi'doolghał . Ni'ana'í t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo yisnááh dadooleeł ; nihighada'iisdláii éí bigháádahidoo'nił . Dandoolghał biniyé nidaniniłchéii éí dadíílghał biniyé naa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	Therefore all your enemies will be eaten ; every one of your enemies will be taken away , and they will be taken away from you ; I will give them to you , and I will give them to you .
GOLD:	“ But all who devour you will be devoured , and all your enemies will be sent into exile.All who plunder you will be plundered , and all who attack you will be attacked .

ID:	616
INPUT:	nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin bich'éédą́ą'gi , Sálaman bichaha'oh góne' Jesus nijighá .
PRED:	Jesus was in the entrance of the temple , where he was in the shadow of the temple .
GOLD:	He was in the Temple , walking through the section known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	617
INPUT:	Ch'ah dijoolí bikáá' átáa'gi tł'óółts'ósí yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí bee bíhidoolchah biniyé bíheestł'ǫ́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And they put it on his hand , and put it on a robe , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	They attached the medallion with a blue cord to Aaron 's turban , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	618
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' diné doo yá'ádaashóonii ahíikaigo baa yíkai ; éí Sálaman yę́ę biye' Riihobówam honiyé bidziilgo ída'diilyaa ; íídą́ą́' Riihobówam t'ah ániid naagháago ádíkásti'go doo bohoníłdzil da nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass after the wicked men , that they came to Rehoboam the son of Solomon , that he might be strong , and Rehoboam would not be able to speak to Rehoboam .
GOLD:	Then a whole gang of scoundrels joined him , defying Solomon 's son Rehoboam when he was young and inexperienced and could not stand up to them .

ID:	619
INPUT:	Shoo , Diyin God naagé nihá nílíinii , ak'ah bik'i yeiniziidgo yínísį́į'ii binii' níníł'į́ !
PRED:	Behold , O God , look at thy anointed , O God , for thy anointed .
GOLD:	O God , look with favor upon the king , our shield ! Show favor to the one you have anointed .

ID:	620
INPUT:	Áádóó k'aa' yee adziiłt'óohgo ana'í tainooskaad ; nída'iil<unk> go bee t'óó bił dahóóląąd .
PRED:	And he cast out his arrows , and cast them away ; and they shall be driven away .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	621
INPUT:	Bik'aa' yee adziiłt'óohgo ana'í tainooskaad ; nída'iil<unk> go áyiilaago yik'ee t'óó bił dahóóląąd .
PRED:	He has scattered his arrows ; He has sent them away , and they are afraid .
GOLD:	He shot his arrows and scattered his enemies ; great bolts of lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	622
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí diné hágo bizhdííniidgo Mízpeh kin shijaa'gi Bóhólníihii bá áłah ájiilaa ,
PRED:	Samuel called the people together at Mizpah , and gathered them together in Mizpah .
GOLD:	Later Samuel called all the people of Israel to meet before the Lord at Mizpah .

ID:	623
INPUT:	Dził Lébanan ní'áhídi kéédahoht'íinii , gad tahgóó danihighan ádaohłaii , nihił hahoníígaigo dooládó' nihik'édí hódlǫ́ǫ da doo . Asdzání éí awéé' bídii'na'go bił hahoníígaiígíigi át'éego nił hahodínóogah !
PRED:	How terrible it is for you , you who dwell in Lebanon , who dwell among you , you who dwell in the field ! It is not a woman who is like a child who is like a young child .
GOLD:	It may be nice to live in a beautiful palacepaneled with wood from the cedars of Lebanon , but soon you will groan with pangs of anguish — anguish like that of a woman in labor .

ID:	624
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Bóhonee'ą́ągo wódahdi yádiłhił bí'néél'ąądgo áádóó bóhonee'ą́ągo nahasdzáán bee niłdzilgo si'áanii naaskáá' ládą́ą́' , áadi índa lą́ą Ízrel dine'é baa nidadziskaii biniinaa ha'áłchíní ałtso yóó'ahideeshkał ni , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ If you make the sky grow up on the sky , then I will leave your children , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Just as the heavens can not be measuredand the foundations of the earth can not be explored , so I will not consider casting them awayfor the evil they have done.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	625
INPUT:	Danizhé'é yę́ę kéyah bee béédahózin dooleeł biniyé t'áá náshiinídą́'ídi tsé adeiztsih yę́ę doo nahjį' kódadíílíił da .
PRED:	You shall not cut off the first day of old , that they may know your fathers .
GOLD:	Do n't cheat your neighbor by moving the ancient boundary markersset up by previous generations .

ID:	626
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii yee ákászaaz , áádóó ts'ídá ba'ahódlíii yee ákászaaz .
PRED:	A righteous person is covered with shame , and a faithful person is covered with shame .
GOLD:	He will wear righteousness like a beltand truth like an undergarment .

ID:	627
INPUT:	Shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é bida'íínóhsin , áádóó nihiDiyin God bich'į'go dadinohyin doo .
PRED:	You shall keep all my commandments , and be holy to your God .
GOLD:	The tassels will help you remember that you must obey all my commands and be holy to your God .

ID:	628
INPUT:	Melkízedek éí Éíbram yik'ijisdli'
PRED:	Abram 's Death
GOLD:	Melchizedek Blesses Abram

ID:	629
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii t'áá bíni'dii daaztsáanii índa naaldlooshii ałchinii nibiisdláadii bik'ah t'áá ha'át'íhída biniyé chodaoł'į́į doo , nidi ts'ídá t'ááká daoyą́ą́' lágo .
PRED:	You must not eat any of the wild animals and wild animals . You must not eat it .
GOLD:	The fat of an animal found dead or torn to pieces by wild animals must never be eaten , though it may be used for any other purpose .

ID:	630
INPUT:	Asdzání saad hal'į́įgo báháchį'ii bits'ą́ądi honoojíidi kééhojit'į́į́jígo agháago yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	It is better to live in the wilderness , than to be angry with a woman .
GOLD:	It 's better to live alone in the desertthan with a quarrelsome , complaining wife .

ID:	631
INPUT:	Jéíkab dine'é danohłíinii áádóó Ízrel dine'é daohdziihígíí t'áá atsą́ą́dóó nánihidiinilii éí iishch'id biyi'dóó náás nihiníjaa'ii dashíísółts'ą́ą́' :
PRED:	Listen to me , O Jacob , who brought you out of the womb of the womb , from the womb of the children of Israel ,
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , descendants of Jacob , all you who remain in Israel.I have cared for you since you were born.Yes , I carried you before you were born .

ID:	632
INPUT:	Áádóó diné lą'í dabiyi'dę́ę́' níłch'i bi'iiníziinii hahaazhjéé' , éí dadilwoshgo ádaaní , Ni Christ Diyin God biYe' nílį́ ! Nidi Christ jílį́įgo bił béédahózingo bąą dzideeztehgo hadadoodzihígi t'áadoo bee bá hojiił'a' da .
PRED:	And many people cried out out out of him , saying , Thou art the Son of Christ , the Son of God . But when they knew that he was the Messiah , he did not answer him .
GOLD:	Many were possessed by demons ; and the demons came out at his command , shouting , “ You are the Son of God ! ” But because they knew he was the Messiah , he rebuked them and refused to let them speak .

ID:	633
INPUT:	Dooládó' bibee éédahózinii ayóó ádaat'ée da áádóó t'óó bik'eda'ayóii ayóó ábóodziil da ; aláahgo bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí hool'áágóó bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ ; éí oochííłdę́ę́' áádóó oochííłgóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	How great sign and wonders ! The kingdom of the kingdom is for ever and ever .
GOLD:	How great are his signs , how powerful his wonders ! His kingdom will last forever , his rule through all generations .

ID:	634
INPUT:	Áádóó díí ha'át'íí shį́į́ dahináanii dį́į'go yiiłtsánígíí t'ááłá'í nítínígo bit'a' dahastą́ągo t'áá naazį́į́ nít'éé' bii'dę́ę' nidi anáá' yee dadilkǫǫh , áko éí t'áadoo dadiiłheełí i'ii'aah áádóó niyiiłkaah kódaaní : Diyin , diyin , diyin , éí Bóhólníihii Diyin God Aláahgo Ayóó'áhóodziilii , hool'áádę́ę́' hojílóonii , k'ad hojílóonii , índa jidoogáałii !
PRED:	And these four living creatures which I have seen , and the eyes of every one that had four wings , but the night is the night , and the night , saying , ‘ The Lord God , the Most High , and the Most High . '
GOLD:	Each of these living beings had six wings , and their wings were covered all over with eyes , inside and out . Day after day and night after night they keep on saying , “ Holy , holy , holy is the Lord God , the Almighty — the one who always was , who is , and who is still to come . ”

ID:	635
INPUT:	Áko ánihidishní , Aheełt'éego nitsídaahkees , ahaa a'ááh danohsin , ałk'isóó danohłį́įgo ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'ní , nihá ádahwiinít'į́'ígo , índa a'ohgo ádaa nitsídaahkees .
PRED:	And I say unto you , Love , mercy , love , love , and humble .
GOLD:	Finally , all of you should be of one mind . Sympathize with each other . Love each other as brothers and sisters . Be tenderhearted , and keep a humble attitude .

ID:	636
INPUT:	Áádóó díí naałniihígíí łį́į́' ałdó' baa níłnii' doo ; dzaanéezda , ghą́ą́'ask'idiida , téliida índa ana'í dah deínéhígi naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso ałdó' baa níłnii' doo .
PRED:	And the horses shall be seen , and it shall be , and the camels , and the camels , and the beast , and all the beasts of the camp .
GOLD:	This same plague will strike the horses , mules , camels , donkeys , and all the other animals in the enemy camps .

ID:	637
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Béíyal-píyor yich'į' dahodeesáá'
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Moab Seduces Israel

ID:	638
INPUT:	Jesus éí diné łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ą́ągo néidiisá
PRED:	Jesus took the leprosy of leprosy ,
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	639
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	's Covenant Renewed

ID:	640
INPUT:	Shi'ana'í bidziilii índa shik'ee dadiniihii yits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshííłtį́ , háálá éí shiláahgo ádabóodziil nít'éé' .
PRED:	He saved me from my enemies and those who hate me ; for they were greater than I .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	641
INPUT:	éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áá shí nidi nihik'ijį' nishłį́įgo ał'ąą dine'é dabinááł nihiníi'gi atídanihish'į́į doo , jó'akon .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold , I am against you , and I will fight against you in the midst of the nations .
GOLD:	Therefore , I myself , the Sovereign Lord , am now your enemy . I will punish you publicly while all the nations watch .

ID:	642
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóí áłah silį́į'go ch'é'étiinjį' nidi doo hoo'a' da , áko Diyin God bizaad bee bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	Many of them gathered together , but he did not enter the gate , and told them the word of God .
GOLD:	Soon the house where he was staying was so packed with visitors that there was no more room , even outside the door . While he was preaching God 's word to them ,

ID:	643
INPUT:	Bíni'dii doo da'oo'į́į da dooleeł biniyé bináá' ádaniłdįįh , áádóó t'áá áłahjį' bich'į' nidahwiiłnáanii bik'ijį' dandaaz le' .
PRED:	Let them destroy their eyes , that they may not see , and let them be upon them all day long .
GOLD:	Let their eyes go blind so they can not see , and let their backs be bent forever . ”

ID:	644
INPUT:	áko éí dashdiiyáago aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bisiláo bindanit'a'í baa hodizhdoo'ááł biniyé bich'į' hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	So he went and spoke to the chief priests , and to the commanders of the army .
GOLD:	and he went to the leading priests and captains of the Temple guard to discuss the best way to betray Jesus to them .

ID:	645
INPUT:	Dóola yázhí , doodaii' dibé yázhída éí bits'íís t'áá ha'át'éhígida alááh , doodaii' a'oh níísánígíí éí náádi'yííłnihgo t'áá ni íinínízingo nááhániihii t'éí nááhíłniih doo , nidi ádee háínídzíí'jí nááhániihii át'éego éí doo ná dínóodzįįł da .
PRED:	If you offer a bull or a sheep , you shall offer it as a burnt offering , but you shall not offer it as a vow .
GOLD:	If a bull or lamb has a leg that is too long or too short , it may be offered as a voluntary offering , but it may not be offered to fulfill a vow .

ID:	646
INPUT:	Jó'áko nít'éé' háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' Jesus hashtł'ish áyiilaago ajoo'į́ áhoolaa lá .
PRED:	So Joab made a Sabbath on the Sabbath day , and he saw the clay .
GOLD:	because it was on the Sabbath that Jesus had made the mud and healed him .

ID:	647
INPUT:	Mó'ab éí shibii' tá'ádísgisí át'é . Íídam bikáa'jį' shikee' ahideeshxą́ą́ł . Filístiya dine'é éí bik'eh díshdlį́į'go hadideeshwosh .
PRED:	Moab is my feet , and I will put my feet on Edom ; I will cry out to the Philistines .
GOLD:	But Moab , my washbasin , will become my servant , and I will wipe my feet on Edomand shout in triumph over Philistia . ”

ID:	648
INPUT:	Yíní'ínígíí áádóó k'ad ádaat'éii índa náásgóó ádahodooníiłii k'ad bee ak'e'íłchí .
PRED:	Now write this to them : “ This is what I am going to do . ”
GOLD:	“ Write down what you have seen — both the things that are now happening and the things that will happen .

ID:	649
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh dideeshniił ? Shich'į' haadzíí' áádóó ałdó' shá ádzaa ; shich'į' nahwiisnáá'dóó bik'ijį' hazhóó'ógo yisháał doo .
PRED:	What should I say to me ? I have done to you , and I will turn against you again , and I will speak against you .
GOLD:	But what could I say ? For he himself sent this sickness.Now I will walk humbly throughout my yearsbecause of this anguish I have felt .

ID:	650
INPUT:	Ayóogo níyolígíí ííyolgo áyiilaa , áko tó náádadiidáhígíí ádahodiilzee' .
PRED:	He made the wind wind by the wind , and the waters of waters was no rain .
GOLD:	He calmed the storm to a whisperand stilled the waves .

ID:	651
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Diné áshłaaígíí shíni' neis'ą́ ; éí bąą diné áádóó naaldlooshii áádóó nidaa'na'ii índa nidaat'a'ii t'áá bił nahasdzáán bikáá' áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	The Lord said , “ I have made the man whom I have made . Therefore I will destroy man , beast , and birds . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ I will wipe this human race I have created from the face of the earth . Yes , and I will destroy every living thing — all the people , the large animals , the small animals that scurry along the ground , and even the birds of the sky . I am sorry I ever made them . ”

ID:	652
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'éii biniinaa atídabi'dil'íinii bik'idahojidlí , háálá yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii daabíí' .
PRED:	Blessed are those who are righteous , for the Kingdom of heaven is their inheritance .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are persecuted for doing right , for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs .

ID:	653
INPUT:	Áádóó diyingo naal'a'í tó bee bóhólnííh nilíinii kóníigo diséts'ą́ą́' , Diyin nílíinii , honílóonii índa hool'áádę́ę́' honílóonii , ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ánít'éego díí bee ánihwiyí'aah .
PRED:	And I heard the angel saying , O God , thou art righteous , and thy righteousness .
GOLD:	And I heard the angel who had authority over all water saying , “ You are just , O Holy One , who is and who always was , because you have sent these judgments .

ID:	654
INPUT:	Háálá dadine'é ayóó ádabóodziilii índa doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą́'góó shikéyah yaatįįh yíná ; náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí biwoo' índa náshdóítsohtsa'ii biwózhah nidahalin .
PRED:	For the mighty people are many , and they are many ; they are like a lion , a lion and a lion .
GOLD:	A vast army of locusts has invaded my land , a terrible army too numerous to count.Its teeth are like lions ' teeth , its fangs like those of a lioness .

ID:	655
INPUT:	Áko á naal'a'í índa bada'áłchíní alą́ąjį' nizhnínil , índa náá'ákéé' góne' Líyah áádóó ba'áłchíní nináájí'nil , áádóó Réíchel índa Jóseph éí ts'ídá akéédę́ę́' nizhnínil .
PRED:	And he set them before his servants , and his sons , and his children Leah , and his children , and Joseph went up from them .
GOLD:	He put the servant wives and their children at the front , Leah and her children next , and Rachel and Joseph last .

ID:	656
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Zerábabel yeidiní'áanii
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Promises for Zerubbabel

ID:	657
INPUT:	ádił nida'ayiilzí'ígíí biniinaa aláahgo naat'áanii nihindant'áago ádeinilaaígíí éí kéyah bikáá'góó t'óó ahayóí bá nida'nt'ą' áádóó ałdó' baa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihits'íís índa danihilį́į́' yee ádídahólnííh , áko nihí éí t'áá íiyisí ádił nitsiniikai .
PRED:	For the sins of our kings , which thou hast made for us , and for the fruit of many kings , and for the sake of the land , and for the sake of our flesh , and we have sinned .
GOLD:	The lush produce of this land piles up in the hands of the kings whom you have set over us because of our sins . They have power over us and our livestock . We serve them at their pleasure , and we are in great misery . ”

ID:	658
INPUT:	<unk> yim kin haal'áii , Sháíyan kin shijaa' , Anéí<unk> kin shijaa' ,
PRED:	And he set up its hands , and built it , and built it ,
GOLD:	Hapharaim , Shion , Anaharath ,

ID:	659
INPUT:	Áádóó tó bidáń'dítį́įhgi éí bich'éédą́ą́'góó atiinígi t'áá íiyisí t'ah abíínídą́ą́' ałní'ní'ą́ąjį' diné áádóó asdzání índa ak'idadi'yiitįįhii bich'į' bee haz'áanii bee bik'eda'ashchínígíí jííłta' , áko diné t'áá ałtso éí bee haz'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí wólta'go ts'ídá hazhó'ó deidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the people read in the gate of the gate , in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning , and all the people read the book of the law .
GOLD:	He faced the square just inside the Water Gate from early morning until noon and read aloud to everyone who could understand . All the people listened closely to the Book of the Law .

ID:	660
INPUT:	áko Sáíman Peter éí nayé'ágizhgo ííłní , Háishą' baa yáníłti' ? bidiní .
PRED:	Simon Peter said to Simon , “ Who are you talking about ? ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter motioned to him to ask , “ Who 's he talking about ? ”

ID:	661
INPUT:	Ákondi díí niye' ałjiłnii yił naaldeehgo ninaalye'é bee hiníná yę́ę ałtso yik'óoyáago nádzáhígíí , t'áá áko béégashii yáázh neesk'ahii bá síníłhį́ !
PRED:	But this is what you have done with a prostitute . You have done to the prostitute . You have done everything you have done . You have killed the bull .
GOLD:	Yet when this son of yours comes back after squandering your money on prostitutes , you celebrate by killing the fattened calf ! '

ID:	662
INPUT:	Diyin God iiná yaa bił hózhóonii
PRED:	The Good News of God
GOLD:	Live to Please God

ID:	663
INPUT:	Háálá kéyah bikáá' t'áá át'éé bee yíłhéél , áko kéyah bikáa'gi nílótsoh éí nanise' áádóó tsin naazkaadii bineest'ą' yi'oh niinítseedígíí ałtso dayííyą́ą́' , índa Ííjip kéyah bikáá' t'áá át'éé nít'éé' ch'il áádóó tsin naazkaadii índa nanise' daditłée'ii doo ła' yidzíi' da .
PRED:	For there was no rain over all the land , and all the trees that were on the earth , and all the trees of the tree , and all the trees of Egypt , and there was no rain in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	For the locusts covered the whole country and darkened the land . They devoured every plant in the fields and all the fruit on the trees that had survived the hailstorm . Not a single leaf was left on the trees and plants throughout the land of Egypt .

ID:	664
INPUT:	Ak'is , doodaléi' alah nilíinii ła' bik'i ni'iizt'óodgo áádóó ch'iyáán bee ádingo ,
PRED:	If a brother or a brother or a brother has no food , and there is no food .
GOLD:	Suppose you see a brother or sister who has no food or clothing ,

ID:	665
INPUT:	Áádóó tálent t'ááłá'í ba'ít'ánígíí ałdó' níyáago ádííniid , Shinanit'a'í , nééhasingo diné hashkéii nílį́ , háálá t'áadoo k'éé'dídléehgi ná'ígish , áádóó t'áadoo ná'oołch'ihgi hééł áná'iil'įįh ,
PRED:	And he that had received one talents came , and said , My lord , I know thee , that I know thee , because I have not planted the seed , and did not sow them .
GOLD:	“ Then the servant with the one bag of silver came and said , ‘ Master , I knew you were a harsh man , harvesting crops you did n't plant and gathering crops you did n't cultivate .

ID:	666
INPUT:	<unk> nas , éí Christ bá bił nideiilnishii , áádóó <unk> <unk> ayóó'óósh'níinii shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	Give thanks to him who is in Christ , and I love him .
GOLD:	Greet Urbanus , our co-worker in Christ , and my dear friend Stachys .

ID:	667
INPUT:	Jó'akonee' déédadołjahii t'áá ánółtso éí honooyééł nihinídaazt'i'ii danohłíinii , didadoołjé'ígíí biih hohkááh áádóó honooyééł biyi' naanídeínóhkááh . Díí shits'ą́ą́dóó nihee dahodooleeł ; yínííł bik'ee shoojée' doo .
PRED:	And all ye men of Benjamin shall come into the wilderness , and go into the wilderness ; and ye shall be afraid of me .
GOLD:	But watch out , you who live in your own lightand warm yourselves by your own fires.This is the reward you will receive from me : You will soon fall down in great torment .

ID:	668
INPUT:	Manáseh éí Íífreiyim yik'ijį' nilį́į doo ; Íífreiyim éí Manáseh yik'ijį' nilį́į doo , áádóó t'áá ła' bizhi'ee Júdah dine'é yik'ijį' nídidoot'ash . Azhą́ díí t'áá ałtsojį' kóhoolaa nidi , t'ah hach'į' báháchį'go hak'ijį' k'ídées'nii' .
PRED:	Manasseh shall be against Ephraim ; Ephraim shall be against Ephraim , and Ephraim shall come against Judah , and he shall return to all these things ; yet his hand is not stretched out his hand .
GOLD:	Manasseh will feed on Ephraim , Ephraim will feed on Manasseh , and both will devour Judah.But even then the Lord 's anger will not be satisfied.His fist is still poised to strike .

ID:	669
INPUT:	Niníbaal si'ą́ągi hótsaago ánílééh áádóó ła' t'áadoodaaí bíni'dii kééhwiit'į́įgi dáádadeezbaalii deidiłts'ǫǫd ; niníbaal bitł'óól nineezgo ádanile'go índa bá anídaalkałígíí niłdzilgo adaniłkaał .
PRED:	Make a tent full of death , and there is no one in it ; let the tent be broken , and let the bars be shut up .
GOLD:	“ Enlarge your house ; build an addition.Spread out your home , and spare no expense !

ID:	670
INPUT:	Ákót'éego sodadołzingo Diyin God Yisdánihiiníiłii bił yá'át'ééh índa bił hóshǫ́ .
PRED:	In this way you pray , God our Savior and our Savior .
GOLD:	This is good and pleases God our Savior ,

ID:	671
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin haal'áagi asdzání ła' , bąąhági ááníiłii nilį́įgo , Férisii bighan góne' dzizdáago ajiyą́ągo bił bééhoozin , áko tózis tsé alabáster yolyéhígíí bee ályaago ak'ah yee yah ayíí'ą́ ,
PRED:	And a woman in the city saw that he was sitting in the house of the Pharisees , and he was eating with oil , and he brought it in with oil .
GOLD:	When a certain immoral woman from that city heard he was eating there , she brought a beautiful alabaster jar filled with expensive perfume .

ID:	672
INPUT:	Áádóó Ish-bósheth yę́ę bitsiits'iin éí Hííbran kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii David yeiní'ą́ągo áyidííniid , Shoo , ni'ana'í Saul yę́ę éí ni'niiłhį́ yę́ę biye' Ish-bósheth kǫ́ǫ́ bitsiits'iin . Saul yę́ę áádóó ba'áłchíní éí Bóhólníihii díí jį́ aláahgo naat'áanii bóhonishníihii yá k'éidiidlaa .
PRED:	Saul gave David the head of Hebron to the king in Hebron . He said to David , “ Behold , the head of Saul , the head of Saul and the house of Saul , and the house of the Lord has given him this day . ”
GOLD:	When they arrived at Hebron , they presented Ishbosheth 's head to David . “ Look ! ” they exclaimed to the king . “ Here is the head of Ishbosheth , the son of your enemy Saul who tried to kill you . Today the Lord has given my lord the king revenge on Saul and his entire family ! ”

ID:	673
INPUT:	Áko díí t'áá ákwíí jį́ didlidgo náá'iiniihii át'é ; éí Dził Sáínaidi bee nihoot'áanii éí łikání halchingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániih doo biniyé át'é .
PRED:	It is a burnt offering to the Lord on Mount Sinai , an offering made by fire to the Lord on Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	This is the regular burnt offering instituted at Mount Sinai as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	674
INPUT:	Áádóó Bábilandóó dine'é éí eda'alyaii Sá<unk> nath wolyéii ádayiilaa , <unk> hahdóó dine'é éí eda'alyaii Néí<unk> wolyéii ádayiilaa , índa Héímathdóó dine'é éí eda'alyaii Asháíma wolyéii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And the people of Babylon made an image of idols , and set up the idols of the people of Hamath , from the border of Hamath .
GOLD:	Those from Babylon worshiped idols of their god Succoth-benoth . Those from Cuthah worshiped their god Nergal . And those from Hamath worshiped Ashima .

ID:	675
INPUT:	Nidi Béílam haadzíi'go Béílak ííłní , Shą́ą́' nił hweeshne'go ádíshní , Bóhólníihii ánínígíí t'éiyá t'áá át'é bi'deeshłííł , dishníi ni' ?
PRED:	But Balaam answered Balak , “ Did I tell you all that the Lord has said ? ”
GOLD:	But Balaam replied to Balak , “ Did n't I tell you that I can do only what the Lord tells me ? ”

ID:	676
INPUT:	Áko ánááhodoo'niid , Ni'jį' aniłt'e' . Ákohgo ni'jį' ajííłt'e' , nít'éé' tł'iish silį́į'go bits'ą́ąjį' Mózes yáájiiltáál .
PRED:	And he said to him , “ I will fall down to the ground . ” And the serpent turned away from him , and Moses cast out his hand .
GOLD:	“ Throw it down on the ground , ” the Lord told him . So Moses threw down the staff , and it turned into a snake ! Moses jumped back .

ID:	677
INPUT:	Jó , diné doo yá'áshóonii bijéí yee adánoolníinii yee ádaa ha'niih , áádóó diné bił adáá háníinii yik'ijidlí ; Bóhólníihii éí yijoołxá .
PRED:	For the heart of the wicked is proud , and he that hates him is blessed : the Lord hates him .
GOLD:	For they brag about their evil desires ; they praise the greedy and curse the Lord .

ID:	678
INPUT:	Shaa yisínínah áádóó wooch'ííd t'éiyá baa dzíínílíhígíí biniinaa kóníłtsogo lą́ą bee atí'él'íinii shits'ą́ą́dóó nik'i hwiidooleeł ni .
PRED:	You will judge me because you have forgotten me , and you will judge me from my wrath .
GOLD:	This is your allotment , the portion I have assigned to you , ” says the Lord , “ for you have forgotten me , putting your trust in false gods .

ID:	679
INPUT:	áyidííniid , Diné t'áá ádzaagóó neinitingo yóó'ayii'éésh dadohníigo díí diné bił shaa noohkai , áko nihinááł nabídééłkid . Jó akonee' , díí diné bik'i dahodooh'aahígíí bąąhági át'éii bąąh ádingo shił bééhoozin ;
PRED:	He said to them , “ Bring these men to me , and I know that there is no sin in you . ”
GOLD:	and he announced his verdict . “ You brought this man to me , accusing him of leading a revolt . I have examined him thoroughly on this point in your presence and find him innocent .

ID:	680
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ła' Diyin God bił ałgha'disht'áah doo jinízingot'ááłáhídi míildi bízneeztą́ą' nidi , t'ááłáhídi bich'į' t'ą́ą́' háázhdoodzihígíí doo bízhneel'ą́ą da .
PRED:	And there were ten thousand men , but he could not turn back from him .
GOLD:	If someone wanted to take God to court , would it be possible to answer him even once in a thousand times ?

ID:	681
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ah abíínídą́ą́' nídahidiijéé' , áko jį́honaa'éí tó yik'i'diiłdíingo éí Mó'ab dine'é náwónanídę́ę́' tó diłgi át'éego łichíi'go dayiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	And in the morning they rose up in the morning , and they saw that Moab was like water from the sky .
GOLD:	But when they got up the next morning , the sun was shining across the water , making it appear red to the Moabites — like blood .

ID:	682
INPUT:	Nidi ádadííniid , Nahjį' t'ą́'ájį' yiizįįh ! T'óó kónígháníjį' kééhat'į́ yiniyé níyáhígíí ánihwii'aahii í'diilyaa lá ! Ádahodiilníłígíí biláahgo ádandiilnííł . Áádóó diné éí Lat yich'į' dah diijée'go dáádílkał yik'ijį' dahashjizhgo k'asdą́ą́' dáádílkał k'ídeizti' .
PRED:	But they said , “ Get up here ! Let 's make you a little cloth ! ” So the people went up to the door and covered the doors .
GOLD:	“ Stand back ! ” they shouted . “ This fellow came to town as an outsider , and now he 's acting like our judge ! We 'll treat you far worse than those other men ! ” And they lunged toward Lot to break down the door .

ID:	683
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Jó , éí bąą Síízar bíhígíí Síízar baa nídahoh'nííł , áádóó Diyin God bíhígíí Diyin God baa nídahoh'nííł .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Behold , we are the things of Caesar , and give to the things of God .
GOLD:	“ Well then , ” he said , “ give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar , and give to God what belongs to God . ”

ID:	684
INPUT:	kójíníigo , Nihílááh , náyónaanídi nihidááhjí kin sinilíjį' doh'aash , ákwii t'áá noo'áázhgóó télii yázhí t'ah doo adiyeehígíí dahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo bik'ídooh'ash , éí k'e'dooh'ałgo nídoohłóós .
PRED:	He said , “ Go to the city , and go to the city . When you find a young donkey , you will find a young donkey , and find him . ”
GOLD:	“ Go into that village over there , ” he told them . “ As you enter it , you will see a young donkey tied there that no one has ever ridden . Untie it and bring it here .

ID:	685
INPUT:	Hódzą́ kin niiní'ą́ ; tsosts'idgo bíyah da'nii'áago áyiilaa ;
PRED:	I have built seven pillars ; I have built seven pillars .
GOLD:	Wisdom has built her house ; she has carved its seven columns .

ID:	686
INPUT:	Ábsalam daaztsą́
PRED:	Absalom 's Death
GOLD:	Absalom 's Defeat and Death

ID:	687
INPUT:	Riihobówam náás adideesdéél
PRED:	Rehoboam and King Rehoboam
GOLD:	Shemaiah 's Prophecy

ID:	688
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad , baa nánooshkąąh , ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo shíísíníłts'ą́ą́' ; bááh ádaał ts'íísígíí ła' ná nídiishkaahgo dííyį́į́ł , áko éí bee nidziilgo bikiin náánáádáał doo .
PRED:	Now therefore hear me , I pray thee , my servant , that thou mayest eat of bread ; and thou shalt eat it with thy strength .
GOLD:	Now do what I say , and let me give you a little something to eat so you can regain your strength for the trip back . ”

ID:	689
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii Jííhu éí Jiiháshafat yideezteh
PRED:	Jehoshaphat the prophet of Israel
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat Appoints Judges

ID:	690
INPUT:	Áko éí haigo doo áhodooníił daígíí bíká sodadołzin .
PRED:	And pray for them that will not be able to come .
GOLD:	And pray that your flight will not be in winter .

ID:	691
INPUT:	Ha'áłchíní bizhé'é ádinii danilį́į le' ! Hwe'asdzą́ą́ éí bąąh áhásdįįdii nilį́į le' !
PRED:	Let his children be the father of his father ; let him be a widow .
GOLD:	May his children become fatherless , and his wife a widow .

ID:	692
INPUT:	Áko Júdah kéyahgi Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó dinééh léi' naagháá nít'éé' ; éí Júdah bighandóó nijigháago Líívai dine'é jílį́įgo ákwii t'óó átsééd kééhojit'į́ .
PRED:	And there was a young man from Bethlehem in Judah , and he dwelt in the house of Judah , and he dwelt there .
GOLD:	One day a young Levite , who had been living in Bethlehem in Judah , arrived in that area .

ID:	693
INPUT:	Áko Bíyer-shííbagóó náájí'ná .
PRED:	They went from Beersheba to Beersheba .
GOLD:	From there Isaac moved to Beersheba ,

ID:	694
INPUT:	Dinéshą' ha'át'íí át'éego ba'át'e' ádin doo , índa bi'dizhchį́įgo t'áá ákogi át'ée doo ?
PRED:	What can a man be pure , and a righteous man be born in his womb ?
GOLD:	Can any mortal be pure ? Can anyone born of a woman be just ?

ID:	695
INPUT:	Áko Léíkish kin haal'áádę́ę́' Jáshowa dah diiyáago Églan kin haal'áajį' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso hoł yíkaigo kin haal'áii biníjíshzhiizh áádóó bik'i jiijéé' ,
PRED:	So Joshua went up from Gath , and all Israel with him , and they went up to Hebron , and fought against it .
GOLD:	Then Joshua and the Israelite army went on to Eglon and attacked it .

ID:	696
INPUT:	éí diyin dabidi'níinii da'ana'í nihináágóó áhą́dígi , doodaii' nízaadi kéédahat'íinii t'áá éí nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́góó kéédahat'íinii dabidiyin ádaat'é .
PRED:	The gods of the earth are their gods , and those who live far away from far away , and those who live in the ends of the earth .
GOLD:	They might suggest that you worship the gods of peoples who live nearby or who come from the ends of the earth .

ID:	697
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus de ádzaago éí asdzání yik'i nághalgo áyidííniid , Asdzání , nik'i dahodii'ah yę́ęshą' háájí ? Da' dinéésh doo ła' atínidi'doolníiłgo yee ná haadzíi' da ?
PRED:	And Jesus lifted up his eyes and looked upon the woman , and said unto the woman , O woman , why do any man speak to thee ?
GOLD:	Then Jesus stood up again and said to the woman , “ Where are your accusers ? Did n't even one of them condemn you ? ”

ID:	698
INPUT:	Jó , kót'éego baa hane' , Diyin God iiná doo ninít'i'ii nihaidiní'ą́ , éí iinánígíí haYe' bii' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For this is what God has given us eternal life . He has given the Son who lives in him .
GOLD:	And this is what God has testified : He has given us eternal life , and this life is in his Son .

ID:	699
INPUT:	Háálá ts'ísee k'ehgo át'éii be'adáhonooni' éí Níłch'i Diyinii yik'ijį' naaldzil , t'áá ákót'éego ałdó' Níłch'i Diyinii éí ts'ísee k'ehgo át'éii yik'ijį' naaldzil , áko díí kót'éego ałts'ą́ą́jí nidlį́įgo baa nideeshaał danohsinii doo bídeínóhhah da dooleeł .
PRED:	For as the flesh of the flesh is against the flesh , so shall the Spirit stand against the flesh , that ye may not be able to do this in the flesh .
GOLD:	The sinful nature wants to do evil , which is just the opposite of what the Spirit wants . And the Spirit gives us desires that are the opposite of what the sinful nature desires . These two forces are constantly fighting each other , so you are not free to carry out your good intentions .

ID:	700
INPUT:	Nidi ázhdidooniił , Ánihidishní , Nidaahkaidę́ę́' doo shił bééhózin da . Bąąhági át'éii baa deínóhkáahii t'áá ánółtso , shits'ánóhkááh !
PRED:	But he said to them , “ I do n't know where you are coming . Come from me , all you who do wrong . ”
GOLD:	And he will reply , ‘ I tell you , I do n't know you or where you come from . Get away from me , all you who do evil . '

ID:	701
INPUT:	T'óó kónígháníjį' nááhást'ą́ , éí Lébanan kéyahgi dá'ák'eh bikáá' nida'nt'ą' dooleeł , índa dá'ák'eh bikáá' nida'nt'ą' yę́ę éí tsin bee hodíłch'il doo .
PRED:	A little while there is a little time , Lebanon will grow in the field of Lebanon , and the fruit of the field will grow in the field .
GOLD:	Soon — and it will not be very long — the forests of Lebanon will become a fertile field , and the fertile field will yield bountiful crops .

ID:	702
INPUT:	Áko David ba'áłchíní bee baa ha'niihii índa Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'íinii yee ayóó ádaat'éii éí doo Júdah dine'é biláahgo ayóó ádajít'ée da dooleeł biniyé Júdah dine'é átsé dabiníbaal t'áá bił Bóhólníihii yisdábidoonił .
PRED:	And the Lord will save the tent of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem , so that the people of Judah may be greater than the people of Judah .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will give victory to the rest of Judah first , before Jerusalem , so that the people of Jerusalem and the royal line of David will not have greater honor than the rest of Judah .

ID:	703
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Riihobówam bida'asdzą́ą́ áádóó bida'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní t'áá ałtso éí biláahgo Méíyakah t'áá íiyisí ayóó'áyó'ní , háálá tseebííts'áadah be'asdzą́ą́ áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní éí hastą́diin índa naadiin tseebíí biye'ké áádóó bitsi'ké hastą́diin bá neheezhchį́ .
PRED:	Rehoboam loved his wives , and all his wives , and all his wives , because he had twelve wives , twelve wives , and sixteen sons .
GOLD:	Rehoboam loved Maacah more than any of his other wives and concubines . In all , he had eighteen wives and sixty concubines , and they gave birth to twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters .

ID:	704
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin tsé da'ílíinii índa aa yílyáii bee naashch'ąą'ígíí ła' baa yádajiłti'go hodiizts'ą́ą'go áháłní ,
PRED:	When they heard about what had been done in the temple and in the temple , they said to him ,
GOLD:	Some of his disciples began talking about the majestic stonework of the Temple and the memorial decorations on the walls . But Jesus said ,

ID:	705
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , dííyee' nináałgo t'įįhdígoígíí át'é , nidi ná naal'a'í bighandóó danilíinii náás ahididoolchíłígíí náás hodeeshzhiizhgóó bá bee háínídzíí' , Da' díísh diné bibee é'él'į' bik'ehgo át'é , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ?
PRED:	O Lord God , you are not a little , but you have spoken against your servant 's house , saying , “ Is this the law of a man , O Lord God ? ”
GOLD:	And now , Sovereign Lord , in addition to everything else , you speak of giving your servant a lasting dynasty ! Do you deal with everyone this way , O Sovereign Lord ?

ID:	706
INPUT:	Áko nihitahgi nihá aląąjį' naazíinii biyahoniishłįįh , háálá shí ałdó' aląąjį' á sézį́ . Shinááł Christ ti'hooznii'go éí baa hashne' , áádóó bee bi'oh adidilyéehii yit'íní dooleełígíí bił ałts'ą́ą́' anisk'iiz doo . Ánihidishní ,
PRED:	I say to you , “ I am standing among you , because I am standing in the presence of Christ , and I tell you the glory of glory .
GOLD:	And now , a word to you who are elders in the churches . I , too , am an elder and a witness to the sufferings of Christ . And I , too , will share in his glory when he is revealed to the whole world . As a fellow elder , I appeal to you :

ID:	707
INPUT:	Áko Mózes haa hodiní'ánígíí éí Géed dine'é áádóó Rúben dine'é índa Jóseph biye' Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí éí Ámor dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Sáíhan bee bóhólnííh yę́ę índa Béíshan hahoodzodóó aláahgo naat'áanii Ag bee bóhólnííh yę́ę kéyahgi kin hadaas'áhígíí índa binaagóó kédaayah haidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	Moses gave them the land of Gad , Gad , and Manasseh the son of Manasseh , and the half of Manasseh , and the border of the Amorites , and the border of Og king of the Amorites , and the border of Og .
GOLD:	So Moses assigned land to the tribes of Gad , Reuben , and half the tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph . He gave them the territory of King Sihon of the Amorites and the land of King Og of Bashan — the whole land with its cities and surrounding lands .

ID:	708
INPUT:	Hatsiits'iin áádóó hatsii' aghaałgaiigi át'éego łigai , yasígi át'éego łigai , áádóó hanáá' kǫ' dah nídíno'ígíí nahalin ;
PRED:	His head and his head is white as white as white as white as snow , and his eyes are like fire .
GOLD:	His head and his hair were white like wool , as white as snow . And his eyes were like flames of fire .

ID:	709
INPUT:	Bitsii' łeezh yik'ídayiighaasgo daachxa índa atíńdadinidleeh ; kódaaníigo hadadeeshghaazh , Héi' ! Héi' ! Ayóó át'éego kin haal'áii jílį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę ákwii táłkáa'di tsinaa'eeł neisnilii t'áá ałtso jit'ínígíí yee da'ast'įįdii ! Éí t'ááłáhídi ahéé'ílkidjį' t'áá ádzaaí dzizlį́į́' !
PRED:	And they cried out upon their heads , and weep , saying , “ Woe ! How great is the great city ! The sea has destroyed all its sins ! ”
GOLD:	And they will weep and throw dust on their heads to show their grief . And they will cry out , “ How terrible , how terrible for that great city ! The shipowners became wealthyby transporting her great wealth on the seas.In a single moment it is all gone . ”

ID:	710
INPUT:	Nihił kééhat'į́į doo ; nihitahgi nihikin hadaas'áagi łahgo náhodii'aah , t'áá bił yá'áhoot'éhígi kééhat'į́įgo ádadoohłííł ; t'áadoo bide ádahwíínóhsiní .
PRED:	And he shall dwell with you , and give him a place in your midst , and dwell in the midst of the cities ; do not fear him .
GOLD:	Let them live among you in any town they choose , and do not oppress them .

ID:	711
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é naanish yídeiniłkadgo ádił nideílníísh .
PRED:	And the children of Israel did the work of the work of their hands .
GOLD:	So the Egyptians worked the people of Israel without mercy .

ID:	712
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́į́dą́ą́' Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdgo ádee haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	On that day the anger of the Lord was angry with him , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord was very angry with them , and he vowed ,

ID:	713
INPUT:	Ásher dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Náftalai dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	The border of Asher shall be from the east side to the west side , one portion .
GOLD:	Naphtali 's land lies south of Asher 's , also extending from east to west .

ID:	714
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá ałtso nich'į' bádahachį'ii ádaa yádadínóozįįł áádóó bíni' dadooląąłgo t'áadoo nídandlíní da doo índa yéego nich'į' nidaaldzilii ádadoodįįł .
PRED:	For all of them shall be ashamed , and they shall be ashamed , and they shall be like an abomination , and they shall perish , and they shall perish .
GOLD:	“ See , all your angry enemies lie there , confused and humiliated.Anyone who opposes you will dieand come to nothing .

ID:	715
INPUT:	Ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níigo shídahooł'aahii danohłį́įgo diné t'áá ałtso bił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	You will know that you love each other . You will know that you are my disciples .
GOLD:	Your love for one another will prove to the world that you are my disciples . ”

ID:	716
INPUT:	Doo t'áá ákogi áhooníiłii t'áá ałtso bąąhági át'éii ádaat'é , nidi bąąhági át'éii doo biniinaa da'dootsaałii ła' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	All the righteous are sin , but there is no sin for sin .
GOLD:	All wicked actions are sin , but not every sin leads to death .

ID:	717
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi áhoot'éhígíí bee nił hweeshne' nidi doo yinídlą́ą dago , yá'ąąshdi áhoot'éhígíí bee nił hweeshne'go haash yit'éego áłt'ąą éí yidíídląął ?
PRED:	I have told you the things that is on earth , but they did not believe , but when I tell you the things that is in heaven , what do you believe ?
GOLD:	But if you do n't believe me when I tell you about earthly things , how can you possibly believe if I tell you about heavenly things ?

ID:	718
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó áhánígo hak'éígíí éí hamáda , hazhé'éda , haye'da , hatsi'da áádóó bił hajíí'áazhda ,
PRED:	And it came to pass , that it was not their father , that his sons and his daughters brought him away .
GOLD:	The only exceptions are his closest relatives — his mother or father , son or daughter , brother ,

ID:	719
INPUT:	Télii éí tádiindi mííldóó ba'aan ashdladi neeznádiin éí bits'ą́ą́dóó Bóhólníihii bich'į' nályéhígíí hastą́diindóó ba'aan t'ááłá'í lá .
PRED:	The donkeys , a thousand and five hundred and five hundred and fifty .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys , of which 61 were the Lord 's share ;

ID:	720
INPUT:	Jó nidi kóní , Saad éí níighahgóó hólǫ́ ; nihizálátahdóó índa nihijéí bii' hólǫ́ǫgo bee yádaałti' ; t'áá éí saad woodlą́ągo baa dahwiilne' .
PRED:	But he said , “ The words is with us , and with your heart , and with your heart , and with your heart ; we have faith . ”
GOLD:	In fact , it says , “ The message is very close at hand ; it is on your lips and in your heart. ” And that message is the very message about faith that we preach :

ID:	721
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God doo hóyą́ą da ílį́į nidi , nihokáá' dine'é yiláahdi hóyą́ , áádóó Diyin God doo bidziil da ílį́į nidi , nihokáá' dine'é yiláahdi ábóodziil .
PRED:	For God is not wise , but wisdom is greater than the world , but God is greater than the world .
GOLD:	This foolish plan of God is wiser than the wisest of human plans , and God 's weakness is stronger than the greatest of human strength .

ID:	722
INPUT:	kéyahdóó átsé daneest'áanii ałtso áłah ádaahłééh ; éí nihikéyah Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígóó nídaneest'áanii ła' ts'iizis bii' hééł ádadooh<unk> go Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bízhi' dólzin doo biniyé náhodii'áníjį' nidahidoohkááł .
PRED:	Take all the first of the first fruits of the land which the Lord your God has given you , and bring it into the place that the Lord your God has given you .
GOLD:	put some of the first produce from each crop you harvest into a basket and bring it to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored .

ID:	723
INPUT:	Ats'íís éí anáá' t'éí nilį́įgoshą' ha'át'íísh yee adiits'a' doo ? Ats'íís éí ajaa' t'éí nilį́įgoshą' ha'át'íísh yee ałchin doo ?
PRED:	What can the body hear ? What can the body hear ? If the body is hungry , why should the body be hungry ?
GOLD:	If the whole body were an eye , how would you hear ? Or if your whole body were an ear , how would you smell anything ?

ID:	724
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné bíla' bąąh dah haz'áanii ííłní , K'ídílchííd . Áko k'ídeeshchidgo bíla' t'áá łahjí át'éhígi át' éego hadaałt'é násdlį́į́' .
PRED:	Then he said to the man , “ Put your hand on your hand ! ” And he stretched out his hand , and it became as one of his hands .
GOLD:	Then he said to the man , “ Hold out your hand. ” So the man held out his hand , and it was restored , just like the other one !

ID:	725
INPUT:	Nihich'ah éí nihitsiinídaazt'i' doo , áádóó kéé' nisoo'eez doo ; doo yínííł naahkai da doo , áádóó doo atíńdadinohdleeh da doo , nidi doo ákwii ádaot'įįdii bił nidadínóołnah áádóó ałch'į' dadinoh'níi doo .
PRED:	Your head shall be upon your head , and shall follow you ; and you shall not mourn , nor mourn , but your sins shall turn away from you .
GOLD:	Your heads will remain covered , and your sandals will not be taken off . You will not mourn or weep , but you will waste away because of your sins . You will groan among yourselves for all the evil you have done .

ID:	726
INPUT:	Bee yisdá'iildééh ayóó át'éii
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	A Warning against Drifting Away

ID:	727
INPUT:	ábizhdííniid , Jéfthah ání , Ízrel dine'é éí Mó'ab kéyahígíí índa Áman dine'é bikéyahígíí t'áadoo bighadeit'ą́ą da ,
PRED:	Jephthah said to Jephthah , “ The Israelites did not take the land of Moab and the Ammonites .
GOLD:	“ This is what Jephthah says : Israel did not steal any land from Moab or Ammon .

ID:	728
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bił hózhǫ́ǫ dooleełgo bíká bił chohoo'į́ , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii nayólíii bits'ą́ą́' ádoodįįł .
PRED:	The hope of the righteous shall rejoice , but the soul of the wicked shall perish .
GOLD:	The hopes of the godly result in happiness , but the expectations of the wicked come to nothing .

ID:	729
INPUT:	hastóí danilíinii , tsíłkéí danilíinii , ch'ikéida , áłchínída índa sáaniida ałtso nidaałtseed , nidi bítáa'gi da'asdzohii bit'áahjį' dadohkááh yíila' . Shikin bii' sohodizindóó hahodoolzhish . Áko Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígi hastóí danilíinii nidadziłtseedgo baa nízhdiikai .
PRED:	Come near to the temple of the Lord , young men , children , children , children , children , and women , but three times come near to the temple of the Lord . Then the elders went to the mountain .
GOLD:	Kill them all — old and young , girls and women and little children . But do not touch anyone with the mark . Begin right here at the Temple. ” So they began by killing the seventy leaders .

ID:	730
INPUT:	Áádóó nááhághą́ąhjį' Her biye' <unk> yah , Jerúsalem ałníí'dóó dinéhígíí yinanit'a'í nilíinii tsé néíztł'in .
PRED:	And next to him : half of the half of the half of the half of the half of the people of Jerusalem , the leader of the people .
GOLD:	Rephaiah son of Hur , the leader of half the district of Jerusalem , was next to them on the wall .

ID:	731
INPUT:	Áádóó bitsiit'áádóó bidee' neeznáá hadaaz'áii áádóó adee' náánáła' háá'áhígíí éí bidááhdóó táa'go naa'aníídee'go éí bináá' hólǫ́ áádóó bizéé' hólǫ́ǫgo ayóó ánísht'é nízingo ádá yálti'go índa adee' yadaa'ááh nít'éé' yę́ę biláahgo nitsxaaz noolninii éí ááhyiłníinii shił bééhodoozįįł niizį́į́' .
PRED:	And there fell ten horns and ten horns before the other horns ; and I saw that it was in his mouth , and his mouth was in his mouth , and his mouth was great , and I saw that it was greater than a lion .
GOLD:	I also asked about the ten horns on the fourth beast 's head and the little horn that came up afterward and destroyed three of the other horns . This horn had seemed greater than the others , and it had human eyes and a mouth that was boasting arrogantly .

ID:	732
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Zerowáíyah biyáázh Jó'ab áshííł'įįdígíí nił bééhózin ; éí Ízrel dine'é bisiláo dah deínéehii binanit'a'í nidilt'éego , éí Ner biye' Ábner áádóó Jííther biye' Améísa áyííł'įįdígíí baa ákoninizį́į́' . Jó , t'áá k'é hólǫ́ǫgo anaa' hólónígi át'éego éí diné nidilt'é nidzistseedgo bidił haziiz bee ákádzíszaazígíí áádóó hakee' bii' dziz'eezígíí ałdó' dił bąąhgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	And you know what Joab had done to me , the son of Zeruiah , the captain of the army of Israel , saw that he had done to Abner the son of Nebat , the son of Nebat , the son of Nebat , and he put his feet on his feet .
GOLD:	“ And there is something else . You know what Joab son of Zeruiah did to me when he murdered my two army commanders , Abner son of Ner and Amasa son of Jether . He pretended that it was an act of war , but it was done in a time of peace , staining his belt and sandals with innocent blood .

ID:	733
INPUT:	Jesus ak'eh deesdlį́į'ii k'ehgo Jerúsalem góne' ííyá
PRED:	Jesus and the People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	734
INPUT:	Nihwiiłdlaadgo tsé nahjį' hayiiznil áádóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii agháago yá'át'éhígíí k'iidííláínda ałníi'gi bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí hayíítł'ingo dego yaa'áago áyiilaa , áádóó ałdó' ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' bąąh haha'nííh biniyé haz'ą́ągo áhoolaa , áádóó índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii yá'át'éhígíí bąąh dah dadínóodah nízingo yaa ninánítaah , nidi ch'il na'atł'o'ii dík'ǫ́zhígíí bąąh hazlį́į́' lá .
PRED:	But he set up the stone in the midst of the vine , and in soul , and in soul , and also in the midst of the vine , and in the wine , and in the vine he gave to the vine , but the vine was full of wine .
GOLD:	He plowed the land , cleared its stones , and planted it with the best vines.In the middle he built a watchtowerand carved a winepress in the nearby rocks.Then he waited for a harvest of sweet grapes , but the grapes that grew were bitter .

ID:	735
INPUT:	Áko t'áá shí yiiłtsą́ , áádóó baa ch'íhoní'ą́ągo ádíshní , Díí Diyin God biYe' át'į́į́ lá .
PRED:	I saw it and said , “ This is the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	I saw this happen to Jesus , so I testify that he is the Chosen One of God . ”

ID:	736
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' aláahgo naat'áanii ánáábideesh'niid , Aláahgo naat'áanii bił hóshǫ́ǫ́ ládą́ą́' bíni' tooh nílínígíí biláahdi naat'áanii danilíinii naaltsoos shá bich'į' ádadoolnííł , áko dabikéyahgóó ch'íhideesháałgo Júdah kéyahjį' anáásdzáajį' shadadi'doo'ááł .
PRED:	Then I said to the king , “ If it please the king , let it be written to the princes of the river , that I may go through the land of Judah . ”
GOLD:	I also said to the king , “ If it please the king , let me have letters addressed to the governors of the province west of the Euphrates River , instructing them to let me travel safely through their territories on my way to Judah .

ID:	737
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul bá nidaal'a'í éí David yich'į' yee hadaasdzíí' . Áádóó David ádííniid , Aláahgo naat'áanii baadaaní yishłeehgo t'įįhdígo haniih át'éii át'éego shaa nitsóhkees ? Jó , diné hojooba' át'éii áádóó doo aláahgo ch'íbi'dit'áahii yee' nishłį́ .
PRED:	And Saul spake unto David his servants , and David said unto him , Go out from me , that I may eat the king , that thou mayest be poor , and I am the king .
GOLD:	When Saul 's men said these things to David , he replied , “ How can a poor man from a humble family afford the bride price for the daughter of a king ? ”

ID:	738
INPUT:	Háálá Filístiya dine'é ałtso nidootsiłgo Táir índa Sáídan kin haal'áii yíká anájahii daadziihígíí t'áá ałtso ádooldįįłgo bich'į' hoolzhish , áko Bóhólníihii éí Káftor kéyahdóó Filístiya dine'é daadziihígíí yidooghą́ą́ł .
PRED:	For the Philistines will destroy Tyre and Sidon and Sidon , and the remnant of the Philistines will be destroyed . And the Lord will destroy the remnant of the Philistines .
GOLD:	“ The time has come for the Philistines to be destroyed , along with their allies from Tyre and Sidon.Yes , the Lord is destroying the remnant of the Philistines , those colonists from the island of Crete .

ID:	739
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó tadzooskaígíí baa dadziiskaidi shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó ádajiilaaígíí éí shízhi' diyinii t'áá íiyisí bik'édí nishłį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they went out to the tribes of Israel , whom they had been scattered among the nations , but they did not listen to my name , which he had made by my name .
GOLD:	Then I was concerned for my holy name , on which my people brought shame among the nations .

ID:	740
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus haadzíi'go ííłní , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kóní : Diné doo bááh t'éí yee hináa da doo , nidi saad t'áá ałtso Diyin God yee hahadziihii yee hináa doo .
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ It is written , ‘ The Scriptures will not live bread , but all the words of God will live . '
GOLD:	But Jesus told him , “ No ! The Scriptures say , ‘ People do not live by bread alone . ' ”

ID:	741
INPUT:	T'ah doo daha<unk> góó danéesée nidi , ch'il náánáła' nidanise'ígíí t'áá yítséedi daniiłnah .
PRED:	But they were not able to destroy them , but some of the seed came to pass away .
GOLD:	While they are still flowering , not ready to be cut , they begin to wither more quickly than grass .

ID:	742
INPUT:	Kót'éego Bóhólníihii éí Job yich'į' hahaasdzíí'dóó bik'ijį' Bóhólníihii éí Tííman kin haal'áádóó diné Élifaz wolyéii ííłní , Ni índa nik'is nidilt'éego doo ákót'éégóó shá hadahisoohdzí'ígíí biniinaa t'óó báhádzidgo shibee atí'él'íinii bee nihich'į' bił tsííkééz , háálá shá naal'a'í Job éí t'áá ákogi át'éego shá hahasdzíi'gi át'éego t'áadoo shá hadasoohdzíi' da .
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to Job , and said to him , “ Because you have sinned against me , you and your brother Job , because of my wrath , because you have not spoken right in my servant Job .
GOLD:	After the Lord had finished speaking to Job , he said to Eliphaz the Temanite : “ I am angry with you and your two friends , for you have not spoken accurately about me , as my servant Job has .

ID:	743
INPUT:	Áko dashdii'áazhgo kintaa'aztiinígíí bibąąhgóó kin léi' bich'éédą́ą'gi télii yázhí dahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo bik'ízhní'áázh , áko k'e'jíí'ah .
PRED:	So they went and found a young donkey on the entrance of the gate of the gate of the gate , and they wrote it .
GOLD:	The two disciples left and found the colt standing in the street , tied outside the front door .

ID:	744
INPUT:	T'áá nihéédahosésįįd yę́ędóó wóshdę́ę́' Bóhólníihii bich'į' nidaałteehgo bik'ijį' danohłį́įgo hodideeshzhiizh .
PRED:	At the beginning of the beginning , I will set you against the Lord at the beginning of your youth .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been rebelling against the Lord as long as I have known you .

ID:	745
INPUT:	Kót'éego hadzoodzíi'go t'áá Gáliliigi nijigháá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when he had said this , he dwelt in Galilee .
GOLD:	After saying these things , Jesus remained in Galilee .

ID:	746
INPUT:	Naaki góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Símiyan dine'é bá ánáánályaa ; Símiyan dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin ; éí Júdah dine'é bikéyah łahjį' bá'doodzo .
PRED:	The second is the second time for the tribe of Simeon according to their families , the tribe of Simeon according to their families . The tribe of Judah will be the land of Judah .
GOLD:	The second allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Simeon . Their homeland was surrounded by Judah 's territory .

ID:	747
INPUT:	Háálá aa a'ááh nínízinii yót'ááh hiníláii bilááh át'é áádóó nit'áá aaníinii k'os bíneel'ą́ .
PRED:	For thy mercy is greater than the heavens , and thy truth is in the clouds .
GOLD:	For your unfailing love is higher than the heavens.Your faithfulness reaches to the clouds .

ID:	748
INPUT:	índa ak'áán t'ááłáhídi hahakaahgo dibé yázhí tsosts'idígíí bik'eh nítį́įgo bił náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	You shall offer one tenth of the seven lambs ,
GOLD:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	749
INPUT:	Áko Áman dine'é binanit'a'í éí Jéfthah binaal'a'í áyidííniid , Jó , Ízrel dine'é éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' náá'nééł yę́ędą́ą́' Árnan tooh nílínídóó Jábak tooh nílíníjį' índa Jórdan toohjį' shikéyah shighadeideest'ą́ . Éí bąą k'ad éí kédaayahígíí hasht'ehodít'é bił nihaa náhididíí'ááł .
PRED:	And he said unto Jephthah the servant of the children of Ammon , Behold , the children of Israel have taken away from the Arnon , from the Arnon to the Arnon , and from the Arnon , to the Arnon , and to the border of the Jordan , and give it to you .
GOLD:	The king of Ammon answered Jephthah 's messengers , “ When the Israelites came out of Egypt , they stole my land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River and all the way to the Jordan . Now then , give back the land peaceably . ”

ID:	750
INPUT:	Áádóó nída'njahgi niikaigo nihe'azis ąą ádeiilyaa nít'éé' ; t'ááłá'í niitínígo nihibéeso t'áá át'é azis bii' <unk> nil lá , áko éí béeso naa nídaniijaa' .
PRED:	And when we arrived in the field , we opened up the money , and opened it ; and each man put his money in his hand , because of his money .
GOLD:	But as we were returning home , we stopped for the night and opened our sacks . Then we discovered that each man 's money — the exact amount paid — was in the top of his sack ! Here it is ; we have brought it back with us .

ID:	751
INPUT:	Háálá diné daneeznáádę́ę́' náádiijée'go , doo nááda'doogeh da , doo nidi ahaa dabi'dii'níił da doo , nidi yá'ąąshdi diyingo nidaal'a'ígíigi ádaat'é .
PRED:	For if the dead rise up from the dead , we will not have sex , but as the angels of heaven .
GOLD:	For when the dead rise , they will neither marry nor be given in marriage . In this respect they will be like the angels in heaven .

ID:	752
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad íinínízin ládą́ą́' ádił da'asiihígíí bá yóó'anídí'aah , doodaii' ninaaltsoos bii' shízhi' sínízohígíí k'éé'<unk> xǫǫłgo baa nánooshkąąh .
PRED:	But now , if you want to forgive your sins , I pray thee , I pray thee , I pray thee , that I pray thee ,
GOLD:	But now , if you will only forgive their sin — but if not , erase my name from the record you have written ! ”

ID:	753
INPUT:	T'áadoo náháchį'í índa hashké nániidzįįhii yóó'adí'aah . T'áadoo ádił náhodílchiłí ; éí doo yá'áshónígi ándoolííł .
PRED:	Do n't turn away your anger and your wrath ; do n't let your evil come to you .
GOLD:	Stop being angry ! Turn from your rage ! Do not lose your temper — it only leads to harm .

ID:	754
INPUT:	Áko diné éí Jóseph bikin góne' yah ayíí'eezhgo tó yeiníką́ągo hakee' táádadzizgiz , áádóó dahatélii yá nida'azhjaa' .
PRED:	And he brought them into the house of Joseph , and brought them into the house of Joseph , and washed their feet , and they washed their donkeys .
GOLD:	The manager then led the men into Joseph 's palace . He gave them water to wash their feet and provided food for their donkeys .

ID:	755
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God nilíinii bibee adziilii bee yisháał doo . Ni t'éiyá t'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí baa yáshti' doo .
PRED:	I will walk in thy strength , O Lord God ; I will speak thy righteousness .
GOLD:	I will praise your mighty deeds , O Sovereign Lord.I will tell everyone that you alone are just .

ID:	756
INPUT:	Bábilan nílíinii , Bóhólníihii hoo'áłígíí doo nínízingóó biniinaa łoh ná niiní'ą́ągo biih yíníyá ; doo baa ákonínízingóó nééhoozingo ni'diiltsood .
PRED:	You have come into a net , Babylon , because you do not know what the Lord wants to do .
GOLD:	Listen , Babylon , for I have set a trap for you.You are caught , for you have fought against the Lord .

ID:	757
INPUT:	Jesus éí siláo neeznádiingo yinanit'a'í nilíinii bá naal'a'í néidiisá
PRED:	Jesus sent the captain of the army
GOLD:	The Faith of a Roman Officer

ID:	758
INPUT:	T'áá háiida diyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' náá'iiłniihgo t'áá hazhó'ó doo Bóhólníihii t'éí yich'į' náá'iiłniihgóó nidi éí t'áá aaníí ábidi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	If you offer sacrifices to other gods , you must not offer sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who sacrifices to any god other than the Lord must be destroyed .

ID:	759
INPUT:	Mózes éí deenásts'aa' yiyiisxį́įgo bidiłígíí éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi t'áá át'é yik'íistah .
PRED:	Moses killed the ram and killed it with the blood of the altar .
GOLD:	and Moses slaughtered it . Then Moses took the ram 's blood and splattered it against all sides of the altar .

ID:	760
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , T'áá háiida éí náádahaniihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' náájiiłniihgo éí nááhániihii ła' Bóhólníihii baazhdidoo'áałgo hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego náájiiłniih doo .
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , saying , If any man offer an offering of peace offerings to the Lord , he shall give it to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . When you present a peace offering to the Lord , bring part of it as a gift to the Lord .

ID:	761
INPUT:	Áádóó Adóram éí naalte' binaanishii yinant'áago ábi'diilyaa ; Aháílad biye' Jiiháshafat éí naat'áaniishchíín nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And he reigned over the servants of his servants ; Jehoshaphat the son of Jehoshaphat was the son of Jehoshaphat .
GOLD:	Adoniram was in charge of forced labor . Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the royal historian .

ID:	762
INPUT:	Shoo , shizhé'é , ni'éé' bidííłgizhígíí dah yistsosgo níníł'į́ , háálá ni'éé' bidííłgizhígíí áádóó t'áadoo niyéł<unk> daígíí díí bee nił bééhózin : nił bééhózin índa yíní'į́įgo doo yá'áshónígi t'áadoo ániishłaa da , doodaii' bee haz'áanii t'áadoo nił k'íníti' da índa t'áadoo nich'į' ádił asésiih da . Shidiyííłhééł biniyé shíkanítáá nít'éé' nidi t'áadoo ná hashja'iishłaa da .
PRED:	Look , my father , look on your clothes , for you know that I have cut off your clothes and your clothes , and you do not know that I have done evil against you , nor have I sinned against you , nor have I sinned against you , but I have not sinned against you .
GOLD:	Look , my father , at what I have in my hand . It is a piece of the hem of your robe ! I cut it off , but I did n't kill you . This proves that I am not trying to harm you and that I have not sinned against you , even though you have been hunting for me to kill me .

ID:	763
INPUT:	hadaałt'é ní'doodleeł biniyé k'íhidílnííh , áádóó nibee adziilii bee béédahózinii índa bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóigo ádahooníiłii diyingo ná naal'a'í Jesus bízhi' bee ádanile' .
PRED:	Give your servant the name of Jesus Christ , that you may be healed by your power and wonders .
GOLD:	Stretch out your hand with healing power ; may miraculous signs and wonders be done through the name of your holy servant Jesus . ”

ID:	764
INPUT:	Áádóó Jánathan éí David áyidííniid , Yiską́ągo dah yiitįįh ; dah nánídaah yę́ęgi doo dah sínídáágóó nídahozdoosah .
PRED:	Then Jonathan said to David , “ Get up tomorrow , and sit down at your feet . ”
GOLD:	Then Jonathan said , “ Tomorrow we celebrate the new moon festival . You will be missed when your place at the table is empty .

ID:	765
INPUT:	T'ah doo nihaa niikááh yę́ędą́ą́' Fílipaidi ti'dahwiisii'nii' áádóó t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádanihi'diilyaago nihił béédahózin . Ákondi nihiDiyin God bee doo dasiiti'góó Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó hane' yá'át'éehii bee nihił dahwiilne' , azhą́ nihik'ijį' danilíinii lą'í nidi .
PRED:	But we know that we have seen the Good News of our God in the beginning of Phinehas , and in the beginning of our shame . But we have many things against God .
GOLD:	You know how badly we had been treated at Philippi just before we came to you and how much we suffered there . Yet our God gave us the courage to declare his Good News to you boldly , in spite of great opposition .

ID:	766
INPUT:	Áádóó Jiiháshafat éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ííłní , Bína'ídíłkid , baa nánooshkąąh , Bóhólníihii ha'át'íí didooniił díí jį́ .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel , “ Please ask me what the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	Then Jehoshaphat added , “ But first let 's find out what the Lord says . ”

ID:	767
INPUT:	Áko Hágeiyai haadzíi'go ání , Lą́'ąą , díí diné áádóó díí dine'é shináałgo ákódaat'é , ní Bóhólníihii , índa t'áá ałtso yindaalnishii ałdó' ákódaat'é , áádóó áadi náádayiiłniihígíí éí doo dadílzin da .
PRED:	Then Isaiah said , “ Amen , this people and all these people say , ‘ This is what the Lord says , and all his work are holy , and they are holy . '
GOLD:	Then Haggai responded , “ That is how it is with this people and this nation , says the Lord . Everything they do and everything they offer is defiled by their sin .

ID:	768
INPUT:	ákwe'é bitah doo dahats'ídígíí hadaałt'é áńdaahdle'go , Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bee nihaa honíyá , dabidohní .
PRED:	And when they were blind , ye say , The Kingdom of God is come to you .
GOLD:	Heal the sick , and tell them , ‘ The Kingdom of God is near you now . '

ID:	769
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí saad yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo kin haal'áhígíí jííkeedii haa deideez'ą́ , éí Tímnath-síírah kin haal'áii éí dziłgo nahaz'ánígóó Íífreiyim dine'é bikéyah biyi' , ákwii kin haal'áago áńjiidlaago ákwii kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they gave it to them according to the word of the Lord , according to the word of the Lord , in the hill country of Ephraim , in the hill country of Ephraim , and dwelt there .
GOLD:	For the Lord had said he could have any town he wanted . He chose Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim . He rebuilt the town and lived there .

ID:	770
INPUT:	Áram ba'áłchíní éí Uz áádóó <unk> áádóó <unk> her índa <unk> daolyé .
PRED:	The sons of Aram were divided , and he sent them to tell them what they said .
GOLD:	The descendants of Aram were Uz , Hul , Gether , and Mash .

ID:	771
INPUT:	Áádóó ni nee diné áádóó asdzání dideeshtah , índa haastihii áádóó ániid naagháii ni nee dideeshtah áádóó ni nee dinééh índa ch'ikę́ę́h dideeshtah .
PRED:	And I will scatter thee men , and women , and women , and thy young men , and thy young men , and thy young men , and thy young men .
GOLD:	With you I will shatter men and women , old people and children , young men and young women .

ID:	772
INPUT:	Áádóó nááda'iiłniihii bits'ą́ą́dóó ła' : Habéíyah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Kaz ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Barziléíyai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ; éí hastiin náánáła' Gíliyad dine'é Barziléíyai wolyéii bitsi' ła' hwe'asdzą́ą́ silį́į'go éí bízhi'ígíí házhi' silį́į́' .
PRED:	And of the priests : of the sons of Zerah , the sons of Tema , the son of Hushai , the son of Hushai , the daughter of Bildad , became a wife .
GOLD:	Three families of priests — Hobaiah , Hakkoz , and Barzillai — also returned . ( This Barzillai had married a woman who was a descendant of Barzillai of Gilead , and he had taken her family name . )

ID:	773
INPUT:	Danihiníghangóó díí t'áadoo daohsání : éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' neeznáá daníjoolgo t'ááłá'ígo shijoolii , éí Bóhólníihii baa nídahidoh'aahii , doodaii' wáin ániidíii , doodaii' áliv tsin naazkaadii bineest'ą' bik'ah neeznáá daníką́ągo t'ááłá'í sikánígíí , éí Bóhólníihii baa nídahidoh'aahii , doodaii' nihilį́į́' áádóó nihidibé alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii náádahołniihii , doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhída bee ádee hadasoohdzíi'ii bee náádaho łniihii , doodaii' t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo náádahołniihii , doodaii' bił dah ní'diilnihgo náádahołniihii ,
PRED:	You shall not return to your house : one tenth of your grain , and a tenth of grain , or of olive oil , or of oil , or of oil , or of oil , or of oil , or of your flock , as the Lord commanded you ,
GOLD:	“ But you may not eat your offerings in your hometown — neither the tithe of your grain and new wine and olive oil , nor the firstborn of your flocks and herds , nor any offering to fulfill a vow , nor your voluntary offerings , nor your sacred offerings .

ID:	774
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é hanaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá ałtso nidadoołtsxił , Bóhólníihii áhodííniidii éí t'áadoo ádadziidzaa da .
PRED:	You shall kill all the nations that dwell in the world , as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	Israel failed to destroy the nations in the land , as the Lord had commanded them .

ID:	775
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi baa hodoolzhish , tooh nílínídóó Ííjip kéyahdi tooh nílíníjį' Bóhólníihii éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' yąąh yoołch'íih doo , áádóó Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , t'ááłá'í nootínígo áłah ánihidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass at that time , that the Lord shall be at the river , and he shall be gathered together , O house of Israel .
GOLD:	Yet the time will come when the Lord will gather them together like handpicked grain . One by one he will gather them — from the Euphrates River in the east to the Brook of Egypt in the west .

ID:	776
INPUT:	tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii yindadoolnishgo yaa daneesánígíí ałtso yíníłta' .
PRED:	And from twenty years old and twenty years old when you read the service of the tabernacle of meeting .
GOLD:	List all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who are eligible to serve in the Tabernacle .

ID:	777
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii Mózes baa deet'áanii biyi' bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo ání , Béégashii éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' haił'éesgo t'áadoo bíchį́į́h bąąh nida'sooł'ání . Diyin God daats'í béégashii t'éiyá yaa nitsíkeesgo ádííniid ?
PRED:	And it is written in the law , “ Do you not put an ox in the morning , except the ox of God ? ”
GOLD:	For the law of Moses says , “ You must not muzzle an ox to keep it from eating as it treads out the grain. ” Was God thinking only about oxen when he said this ?

ID:	778
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	779
INPUT:	Ch'ikę́ę́h nílíinii , shich'į' dah díníit'aahgo nitsíníkeesgo shíísíníłts'ą́ą́' . Nidine'é áádóó nizhé'é bighandóóígíí baa yoonééh .
PRED:	Listen to me , O virgin , and listen to me , and do to your people and your father 's house .
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	780
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh díí náádahaniihii éí ádił nida'iiszíi'ii t'óó yéédabiyiiłníihii át'é .
PRED:	But these are the offering of the year that they have sinned .
GOLD:	But instead , those sacrifices actually reminded them of their sins year after year .

ID:	781
INPUT:	Iibrónahdóó dah náádii'náago Ííziyan-gííber hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out from there and camped in Dothan .
GOLD:	They left Abronah and camped at Ezion-geber .

ID:	782
INPUT:	Hágo , Diyin God yaa naayáii níníł'į́ . Diné bitahgóó yaa naagháii t'óó bik'eda'ayóí .
PRED:	Come , see what God has done . There are many works among the people .
GOLD:	Come and see what our God has done , what awesome miracles he performs for people !

ID:	783
INPUT:	éí doodaii' shíká adoolwołígíí ádingo náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí nahalingo nidashidiyoołdlał .
PRED:	Or my help shall be as a lion , and my soul shall be as a lion .
GOLD:	If you do n't , they will maul me like a lion , tearing me to pieces with no one to rescue me .

ID:	784
INPUT:	Éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yik'ee bádahóóchįįd , áko hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Éfesas dine'é bidiyin Daiyána éí ayóó át'é !
PRED:	When they heard this , they became very angry . They cried out out , “ The god of Ephesus is great . ”
GOLD:	At this their anger boiled , and they began shouting , “ Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! ”

ID:	785
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman ázhdííniid , T'áá aaníí kin ayóó át'é bii' kééhót'į́į dooleełii ná áshłaa ; éí bii' honílǫ́ǫgo ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	Solomon said , “ I have built a house for you , and it will be forever . ”
GOLD:	Now I have built a glorious Temple for you , a place where you can live forever ! ”

ID:	786
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hinishná ; ákót'éego Ízrel dine'é bitahgi díí saad nawólta' ts'ídá t'áá aaníí doo bee hanáádíídzih da .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord God : As surely as I live , thou shalt not speak in the midst of Israel .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you will not quote this proverb anymore in Israel .

ID:	787
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán nílíinii , shidił nídóół'įįh lágoáádóó bíni' shiinéé' diits'a' doo .
PRED:	O earth , let me hear my voice , and let the voice of my voice hear .
GOLD:	“ O earth , do not conceal my blood.Let it cry out on my behalf .

ID:	788
INPUT:	Rábah kin haal'áagi éí ghą́ą́'ask'idii nida'ałchozhgo áhodeeshłííł , áádóó Áman dine'é bikéyahdi dibé bighan naaznilgo ádeeshłííł , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nihił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will make the camels of the camels of his camels , and I will make the sheep of the children of Ammon , and you shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will turn the city of Rabbah into a pasture for camels , and all the land of the Ammonites into a resting place for sheep and goats . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	789
INPUT:	Bikáá' adání yikáá' nida'iikaah ; ni'góó nida'azkaadgo da'ayą́ áádóó da'adlą́ ; naat'áanii danohłíinii , nídoohjeehgo naagé nídaałtłah .
PRED:	They sit on the table , and eat , and drink , O princes ; rise up , O princes of war .
GOLD:	Look ! They are preparing a great feast.They are spreading rugs for people to sit on.Everyone is eating and drinking.But quick ! Grab your shields and prepare for battle.You are being attacked !

ID:	790
INPUT:	Ákwe'é ídahooł'aahii , Yéego da'iinohdlą́ągo dahinohná , bijiníigo biya<unk> niiłįįhgo bi'oodlą' yee dabidziilgo dah yikahgo ájiilaa , áádóó , Ach'į' nidahwiiłnáanii lą'í bibahididiikahgo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biih hidiikah , jiníigo bich'į' hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	And the disciples cried out with a loud voice , saying , Ye believe in faith , that we may enter into the kingdom of God .
GOLD:	where they strengthened the believers . They encouraged them to continue in the faith , reminding them that we must suffer many hardships to enter the Kingdom of God .

ID:	791
INPUT:	Áádóó nihił nishłį́į doo , áádóó niha'áłchíní nídahoodleełgo k'ee'ąą nooht'į́įłgo ánihideeshłííł , índa bohoníłdzilgo nihił ahadi'nisht'ą́ągo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	And I will be with you , and I will make you fruitful , and I will make a covenant with you , and I will establish you .
GOLD:	“ I will look favorably upon you , making you fertile and multiplying your people . And I will fulfill my covenant with you .

ID:	792
INPUT:	Áádóó booyéełgo dabibeeldléí atiingóó yá dayíłkaad .
PRED:	They threw their clothes on the road . They threw their clothes on the road .
GOLD:	As he rode along , the crowds spread out their garments on the road ahead of him .

ID:	793
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí mána yee dayíízhi' ; ch'il <unk> yander bináá' nahalingo łigai , áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh bááh dá'áka'í nímazí bił ályaaígíí halniih .
PRED:	And the children of Israel did eat it , and the name of him was as an ephah of honey , and of honey .
GOLD:	The Israelites called the food manna . It was white like coriander seed , and it tasted like honey wafers .

ID:	794
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii nanise'iísh ha'át'íhída t'áá bee ádoolníiłgo át'é ? Da' éísh ła' bąąh k'élniihgo łeets'aa' t'áá bąąh dah náhidiit'áahgo ádoolnííł ?
PRED:	Can it be done for the vine , that it may be cut off ? Can it be cut off from the vessels ?
GOLD:	Can its wood be used for making things , like pegs to hang up pots and pans ?

ID:	795
INPUT:	Shidine'é yaa nidaakaígíí hanisíidgo nił bééhodoozįįłígíí biniyé ya'niiltł'ǫ́ǫgo bighą́ą́'dóó ha'alzíidii índa bee ohoníłdzilii ániishłaa .
PRED:	I have set my head on the roof of my people , that they may know that I have set up my people .
GOLD:	“ Jeremiah , I have made you a tester of metals , that you may determine the quality of my people .

ID:	796
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii ádahodííniid , Jó , diné ninás'áhígíí nił bééhózin . Ha'át'éegoshą' háí shideelchid diní ?
PRED:	The disciples said to him , “ You know that the man is blind . Why do you say to me ? ”
GOLD:	His disciples said to him , “ Look at this crowd pressing around you . How can you ask , ‘ Who touched me ? ' ”

ID:	797
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'áadoo nánídlíníii baa nida'aldeeh ; jó , diné doo yá'ádaashóonii ádayoolíłígíí bik'ehgo diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bich'į' áánííł , áádóó diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii ádayoolíłígíí bik'ehgo diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bich'į' áánííł . Díí ałdó' éí t'áadoo nánídlíní da , dishní .
PRED:	There is nothing in the earth ; for the wicked do according to the ways of the righteous , and according to the righteous , according to the works of the righteous . This is my vanity .
GOLD:	And this is not all that is meaningless in our world . In this life , good people are often treated as though they were wicked , and wicked people are often treated as though they were good . This is so meaningless !

ID:	798
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' bee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'ii , ak'idi'yiitįįh t'áá ałtso yiláahdi át'éii , éí Christ Jesus bee nihijéí índa nihintsékees yaa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	And the peace of God is greater than all understanding , but the heart of Jesus Christ will be in your hearts and in your hearts .
GOLD:	Then you will experience God 's peace , which exceeds anything we can understand . His peace will guard your hearts and minds as you live in Christ Jesus .

ID:	799
INPUT:	áádóó áshíłní , Paul , t'áadoo nił yé'í ; Síízar ts'ídá t'áá bidááhdóó yidíízįįłí ; jó'akon , bił nił oo'ołígíí Diyin God t'áá ałtso neinínil .
PRED:	and he said to me , “ Do n't be afraid . Behold , God has given you all the grain that is in front of Caesar . ”
GOLD:	and he said , ‘ Do n't be afraid , Paul , for you will surely stand trial before Caesar ! What 's more , God in his goodness has granted safety to everyone sailing with you . '

ID:	800
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , saad nanil'ingo béédi'dootį́įłii ła' bee handziih , áádóó Ízrel dine'é hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii ła' bee bich'į' handziih ;
PRED:	“ Son of man , speak to them a parable , and speak to them a parable to the children of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give this riddle , and tell this story to the people of Israel .

ID:	801
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' ni'góó nideiskaadígíí éí óola bik'ésti'go áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he overlaid the house with gold , and covered them with gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid the floor in both rooms with gold .

ID:	802
INPUT:	Éí bąą Néíyaman éí łóód a<unk> yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ánígíí nididoolnah k'ad áádóó na'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ałdó' hool'áágóó bitah yiłnih doo . Índa yasgi át'éego łigaigo łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hodoolna'go Iiláísha bits'ą́ąjį' dashdiiyá .
PRED:	So Joab will be healed forever and to his descendants forever . He will go away from Elisha 's disease .
GOLD:	Because you have done this , you and your descendants will suffer from Naaman 's leprosy forever. ” When Gehazi left the room , he was covered with leprosy ; his skin was white as snow .

ID:	803
INPUT:	Sáíman Peter ánáázhdoo'niid , Bóhólníihii , doo t'áá shikee' t'éiyá da nidi shíla' índa shitsiits'iin ałdó' táádíígis !
PRED:	Simon answered , “ Lord , only my feet and my head . ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter exclaimed , “ Then wash my hands and head as well , Lord , not just my feet ! ”

ID:	804
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Ni ałdó' ashdla'go kin hadaas'á bee nóhólníih doo .
PRED:	He said to them , “ You also will have five cities . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ Well done ! ' the king said . ‘ You will be governor over five cities . '

ID:	805
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iithiyópiya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í <unk> kah baa hane'go yidiizts'ą́ą'go , Jó , nik'ijį' nidoobah biniyé yigááł , ha'níigo baa hojíínii'go Heziikáíyah yich'į' anáá'ííł'a' kóníigo ,
PRED:	When the king of Assyria heard this , he sent a message to come to fight against Hezekiah , saying ,
GOLD:	Soon afterward King Sennacherib received word that King Tirhakah of Ethiopia was leading an army to fight against him . Before leaving to meet the attack , he sent messengers back to Hezekiah in Jerusalem with this message :

ID:	806
INPUT:	naanish t'ááłá'íígíí hanaanish danilį́į́ léi' t'áá ákwii ba'ałk'ee dzizdáago nidajishnish , háálá níbaal ííł'íní dajílį́ .
PRED:	There was one work in his work , and he sat in his work ; for they are the father .
GOLD:	Paul lived and worked with them , for they were tentmakers just as he was .

ID:	807
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo yanáalk'idę́ę́' hadáájoot'áazhgo kin haal'áhíjį' ajíí'áázh . Kin bighą́ą'di Sámuel éí Saul bił ahił nahodzisne' .
PRED:	And they went up from the high place , and went to the city , and told Saul on the top of the city .
GOLD:	When they came down from the place of worship and returned to town , Samuel took Saul up to the roof of the house and prepared a bed for him there .

ID:	808
INPUT:	Nishtł'ají yee shits'iiyah déesnii' doo nít'éé' áádóó nish'náájí yee shináz'nii' doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	When I had put my hands on my right hand , I would have two sons .
GOLD:	Your left arm would be under my head , and your right arm would embrace me .

ID:	809
INPUT:	Doo hada'ísídół'į́į́'góó t'áadoo hooyání nídoodáałgo , da'ołhoshgo nihik'ídoogááł .
PRED:	Do n't let your eyes go back , but if you sleep , he will find you .
GOLD:	Do n't let him find you sleeping when he arrives without warning .

ID:	810
INPUT:	Esther éí asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh ábi'diilyaa
PRED:	Esther 's Queen
GOLD:	Esther Becomes Queen

ID:	811
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' bijééhkał índa ał<unk> dzihgo yił haadaaskaigo , Bik'i dah didíílnih , dahałníigo nídahookąąh .
PRED:	Then they called out a man and the blind , and cried out to him , saying , “ Let him lay his hand on him . ”
GOLD:	A deaf man with a speech impediment was brought to him , and the people begged Jesus to lay his hands on the man to heal him .

ID:	812
INPUT:	Kót'éego áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii bich'į' yádaołti' doo , Bóhólníihii haa yit'éego nich'į' énáhoosįįd ? áádóó , Bóhólníihii haa yit'éego hanáánáádzíí' ? dabidohníi doo .
PRED:	And you shall speak to the prophet , saying , ‘ The Lord has spoken to you ? ' And you shall say , ‘ What is the word of the Lord ? '
GOLD:	“ This is what you should say to the prophets : ‘ What is the Lord 's answer ? ' or ‘ What is the Lord saying ? '

ID:	813
INPUT:	Jóseph haye'ké Ííjip kéyahgi há yizhchínígíí éí naaki , áko Jéíkab ba'áłchíní t'áá ałtso Ííjip kéyahgi nínánígíí éí tsosts'idiin .
PRED:	Joseph 's sons were two sons in Egypt , and Jacob 's sons were seven hundred .
GOLD:	In addition , Joseph had two sons who were born in Egypt . So altogether , there were seventy members of Jacob 's family in the land of Egypt .

ID:	814
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá háiida ch'į́įdii yádabiiłti'ii índa da'diłgąshii bikéé' dashdiiyáago ajił baa nijigháhígíí hak'ijį' nishłį́į doo , índa hadine'é bits'ą́ąjį' hodiyeeshxééł .
PRED:	And if any man go after the spirits of the dead , and after him , I will be against him , and I will kill him from his people .
GOLD:	“ I will also turn against those who commit spiritual prostitution by putting their trust in mediums or in those who consult the spirits of the dead . I will cut them off from the community .

ID:	815
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Zekaráíyah yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Zechariah , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to Zechariah from the Lord :

ID:	816
INPUT:	Áádóó índa Dził Sáínaidę́ę́' Mózes éí tsé dilkǫǫhii naakigo bikáa'gi neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii joojihgo dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hadah níjoodáałgo hanii' bits'ádi'nílídígíí doo baa ákoznízingóó nídzídzá ; jó , Diyin God bił ałch'į' yájíłti' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Moses went up from Mount Sinai , and saw that he had gone up from the mountain , and saw that he had gone out of the mountain , and he was speaking to God .
GOLD:	When Moses came down Mount Sinai carrying the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , he was n't aware that his face had become radiant because he had spoken to the Lord .

ID:	817
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' ájíní , T'áá áhoołts'íísígo baa nániideeshkąąłii laanaa nisin ; nánooshkąąh , dooda , doo shididííniił da . Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Yíníkeed , shimá ; jó , dooda , doo nidideeshniił da .
PRED:	And the king said , I pray thee , I pray thee , that thou mayest not say unto me , I pray thee . And the king said unto him , My mother shall not say , I will not call thee .
GOLD:	“ I have one small request to make of you , ” she said . “ I hope you wo n't turn me down. ” “ What is it , my mother ? ” he asked . “ You know I wo n't refuse you . ”

ID:	818
INPUT:	Íífad bikáa'gi ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí éí óola áłts'óózígo neheeshgizhígíí áádóó yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí áádóó łichxí'ígíí índa áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii baa nahodeesgį'go iichįįhgo íífad ályaaígi át'éego áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the ephod of gold , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and fine linen , and fine linen .
GOLD:	Bezalel made the chestpiece with great skill and care . He made it to match the ephod , using finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	819
INPUT:	ATaa' bich'į' Jesus honít'i'ii nilį́
PRED:	The Father and the Father
GOLD:	Jesus , the Way to the Father

ID:	820
INPUT:	Áko naal'a'í ábizhdííniid , Níléí diné nihidáahjį' yigáłígíishą' háí át'į́ ? Áko naal'a'í ání , Shinanit'a'í át'į́ . Ákohgo ch'ikę́ę́h binii'jį' yik'é'ésti' .
PRED:	He said to his servant , “ Who is this man who is coming to meet us ? ” “ My lord , my lord ! ” So the woman stretched out his face on her head .
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master. ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	821
INPUT:	Tó ak'i ch'ídzíłhałígi át'éego t'óó báhádzidgo hoł yéé' áhooł'įįh ; tł'ée'go níyoltsoh hoł yóó'iighááh .
PRED:	They are afraid of the waters , and they are afraid ; they are afraid in the night .
GOLD:	Terror overwhelms them like a flood , and they are blown away in the storms of the night .

ID:	822
INPUT:	Nihádahachįįhgo ts'ídá bąąhági ádaohnééh lágo ; t'áá nihádahachį'go o'ó'ááł lágo .
PRED:	Do not sin in your anger ; do n't be angry with your anger .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you. ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	823
INPUT:	Áko éidíígíí doo bee baa nídeiit'į́į́góogo , diné t'áá ałtso dabiidoodląął , áádóó Rome dine'é dadookahgo nihihodiyingo haz'ánígíí índa nihidine'é éí nihikéyah t'áá bił t'áá haz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' nihits'ą́ą́' deidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	If you do not obey them , all the people will believe and believe you , and you will be a holy place , and you will destroy your holy place .
GOLD:	If we allow him to go on like this , soon everyone will believe in him . Then the Roman army will come and destroy both our Temple and our nation . ”

ID:	824
INPUT:	Job yich'į' haadzíi'go Iiláíhu bee bá haz'ą́
PRED:	Job answered Job
GOLD:	Elihu Responds to Job 's Friends

ID:	825
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso Kéídeshdóó dah náádii'náago Dził Hor hoolyéejį' níná .
PRED:	So all the congregation of Israel went out from Kadesh to Kadesh .
GOLD:	The whole community of Israel left Kadesh and arrived at Mount Hor .

ID:	826
INPUT:	áádóó éí ha'a'aahjí ch'íhoodzooígíí Gí<unk> kin shijaa'góó , áádóó <unk> zin haz'ánígóó , Rí<unk> ho<unk> kin shijaa' bich'į'go áádóó Níyah kin shijaa'jį' nááhodeesdzo ,
PRED:	And the border went out from the east side to Gibeah , and went into the city of Gibeon , and went to the border of it .
GOLD:	Then it continued east to Gath-hepher , Eth-kazin , and Rimmon and turned toward Neah .

ID:	827
INPUT:	T'áá ni ádínínígíí bee ádá nináhonít'aah ; shí éí doo nánihonish'aah da ; t'áá aaníí , t'áá ni ádínínígíí bee ádaa nahólne' .
PRED:	Thou shalt judge thy judgment : yea , I am not thy judge ; yea , thou shalt speak thy truth .
GOLD:	Your own mouth condemns you , not I.Your own lips testify against you .

ID:	828
INPUT:	Nidi ni , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shinaage' nílį́ ; bee ił nishłíinii áádóó dah neesht'áałgo áshósinii nílį́ .
PRED:	But you , Lord , are my shield ; you are my shield and my covenant .
GOLD:	But you , O Lord , are a shield around me ; you are my glory , the one who holds my head high .

ID:	829
INPUT:	Doo yóó'áshidi'doolníił da biniyé yisdáshííłtį́ , áko adinídíín yideestsééł .
PRED:	He saved me , that I may not be buried ; and I may see the light .
GOLD:	God rescued me from the grave , and now my life is filled with light . '

ID:	830
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Hanéínai éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Éísa yaa níyáago íidííniid , Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í baa jiisínílíí' ; Bóhólníihii niDiyin God éí doo baa jiisínílíi' da ; éí bąą Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo doo bik'eh didíídleeł da .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that Isaiah the prophet came to Asa king of Judah , and said unto him , Because thou hast not believed in the Lord thy God , the God of Aram , and the army of Aram shall not return to him .
GOLD:	At that time Hanani the seer came to King Asa and told him , “ Because you have put your trust in the king of Aram instead of in the Lord your God , you missed your chance to destroy the army of the king of Aram .

ID:	831
INPUT:	Áman dine'é índa Síriya dine'é bik'eh hodeesdlį́į́'
PRED:	The Ammonites and Aram
GOLD:	David Defeats the Ammonites

ID:	832
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi Diyin God k'ehgo hináanii ásdįįd , áko diné bitahgi t'áá ákogi át'éii doo ła' naagháa da ; t'áá ałtso diné diyoolyéełgo bidił bits'ádoonah biniyé ahéeshjéé' ; t'ááłá'í nítínígo bik'is danilíinii yee deidoolohii t'éí hádaat'į́ .
PRED:	The living God lives on the earth , and there is no one in the midst of the righteous ; all the righteous are in wait for the blood of his brother .
GOLD:	The godly people have all disappeared ; not one honest person is left on the earth.They are all murderers , setting traps even for their own brothers .

ID:	833
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii héti'ii azis bii' dá'deestł'ǫ́ , áádóó doo ákwii áát'įįdii bidáń'da'díłkad .
PRED:	And he put a yoke in the law , and put the doors of iniquity .
GOLD:	My sins would be sealed in a pouch , and you would cover my guilt .

ID:	834
INPUT:	Júdas éí James biye' índa Júdas Iskáriyat , éí nináhodidoo'áłígíí .
PRED:	Judas the son of James , and Judas , the son of Judas , who was going to deliver him .
GOLD:	Judas ( son of James ) , Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	835
INPUT:	Nidi na'adlo' t'áá deíłt'éeh doo biniyé ats'áhaaskaii , éí doo ákwii ádaaníiłii bił yówehjį' Bóhólníihii ho'doołnih . Ízrel dine'é bitahgi hasht'ehodít'ée le' !
PRED:	But the Lord will make peace with those who turn away from evil . May the Lord make peace among Israel .
GOLD:	But banish those who turn to crooked ways , O Lord.Take them away with those who do evil.May Israel have peace !

ID:	836
INPUT:	Áko bá nahós'a'jį' daats'í ninádííjih , índa bighangóó atiinígíí daats'í nił bééhózin doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt bring them into the land , and thou shalt know whether it is in thy house .
GOLD:	Can you take each to its home ? Do you know how to get there ?

ID:	837
INPUT:	Jó , éí Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii yisdáshidoołtéełgo Diyin God bich'į' baa ahééh nisin ! Ákohgo t'áá shí ánísht'éego Diyin God yee has'áanii shíni' bee bi'íínísin ; jó , ts'ísee k'ehgo bąąhági át'éii yee has'áaniida bi'íínísin .
PRED:	For I give thanks to the Lord Jesus Christ , to save my God . And I fear the law of God , because I have made the law of the law of the law of sin .
GOLD:	Thank God ! The answer is in Jesus Christ our Lord . So you see how it is : In my mind I really want to obey God 's law , but because of my sinful nature I am a slave to sin .

ID:	838
INPUT:	Éí kodi nihił áhoot'éhígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé , áádóó nihijéí hada'ólníigo ánihizhdoolííl ałdó' biniyé nihich'į' ahóół'a' .
PRED:	But so that you may know the way of your heart , and that your heart may be able to know your hearts .
GOLD:	I have sent him to you for this very purpose — to let you know how we are doing and to encourage you .

ID:	839
INPUT:	Éí bąą Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Bóhólníihii kót'éego baa haadzíí' , Aháláane' , shínaaí ! Aháláane' , shideezhí ! Aháláane' , bóhonishníihii ! Aháláane' , yee ayóó át'éii ! doo daaníigo haa atínídadindleehgo daacha da doo !
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord concerning Josiah the son of Josiah , king of Judah , saying , “ My brother , my brother ! My brother , my brother ! My brother , my brother ! ”
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says about Jehoiakim , son of King Josiah : “ The people will not mourn for him , crying to one another , ‘ Alas , my brother ! Alas , my sister ! 'His subjects will not mourn for him , crying , ‘ Alas , our master is dead ! Alas , his splendor is gone ! '

ID:	840
INPUT:	Nidi shí éí hool'áágóó Jéíkab biDiyin God baa hashne' áádóó baa hashniihgo bich'į' hashtaał doo .
PRED:	But I will sing to the God of Jacob for ever , and I will sing praise to him .
GOLD:	But as for me , I will always proclaim what God has done ; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob .

ID:	841
INPUT:	T'ah náábíláahgo diné t'áá ałtso bitahdóó diné t'áá nitsídaakeesii áádóó Diyin God deidísinii áádóó bada'ahódlíii índa adááh hání yijoołxáii náhidííla ; éí miilgo , neeznádiingo , ashdladiingo índa neeznáago diné yindant'áa doogo nídiinííł .
PRED:	And he shall hate him all the men of all men , and faithful men , and faithful , and faithful , and faithful men ; and he shall rule over thousands , and ten thousand men .
GOLD:	But select from all the people some capable , honest men who fear God and hate bribes . Appoint them as leaders over groups of one thousand , one hundred , fifty , and ten .

ID:	842
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é ła' kéyahgi bik'ídadziskaigo David bił baa jíkai . Bááh ła' bada'dzistsoodgo yiyííyą́ą́' ; tó ałdó' ła' baa dadzizką́ągo yoodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	They found a man in Egypt and brought him to David . They took some bread and ate some of them . They ate some water .
GOLD:	Along the way they found an Egyptian man in a field and brought him to David . They gave him some bread to eat and water to drink .

ID:	843
INPUT:	T'ah abínídą́ą́' aa a'ááh nínízinii baa hane'go háni'dii diists'a'go áshílééh , háálá ni naa jííníshłí . Yishááł dooleełgóó bínashiníłtin , háálá shii' sizíinii nich'į' cho'ooł'į́įgo níká déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	Let me hear your mercy in the morning , for I will come to you , for I will find you , for I will look for you .
GOLD:	Let me hear of your unfailing love each morning , for I am trusting you.Show me where to walk , for I give myself to you .

ID:	844
INPUT:	Áko shik'is jílį́ shííní'níigo , t'áá náshididííłtéłígi át'éego nááhodidííłtééł .
PRED:	If you love me , you will take me as a donkey . ”
GOLD:	So if you consider me your partner , welcome him as you would welcome me .

ID:	845
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díldzííł ! ShiDiyin God yisdáshíłteeh ! Háálá shida'ana'í t'áá ałtso biniishjaa' náhidíníłhaal . Doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii biwoo' dahíníti' .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord God , save me ; for I have cut off all my enemies ; I have cut them off , and the teeth of their God .
GOLD:	Arise , O Lord ! Rescue me , my God ! Slap all my enemies in the face ! Shatter the teeth of the wicked !

ID:	846
INPUT:	T'áá biyázhí nishłį́į́dóó wóshdę́ę́' atíshi'dil'į́į́ nít'éé' áádóó k'asdą́ą́' danástsaah nít'éé' ; nits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' báádahadzidii bik'ee ti'hooshnííh ; t'áadoo ánááhó'ne'<unk> da .
PRED:	I was consumed from my youth , and I was sick ; I was sick , and there was no more afraid of them .
GOLD:	I have been sick and close to death since my youth.I stand helpless and desperate before your terrors .

ID:	847
INPUT:	Pásher ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan tsosts'id .
PRED:	The sons of Tema , one thousand and two hundred and seven .
GOLD:	The family of Pashhur1,247

ID:	848
INPUT:	naat'áanii danilíinii tó yíká ida'iizgeed ; diné binanit'a'í danilíinii bigish yee tó yíká nida'azgeed . Áko honoojíídóó Mátanah hoolyéégóó Ízrel dine'é dah náádii'ná ;
PRED:	And the princes sought for water ; and the princes of the princes of the princes of Israel went out from the wilderness of Zin .
GOLD:	Sing of this well , which princes dug , which great leaders hollowed outwith their scepters and staffs. ” Then the Israelites left the wilderness and proceeded on through Mattanah ,

ID:	849
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizindóó índa aláahgo naat' áanii bighandóó yódí ałtso ayííyį́ , áko Sálaman éí naagé óola yee ádayiilaaígíí t'áá át'é éí Sháíshak ayííyį́ .
PRED:	And he took all the vessels of the house of the Lord , and the king 's house , and all the gold that Solomon had made for him .
GOLD:	He ransacked the treasuries of the Lord 's Temple and the royal palace ; he stole everything , including all the gold shields Solomon had made .

ID:	850
INPUT:	Áádóó aa doolyéełii bich'į' nizh'nínilgo , ada'azláii dah nídazhdiił'a' .
PRED:	And he sent a gift to them , and sent them away .
GOLD:	After delivering the payment , Ehud started home with those who had helped carry the tribute .

ID:	851
INPUT:	Nída'dókeedígíí t'áá ałtso ba'iyínííł , áádóó ninaalye'é nighayii'níiłii t'áadoo bínéíníkeedí .
PRED:	Do n't look for all your thoughts , and do n't ask for your wealth .
GOLD:	Give to anyone who asks ; and when things are taken away from you , do n't try to get them back .

ID:	852
INPUT:	David éí dibé nidanilkaadii áádóó béégashii nidanilkaadii t'áá át'é néísná . Áko diné dabilį́'ígíí alą́ąjį' ats'ádeineeskaadgo ádaaní , Díí David binaalye'é ádaat'é .
PRED:	David built sheep and cattle , and all the cattle . And the people threw them before the first , saying , This is the spoil of David .
GOLD:	He also recovered all the flocks and herds , and his men drove them ahead of the other livestock . “ This plunder belongs to David ! ” they said .

ID:	853
INPUT:	Áko hahóóyá bijį́ tsin naazkaad dabi'iil danizhóníii éí tsin naazkaadii páam wolyéhígíí bi'iil áádóó tsin dadíłch'ilii bi'iil índa tó nílį́į́dę́ę́' k'ai' ałdó' nidahidoołjołgo bee chaha'oh ádadoohłííł , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo tsosts'id yidoołkááł .
PRED:	And thou shalt cast out the palm trees on the day of the palm trees , and palm trees , and thou shalt make it a shadow of water , and thou shalt put it in the sight of the Lord thy God for seven days .
GOLD:	On the first day gather branches from magnificent trees — palm fronds , boughs from leafy trees , and willows that grow by the streams . Then celebrate with joy before the Lord your God for seven days .

ID:	854
INPUT:	naaldlooshii dabikéshgaan dahałgizhígíí áádóó doo bita' nida'azbaalii índa nída'at'aałígíí éí daohsą́ą doo .
PRED:	You shall eat the flesh of the animal that has a flock , and the animal that has a flock , and you shall eat it .
GOLD:	You may eat any animal that has completely split hooves and chews the cud .

ID:	855
INPUT:	Shoo , kǫ́ǫ́ sézį́ ; Bóhólníihii binááł áádóó ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii binááł shaa dahołne' . Háishą' bibéégashii bigha nishtį́ ? Háishą' bitélii bigha nishtį́ ? Háishą' bi'délo' ? Háishą' bide íinisin ? Háishą' bee naho'diiniihii sheinínilgo shíni' ííłdingo áyiilaa ? Éí nihił k'éédahodeeshdǫǫł .
PRED:	Behold , I stand there before the Lord , and the oil of the anointed of the Lord ; who has taken the ox from his hand ? Who has given me the donkey ? Who has given me ? Who has made me an atonement for me ?
GOLD:	Now testify against me in the presence of the Lord and before his anointed one . Whose ox or donkey have I stolen ? Have I ever cheated any of you ? Have I ever oppressed you ? Have I ever taken a bribe and perverted justice ? Tell me and I will make right whatever I have done wrong . ”

ID:	856
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus t'áadoo hach'į' hanáádzíi' da , áko Páílat díidíígíí yik'ee t'óó bił ahayóí .
PRED:	But Jesus did not answer them , and Pilate was amazed .
GOLD:	But Jesus said nothing , much to Pilate 's surprise .

ID:	857
INPUT:	Ayóó'óósh'níinii éí jádí , doodaii' bįįhką' nahalin , jó'akon . Tsé yítł'inígíí bine'dę́ę'go sizį́įgo tsésǫ'gi tsin yistł'ǫ́ǫgo dádiníbaalígíí yiníká déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	I love my beloved , and behold , there is a garden , and a stone standing by the wall , and hid him in the window .
GOLD:	My lover is like a swift gazelleor a young stag.Look , there he is behind the wall , looking through the window , peering into the room .

ID:	858
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é t'áá dah yinééł nít'éé' índa dé'éyóní hatahgi t'óó átsééd kéédahat'ínígíí ádił nida'iisí'ígíí bá yóó'anídidoot'ááł , háálá t'áadoo yaa ákodaníziní ádił nida'iisíí' .
PRED:	The whole community of Israel and the foreigners who live among them will be forgiven because they have sinned .
GOLD:	The whole community of Israel will be forgiven , including the foreigners living among you , for all the people were involved in the sin .

ID:	859
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii bizaad bidziilígíí bąą , Ha'át'íí lá baa naniná ? háísh yididooniił ?
PRED:	For why shall the words of the king say , What is thy word ?
GOLD:	His command is backed by great power . No one can resist or question it .

ID:	860
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii hach'į' haadzíi'go tsits'aa' ádajiilaago Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin tł'óo'di dáń'dítį́įhgi nidadziz'ą́ .
PRED:	And the king commanded the ark , and set it in front of the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	So now the king ordered a chest to be made and set outside the gate leading to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	861
INPUT:	Áko nihí Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , ał'ąą ádóone'é nohłínígíí bik'ehgo díí kéyah ałtaa doohdzoh .
PRED:	And this land shall be divided unto you , O house of Israel , according to your tribes , according to your tribes .
GOLD:	“ Divide the land within these boundaries among the tribes of Israel .

ID:	862
INPUT:	Kin hadaas'áhígíí nihikédaayahgi táa'go kin haal'áii t'áá nihí ádá nidadidooh'ááł ; éí kédaayah Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	And you shall take three cities in your cities , which the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	Then you must set apart three cities of refuge in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	863
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii díí bee aha'deet'áanii danihizhé'é yę́ę doo yee yił ahada'deest'ą́ą da , nidi nihí díí jį́ dahinii'nánígíí t'áá áníiltso nihił ahada'deest'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord has not made a covenant with our ancestors , but we have made a covenant with us today .
GOLD:	The Lord did not make this covenant with our ancestors , but with all of us who are alive today .

ID:	864
INPUT:	Áko diné t'ááłá'í níyá nahalingo diné t'áá ałtso t'ááłáhígi ahíikai ; tó bidáń'dítį́į́h bich'éédą́ą́'góó atiinígi áłah nilį́ , áko bee haz'áanii yína'niłtinii Ézra , Mózes yee has'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' yee hahaasdzíi'ii díí'ááł , deidííniid .
PRED:	And all the people gathered together together as one man at the gate of the gate , in the gate of the gate , and Ezra the law of the Lord commanded Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	all the people assembled with a unified purpose at the square just inside the Water Gate . They asked Ezra the scribe to bring out the Book of the Law of Moses , which the Lord had given for Israel to obey .

ID:	865
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go hazháá'áád nít'é'ígíí bił Mó'ab kéyahdóó nihééjíkai , háálá Mó'ab kéyahgi díí baa hozdiizts'ą́ą́' : haash yit'éego Bóhólníihii bidine'é yik'iinít'į́į'go ch'iyáán yeidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	So she rose up and went back to the land of Moab , because it was heard of it in Moab , because it was done to the people of Moab , and gave them food .
GOLD:	Then Naomi heard in Moab that the Lord had blessed his people in Judah by giving them good crops again . So Naomi and her daughters-in-law got ready to leave Moab to return to her homeland .

ID:	866
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go índa jį́įgo t'áá áłahjį' dilwoshgo tsé yee ni'ídiilgéeshgo dziłgóó áádóó dajishcháá'góó naaghá .
PRED:	And in the same day they cry out in a loud rock , and cast it into the mountains , and in the hills .
GOLD:	Day and night he wandered among the burial caves and in the hills , howling and cutting himself with sharp stones .

ID:	867
INPUT:	Ménahem łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáhígíí t'áá ałtso éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat , and all that he did , are they not written in the book of the Kings of Israel ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Menahem 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	868
INPUT:	Bí t'éiyá bee yisdádeeshááł ; t'óó áhodil'íinii éí doo Diyin God yidááhdóó nidoogáał da .
PRED:	I will save him alone , but he who does not stand before God .
GOLD:	But this is what will save me — I am not godless.If I were , I could not stand before him .

ID:	869
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii ła' áádóó nááda'iiłniihii ła' índa dinéda ła' , Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' íiyisí baa hane'ii , níigo yáłti'ii éí diné ba'áłchíní t'áá bił atídeeshłííł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , that I will punish one of the prophets , and of the priests , and of the priests , and of the words of the Lord , and of the children of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	870
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí óola bee ályaii éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii biyi' ata'naníbaalígíí bitsį́įjį' niiní'ą́ągo
PRED:	And the altar of gold altar was in front of the tent of meeting , at the front of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	He also placed the gold incense altar in the Tabernacle , in the Holy Place in front of the inner curtain .

ID:	871
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł díí nídaahdį́įh doo : éí náhodidoo' áłígi ákwii bízhi' dólzingo haz'ą́ągi tł'oh naadą́ą́' neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' áádóó wáin ániidíii neeznáá daníką́ągo t'ááłá'í siką́ągo áádóó tsin áliv bineest'ą' bik'ah neeznáá daníką́ągo t'ááłá'í siką́ągo índa nihilį́į́' áádóó nihidibé alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii náádahołniihii daahsą́ą doo . Ákódaaht'į́įgo díí bídahooł'aah doo : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá áłahjį' dadíínóhsin doo .
PRED:	You shall eat it in the presence of the Lord your God : one tenth of the grain , a tenth of grain , a tenth of oil , and a tenth of oil , and a tenth of oil , and a tenth of oil .
GOLD:	Bring this tithe to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — and eat it there in his presence . This applies to your tithes of grain , new wine , olive oil , and the firstborn males of your flocks and herds . Doing this will teach you always to fear the Lord your God .

ID:	872
INPUT:	áká aníjílwo' ládą́ą́' , háni'dii áká aníjílwo' dooleeł ; nazh'nitin ládą́ą́' , háni'dii nazh'nitin dooleeł ;
PRED:	If he is help , let him help him . If he is teaching , let him teach his teaching .
GOLD:	If your gift is serving others , serve them well . If you are a teacher , teach well .

ID:	873
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í honíle'go t'áá łáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tseebídiindóó ba'aan ashdladi mííl Asíriya dine'é bisiláo dah yinéłígíí neistseed , áko hoos'įįdgo nízhdiijée'go éí t'áá ałtso daneeznáago bits'íís dadziiłtsą́ , jó'akon .
PRED:	And the angel of the Lord came and struck down a hundred and five hundred and five hundred and five thousand ; and when the morning rose up , they saw all flesh .
GOLD:	That night the angel of the Lord went out to the Assyrian camp and killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers . When the surviving Assyrians woke up the next morning , they found corpses everywhere .

ID:	874
INPUT:	Áádóó atsį' ayóó áhálniihgo hasht'ejiilaii índa łees'áán biłgo hayáázh Jéíkab bílák'ejííką́ .
PRED:	And he made the meat of the meat , and gave it into the hand of Jacob his son .
GOLD:	Then she gave Jacob the delicious meal , including freshly baked bread .

ID:	875
INPUT:	Bábilangi Belsházar aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo áłtsé náhááh góne' , Daniel hatsásk'eh bikáá' dziztį́įgo nijiiyeeł áádóó hoł áhóót'įįd . Áko baa nijiizyeelii baa hojoolne'go bee ak'e'jishchį́ :
PRED:	In the first year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , Daniel sat on his bed , and he wrote to his dream .
GOLD:	Earlier , during the first year of King Belshazzar 's reign in Babylon , Daniel had a dream and saw visions as he lay in his bed . He wrote down the dream , and this is what he saw .

ID:	876
INPUT:	Áko Bábilan dine'é binanit'a'í danilíinii bá nidaal'a'í éí kéyahgi ayóó ánóolningo ádahóót'įįdígíí yínda'ídí<unk> kił biniyé hach'į' ayiis'a'go Diyin God hwíidínóotah biniyé t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nihoníłtį́ , áko hajéí bii' bee nitsídzíkeesii t'áá át'é bił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	And the princes of Babylon sent messengers to ask for the great things that God had done in the land , so that they may be afraid .
GOLD:	However , when ambassadors arrived from Babylon to ask about the remarkable events that had taken place in the land , God withdrew from Hezekiah in order to test him and to see what was really in his heart .

ID:	877
INPUT:	Máíkah éí e'elyaii yich'į' nahałá
PRED:	Micah 's idols
GOLD:	Micah 's Idols

ID:	878
INPUT:	Áádóó diné doo hólǫ́ǫ́góó yiyiiłtsą́ągo áná'ookąąhii doo hólǫ́ǫ́góó t'óó bił ahóóyóí ; éí bąą bigaan yee ádá yisdá'ííjaa' áádóó bit'áá ákogi át'éii chánah í'diilyaa .
PRED:	When he saw that he was not in his eyes , he cried out for help ; therefore he saved his arm and righteousness .
GOLD:	He was amazed to see that no one intervenedto help the oppressed.So he himself stepped in to save them with his strong arm , and his justice sustained him .

ID:	879
INPUT:	Rúben dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Júdah dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	And the border of Reuben shall be from the east side to the west side , and the border of Judah shall possess it .
GOLD:	and then Judah , all of whose boundaries extend from east to west .

ID:	880
INPUT:	Áko hamá índa hatsilíké haa yíkai , nidi diné t'óó ahayóigo biniinaa doo hach'į' nookááh át'ée da .
PRED:	His mother and his brothers came to him , but they could not come to him because of the multitude .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him , but they could n't get to him because of the crowd .

ID:	881
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Nihi'ana'í danilíinii t'áá aaníí nahjį' kódaalyaa ; binaalye'é daadziihígíí ałtso adahideezk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	saying , “ Your enemies are cut off , and all the spoil are burned with fire . ”
GOLD:	They will say , ‘ See how our enemies have been destroyed.The last of them have been consumed in the fire . '

ID:	882
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Ííjip kéyahdi hoł íldee' , áádóó Íshmeiyel dine'é hoł yíkaígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó Féro bisiláo binanit'a'í , Pátifer wolyéii nahwiisnii' .
PRED:	Joseph was afraid to go with him in Egypt , and Ishmael the captain of the people who were with him , the captain of Pharaoh 's army .
GOLD:	When Joseph was taken to Egypt by the Ishmaelite traders , he was purchased by Potiphar , an Egyptian officer . Potiphar was captain of the guard for Pharaoh , the king of Egypt .

ID:	883
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Éran ííłní , Jó , Ízrel dine'é diyingo shaa nídeidiyii'aahígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó bił dah nídi'diilnihgo náádahaniihii t'áá át'é ałdó' níí' át'é ; éí ni'doolzį́'ígíí bąą naa diní'ą́ , áádóó hool'áágóó bik'eh hoogáałii át'éego niye'ké bił nihaa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord said to Aaron , “ Behold , I have given you the children of Israel as an offering from the children of Israel , and I have given you all the offerings that they have given to you , and I have given you for your sons forever . ”
GOLD:	The Lord gave these further instructions to Aaron : “ I myself have put you in charge of all the holy offerings that are brought to me by the people of Israel . I have given all these consecrated offerings to you and your sons as your permanent share .

ID:	884
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bibikáá' náá'iiniihí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'é'étiingi si'ánígíí dił yik'ínéíłtah doo , áádóó ak'ahígíí yiidiłidgo Bóhólníihii bich'į' łikání halchin doo .
PRED:	And the priest shall sprinkle the blood of the Lord upon the altar of meeting , and he shall sprinkle it in the entrance of the tent of meeting , and he shall burn the fat of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the priest will be able to splatter the blood against the Lord 's altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and he will burn the fat as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	885
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hadzoodzíi'go bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii ábizhdííniid , Háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne'ésh nááhodi'doo<unk> go bee haz'ą́ , dooda daats'í ?
PRED:	Jesus answered them and the Pharisees and the Pharisees , “ Is n't it lawful for the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked the Pharisees and experts in religious law , “ Is it permitted in the law to heal people on the Sabbath day , or not ? ”

ID:	886
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é doo da'nohłį́į́góó ádanihííł'įįdii yee nihá nidahałt'i'ii doo náádadidoots'į́į́łgóó ádeeshłííł , dadine'é doo nihá nináádahałt'i' da dooleeł áádóó nidine'é ádił nida'iilzíihgo doo ánáádadoohdlíił da , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	The nations have not listened to the voice of the nations which I have done to you , and you will no longer turn back from your people , ” says the Lord God .
GOLD:	I will not let you hear those other nations insult you , and you will no longer be mocked by them . You will not be a land that causes its nation to fall , says the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	887
INPUT:	Nidi biniinaanii éí bił kééhót'íinii t'áá bí bił nabik'íyádííłtih , áádóó diné náánáła' neinił'inii t'áadoo bits'ą́ą́' baa nahólne'í .
PRED:	But you shall cover his neighbor with his neighbor , and you shall not give him any man to his neighbor .
GOLD:	When arguing with your neighbor , do n't betray another person 's secret .

ID:	888
INPUT:	Bits'áoz'a' bąąhgóó tsídii wót'áahdi nidaat'a'ii t'áá ałtso bit'oh ádayiilaa , bits'áoz'a' biyaagóó éí halgaigóó naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso ákǫ́ǫ́ nida'iishchį́ , áádóó bichaha'ohgóó ał'ąą dine'é ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And he made all the birds of the sky , and made all the beasts of the sky : and all the beasts of the field were in the field , and all the nations that dwell in the midst of the earth .
GOLD:	The birds nested in its branches , and in its shade all the wild animals gave birth.All the great nations of the worldlived in its shadow .

ID:	889
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii bee haz'áanii k'íiníti'go łoh yiih yighááh , nidi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii hataałgo bił nihoozhǫǫh łeh .
PRED:	The wicked shall fall into a net , but the righteous shall rejoice .
GOLD:	Evil people are trapped by sin , but the righteous escape , shouting for joy .

ID:	890
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii binaanish iiná yii' iilóós , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii ááníłígíí yee bąąhági át'éii yii' iilóós .
PRED:	The righteous will live in life , but the wicked will bring life to the wicked .
GOLD:	The earnings of the godly enhance their lives , but evil people squander their money on sin .

ID:	891
INPUT:	T'áá ni t'éí hodiyingo honílǫ́ǫ́dę́ę́' , yádiłhił bilááhdę́ę́' hadah dííní'į́į́' , áádóó nidine'é Ízrel niidlíinii áádóó kéyah nihaa dííní'ánígíí bik'ijídliih ; éí kéyahígíí danihizhé'é yę́ę bich'į' bee ádee hadíínídzíi'ii bikáa'gi abe' áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįd .
PRED:	“ You are holy , and look at the sky , and you will bless the land that you gave to your ancestors , and you will bless them with milk and honey . ”
GOLD:	Now look down from your holy dwelling place in heaven and bless your people Israel and the land you swore to our ancestors to give us — a land flowing with milk and honey . '

ID:	892
INPUT:	Áko díigi át'éego Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah kwáát'įįd ; kót'éego diné táa'go ayóó ádaat'éii atah jílį́ ho'di'ní .
PRED:	So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did so , and these three men were among them .
GOLD:	Deeds like these made Benaiah as famous as the Three mightiest warriors .

ID:	893
INPUT:	Ákohgo Daniel hakin góne' yah anídzoodzáago Hananáíyah áádóó Mísheiyel índa Azaráíyah éí hak'isóó danilíinii áhodoo'niidígíí bee bił náhojoolne' .
PRED:	Then Daniel went into the house and told him , Azariah , Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah , and his brethren .
GOLD:	Then Daniel went home and told his friends Hananiah , Mishael , and Azariah what had happened .

ID:	894
INPUT:	Áko Kéínan kéyahdi hazhé'é baa níjíkaigo áho'dool'įįdígíí bee bił dahojoolne'go ádajiní ,
PRED:	When they came to their father in the land of Canaan , they told him what had happened to him .
GOLD:	When the brothers came to their father , Jacob , in the land of Canaan , they told him everything that had happened to them .

ID:	895
INPUT:	Jesus éí Lázaras daaztsánígíí ááhyiłní , nidi hanályį́įhgo ałhoshígíí ááhyiłní daznízin .
PRED:	Jesus said this to the dead , “ Lazarus is the last time . ”
GOLD:	They thought Jesus meant Lazarus was simply sleeping , but Jesus meant Lazarus had died .

ID:	896
INPUT:	A'ohgo áda'dólzinii bik'idahojidlí , háálá éí nahasdzáán daabíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	Blessed are the humble , for the earth shall possess it .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are humble , for they will inherit the whole earth .

ID:	897
INPUT:	Áko Dan dine'é éí e'elyaii t'áá bí ádá dah dayiyiisį' . Manáseh biye' Gérsham nilíinii éí haye' Jánathan áádóó biye'ké éí kéyah nahós'a'gi yisnááh dadzizlį́į'jį' Dan dine'é bá nááda'iiłniihii dajílį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the children of Dan set up an image , and Manasseh the son of Manasseh , the son of Jonathan , and his sons , in the land of Dan .
GOLD:	Then they set up the carved image , and they appointed Jonathan son of Gershom , son of Moses , as their priest . This family continued as priests for the tribe of Dan until the Exile .

ID:	898
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaadóó David éí Meihanéíyim kin shijaa'jį' jiníyáago Néíhash biye' Shóbai éí Áman dine'é bikin haal'áii Rábahdę́ę́' naagháii , áádóó Ámiyel biye' Méíkir éí Ló-dííbar kin shijaa'dę́ę́' naagháii índa Gíliyad dine'é Barziléíyai , éí Rógiilim kin shijaa'dę́ę́' naagháii
PRED:	And when David came to Mizpah , he came up from the sons of Ammon , who was from the sons of Ammon , from the sons of Ammon , and from the sons of Ammon , and from Gilead ;
GOLD:	When David arrived at Mahanaim , he was warmly greeted by Shobi son of Nahash , who came from Rabbah of the Ammonites , and by Makir son of Ammiel from Lo-debar , and by Barzillai of Gilead from Rogelim .

ID:	899
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' dinééh léi' Hííbrew dine'é nilį́įgo éí siláo binanit'a'í yá naal'a'í nilį́įgo bił naháatą́ą́ nít'éé' , áko neisiigeelígíí bee bił hwiilne'go ááhyiłníinii yee nihił hoolne' ; t'áá áníidlah neisiigeelígíí ááhyiłníinii bik'ehgo yee nihił hoolne' .
PRED:	At that time there was a young man who was in charge of the army , and he told us what we had done . He told us what we had done .
GOLD:	There was a young Hebrew man with us in the prison who was a slave of the captain of the guard . We told him our dreams , and he told us what each of our dreams meant .

ID:	900
INPUT:	Kodóó dah doóya' lágo , baa nánooshkąąh ; nánísdzáago índa aa deeshłéełii ch'ídeeshjihgo nich'į' nideeshnił . Áko áhodííniid , Néínídzáajį' niba' sédáa doo .
PRED:	Do n't go out from there . I will bring you back to you . ” He said to him , “ I will go to you . ”
GOLD:	Do n't go away until I come back and bring my offering to you. ” He answered , “ I will stay here until you return . ”

ID:	901
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii diné nihich'į' yi'iiłníihii t'áá ałtso ádadoołdįįł ; doo ła' baa a'áhí dadínóohsįįł da , áádóó t'ááká bidiyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' nidahoh<unk> yíila' , jó , ákódaaht'į́įgo łoh nihąąh niidoo'ááł .
PRED:	And the Lord thy God shall destroy all the people , and thou shalt not give them any of them ; and thou shalt not make a covenant unto other gods : for it shall be a net .
GOLD:	“ You must destroy all the nations the Lord your God hands over to you . Show them no mercy , and do not worship their gods , or they will trap you .

ID:	902
INPUT:	Áko siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í haa níyáago hoołtsoodgo béésh da'ahólzha'í naakigo bee ho'<unk> <unk> níigo yee hooł'a' . Áko , Háísh át'į́ , índa , Ha'át'íishą' yaa naayá , níigo na'ídééłkid .
PRED:	And the captain of the army came to him , and commanded him to put two chains in chains . And he asked , “ Who is he ? ”
GOLD:	Then the commander arrested him and ordered him bound with two chains . He asked the crowd who he was and what he had done .

ID:	903
INPUT:	Ákwe'é yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii Jerúsałemdę́ę́' Ántiyakjį' yíkai .
PRED:	In those days the prophets came to Antioch .
GOLD:	During this time some prophets traveled from Jerusalem to Antioch .

ID:	904
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii binahont'ingo haz'ą́ągi kééhojit'ínígíí éí Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii bichaha'ohgi hojílǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Whoever lives in the place of the Most High will sit in the shadow of the Almighty .
GOLD:	Those who live in the shelter of the Most Highwill find rest in the shadow of the Almighty .

ID:	905
INPUT:	Dilní yee ádadííniidgo t'áá ałtso hasht'e'ádadiilyaa , nidi doo ła' dazhdoobah da , háálá diné t'áá yíl'áá nít'éé' t'óó báhádzidgo atíháshłééh .
PRED:	They answered , “ All of them are ready , but they will not go to battle ; for I will pour out my wrath upon all the people . ”
GOLD:	“ The trumpet calls Israel 's army to mobilize , but no one listens , for my fury is against them all .

ID:	906
INPUT:	Áádóó David áhodííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' doo náníldzidgóó Bóhólníihii ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii bich'į' k'ídíínílchidgo síníłhį́ ?
PRED:	David said to him , “ Why are you afraid of the Lord 's anointed , and you killed him ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why were you not afraid to kill the Lord 's anointed one ? ” David asked .

ID:	907
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii éí t'áá ákót'éego dahonít'i'ii łahgo át'éego ádeidoolííł biniyé t'áá nahont'inee t'áadoo le'é <unk> yééh .
PRED:	There is no place for the wicked , that the way of the wicked may be made perfect .
GOLD:	The wicked take secret bribesto pervert the course of justice .

ID:	908
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii nílíinii , Bóhólníihii baa hóniih , áádóó yee naa joozba'ii éí t'ááká baa yóónééh .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , my soul , and do not forget your mercy .
GOLD:	Let all that I am praise the Lord ; may I never forget the good things he does for me .

ID:	909
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóí naa'ayiiłtł'iidgo t'áá aaníí ałk'i dahiniidéehgo áyiilaa áádóó ádadííniid , Soł<unk> <unk> , nihide áhósinii bidiltłish bits'ą́ąjį' dah didiijahgo t'áá nihí nihidine'é índa kéyah bii' nidanihi'diizhchį́ yę́ęgóó nídiidleeł .
PRED:	Many of them did many things against him , and they said , “ Let us go out from the sword , and let us go out from the sword , and our people , and our land . ”
GOLD:	They stumble and fall over each otherand say among themselves , ‘ Come , let 's go back to our people , to the land of our birth.Let 's get away from the sword of the enemy ! '

ID:	910
INPUT:	Éí bikéyahdóó nahjį' kóbi'diilyaago , Éí kéyah doo shídíínít'i'góó ts'ídá t'áadoo nééhosésįįd da , hałní nahalin doo .
PRED:	They will be taken away from their land , and I will not hide you from the land that you have said , “ I will not be like you . ”
GOLD:	But when it is uprooted , it 's as though it never existed !

ID:	911
INPUT:	chahałheełgi índa aniné bichaha'ohgi nidaháaztánígíí bik'i adinídíin doo , áádóó hózhǫ́ǫgo honít'i'góó nihoo'ish doo .
PRED:	He will give light to those who sit in darkness , and those who sit in darkness will give light to them .
GOLD:	to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death , and to guide us to the path of peace . ”

ID:	912
INPUT:	Jó , shidine'é doo ádahalyą́ą da ; doo shéédahósin da ; t'óó ádahodiilgis ; doo ak'ida'diitįįh da . Doo yá'áshǫ' ádeidoolíłígíí yaa dahóyą́ ; yá'át'éehii yaa nidadookahígíí doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	For my people do not know me ; they do not know me ; they do not understand their evil ways ; they do not know what is good .
GOLD:	“ My people are foolishand do not know me , ” says the Lord. “ They are stupid childrenwho have no understanding.They are clever enough at doing wrong , but they have no idea how to do right ! ”

ID:	913
INPUT:	háálá hastą́ą́h jį́įjį' Bóhólníihii éí yádiłhił áádóó nahasdzáán áádóó tónteel índa biyi'di dahólóonii t'áá ałtso áyiilaa , áádóó tsosts'id jį́ azlį́į́' góne' hanáályį́į́' ; éí bąą Bóhólníihii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ yik'ijisdli' áádóó dílzingo ats'éidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	For the seventh day the Lord made heaven , earth , and all that was in the sea , and in the sea , and on the seventh day the Lord blessed him .
GOLD:	For in six days the Lord made the heavens , the earth , the sea , and everything in them ; but on the seventh day he rested . That is why the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and set it apart as holy .

ID:	914
INPUT:	Áádóó Léíban éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Da' t'óósh shidá'í nílínígíí bąą t'áá níík'eh shá nanilnish doo ? Shił hólne' , díkwíishą' bik'é nanilnish doo ?
PRED:	Laban said to Jacob , “ Have you done what I have done to you ? Tell me what you have done ? ”
GOLD:	Laban said to him , “ You should n't work for me without pay just because we are relatives . Tell me how much your wages should be . ”

ID:	915
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó éí kin haal'áhídóó dabilį́į́' áádóó bindaalye'é éí Ízrel dine'é dayoosbą́ągo t'áá bí ádá nídeidii'nil ; Bóhólníihii bizaad k'ehgo Jáshowa yich' į' yee haadzíi'ii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	So Moses took the livestock and the spoil , and the spoil of the children of Israel , as the Lord had commanded Joshua .
GOLD:	Only the livestock and the treasures of the town were not destroyed , for the Israelites kept these as plunder for themselves , as the Lord had commanded Joshua .

ID:	916
INPUT:	Jó , nik'éí bąąh háíníł'áhígíí yee' t'áadoo biniyéhígóó nich'į' niná'doodlééł . Nee áchą́'íídéeni'go t'áadoo yił hanáádadólchídígóó t'áá daalchí'ígo íinilaa .
PRED:	For you have nothing to do to your relatives , and you have done to them . You have done nothing to eat .
GOLD:	“ For example , you must have lent money to your friendand demanded clothing as security.Yes , you stripped him to the bone .

ID:	917
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , yaa nidaaskaii bik'é k'éédabidídle' .
PRED:	O Lord , make them pay for their works , O Lord .
GOLD:	Pay them back , Lord , for all the evil they have done .

ID:	918
INPUT:	Ádaat'éii índa yaa nidaakaígíí bá daníníł'į́į'go ha'íídíílniił , áko Jerúsalemgi baa niséyáhígíí t'áá ałtso doo t'áadoo biniyéhígóó baa niséyáágóó nił bééhodoozįįł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	And thou shalt see their ways and their works , and say unto them , I have done all that I have done in Jerusalem , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	When you meet them and see their behavior , you will understand that these things are not being done to Israel without cause . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	919
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , t'áadoo áłchínígi át'éego nitsídaahkeesí ; jó , a<unk> gi át'éego doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'éii doo baa ákodanohsin da , nidi hóyáanii k'ehgo nitsídaahkees .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , do n't know what is right , but do n't know what is right .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't be childish in your understanding of these things . Be innocent as babies when it comes to evil , but be mature in understanding matters of this kind .

ID:	920
INPUT:	Mt . 26 : 1-5
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	921
INPUT:	Nihits'iizis bii' nooh nída'ołchíihii bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo áádóó nihibii' táá'oo'nihí bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo .
PRED:	I will bless you with the basket and bless you .
GOLD:	Your fruit baskets and breadboardswill be blessed .

ID:	922
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' Béíyasha éidí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go Réímah kin haal'á ánéídléhígíí yik'i deeyáago Térzah kin haal'áagi kééhat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Baasha heard this , he went out to Ramah , and dwelt in Heshbon .
GOLD:	As soon as Baasha of Israel heard what was happening , he abandoned his project of fortifying Ramah and withdrew to Tirzah .

ID:	923
INPUT:	Atiin bąąhgóó tó nílínígi ákwii tó jidoodlį́įłgo de dah jidínóot'ááł .
PRED:	He will drink the water by the road , and he will drink it with water .
GOLD:	But he himself will be refreshed from brooks along the way.He will be victorious .

ID:	924
INPUT:	Nihí yisdádahinoochą́'ígíí ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó yisnááh dasoolį́į'go shéédaołniih doo ; jó , dabijéí yee ajił k'ehgo adádanoolníigo áádóó eda'alyaii ajił k'ehgo yidádanoolníigo deiníł'íinii shits'ádahaaskaigo biniinaa yínííł naashá . Doo yildinígi át'éego ádił nida'iisí'ígíí yiniinaa ák'ee dadi'niih doo .
PRED:	If you are saved among the nations , remember me among the nations , for they have turned away from their heart , and have turned away from me , because they have sinned against me .
GOLD:	Then when they are exiled among the nations , they will remember me . They will recognize how hurt I am by their unfaithful hearts and lustful eyes that long for their idols . Then at last they will hate themselves for all their detestable sins .

ID:	925
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah ajííyáago nida'iiłniihígíí ch'ízhneełkaadgo baa nízdiidzá ,
PRED:	And when he entered into the temple , he began to drive out the hands of the priests ,
GOLD:	Then Jesus entered the Temple and began to drive out the people selling animals for sacrifices .

ID:	926
INPUT:	Kin índa at'į́ éí azhé'é danilíinii bits'ą́ą́dóó ee nidahwiileeh , nidi e'asdzą́ą́ hóyáanii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó ee nihwiileeh .
PRED:	And the house is a house of the fathers , but the wife of the Lord is among them .
GOLD:	Fathers can give their sons an inheritance of houses and wealth , but only the Lord can give an understanding wife .

ID:	927
INPUT:	Diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił . Mą'ii dahodoolghałii dajílį́į doo .
PRED:	The sword shall fall by the sword ; and they shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	They will die by the swordand become the food of jackals .

ID:	928
INPUT:	Dabibéégashii áádóó deit'ínígíí índa dabilį́į́' t'áá ałtso , da' éísh doo danihí da doo ? Haa'íshą' ákódadii'nííł , áko nihił kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	And their cattle , and their cattle , and all their cattle , what shall we do ? and we shall dwell with us .
GOLD:	But if we do this , all their livestock and possessions will eventually be ours . Come , let 's agree to their terms and let them settle here among us . ”

ID:	929
INPUT:	Náábíkéé' góne' anáázh'niiltsąądgo ashkii náájíshchį́ , áko ánáázhdoo'niid , K'ad Bóhólníihii baa hashniih doo ; díí biniinaa ashkii Júdah bee jíízhi' , áádóó t'áadoo náá'jíshchį́į da .
PRED:	Then she conceived again and bore a son again again , and he said , “ I will praise the Lord , because of this boy , and I will no more again . ”
GOLD:	Once again Leah became pregnant and gave birth to another son . She named him Judah , for she said , “ Now I will praise the Lord ! ” And then she stopped having children .

ID:	930
INPUT:	Ákondi ła' da'oołch'į́įdgo áádóó saad ídei'áahgo Christ yaa dahalne' , nidi ła' éí yá'át'éehgo nitsáhákees bee yaa dahalne' .
PRED:	But some of them declare the words of Christ , and they declare the good news of Christ .
GOLD:	It 's true that some are preaching out of jealousy and rivalry . But others preach about Christ with pure motives .

ID:	931
INPUT:	nihik'ee dadiniihgo nihaa nídaat'į́į doo índa bindaałnishgo bee bilááh nídaasdlį́į'ii éí adeidiyoojih áádóó t'áá łichí'ígo nidaahkaigo adanihidoolííł índa t'óó baa'ihgo ááníłígíí áádóó ałjiłnii nílį́įgo t'áá łiníchí'í nits'ą́ą́' <unk> di'doołtsos .
PRED:	And they shall hate you , and they shall take away the things which you have given to you , and they shall take away your ways , and they shall take away your abominations , and the prostitute of a prostitute .
GOLD:	They will treat you with hatred and rob you of all you own , leaving you stark naked . The shame of your prostitution will be exposed to all the world .

ID:	932
INPUT:	éí bąą dibé baa ádahołyáanii , Bóhólníihii áníinii dadoohts'į́į́h ,
PRED:	Therefore , ye shepherds , hear the word of the Lord , ye shepherds ,
GOLD:	Therefore , you shepherds , hear the word of the Lord .

ID:	933
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí dine'é áyidííniid , Díí jínígíí béédaałniih : éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' naalte' danohłį́ yę́ędóó ch'ínoonáa ni' , háálá Bóhólníihii éí díí kéyahdóó bibee adziilii yee ch'éénihí'nil , áko díík'ǫsh bił bááh ályaii t'áadoo nídaohdį́hí .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the people of Israel , “ Remember this : You are slaves of the land of Egypt , because the Lord has set them out of the land of Egypt , and you did not eat bread . ”
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ This is a day to remember forever — the day you left Egypt , the place of your slavery . Today the Lord has brought you out by the power of his mighty hand . ( Remember , eat no food containing yeast . )

ID:	934
INPUT:	Lą'í nááhaidi baa hózhǫ́ǫgo yihah wolyéhígíí baa hodoolzhishgo béeso hak'é naalyáhígíí bik'ehgo t'áá hó łahjį' ák'é ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	And in the year of many years the year of peace shall be sold , according to the price of his money , according to the price of his money .
GOLD:	If many years still remain until the jubilee , they will repay the proper proportion of what they received when they sold themselves .

ID:	935
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é ahoolchíiłii , náá'iiłniihii danilíinii éí diné bee dahólónígíí neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' baa dahajáah doogo bee bá nahaz'ą́ , éí bidine'é danilíinii ákódaadzaa , Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́dóó ahoolchíiłii nidi ákódaadzaa .
PRED:	The Levites , the priests , who gave to me one tenth of the men who had , as the sons of Abraham had done .
GOLD:	Now the law of Moses required that the priests , who are descendants of Levi , must collect a tithe from the rest of the people of Israel , who are also descendants of Abraham .

ID:	936
INPUT:	Áko Remaláíyah biye' Pííkah éí Júdah dine'é dahayóii t'áá ła'óo jį́ neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi mííl neistseed , háálá dahazhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii yóó'adazdeez'ą́ .
PRED:	And Rebekah the son of Rebekah killed Judah a hundred and twenty thousand , because they had forsaken the Lord , the God of their fathers .
GOLD:	In a single day Pekah son of Remaliah , Israel 's king , killed 120,000 of Judah 's troops , all of them experienced warriors , because they had abandoned the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	937
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	938
INPUT:	Áko Giihéízai éí Néíyaman bikéé' jiníyá . Áádóó Néíyaman bikéé' joolwołgo hoołtsą́ índa bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yii'dę́ę́' hadááyáago hadááh níyáago ání , Yá'ádahoot'ééhésh ?
PRED:	So Gehazi went after Sisera , and she followed him . And when he saw his chariot , he went out from meet him , and said , “ Is there a young time ? ”
GOLD:	So Gehazi set off after Naaman.When Naaman saw Gehazi running after him , he climbed down from his chariot and went to meet him . “ Is everything all right ? ” Naaman asked .

ID:	939
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul hazhé'é yázhí ábizhdííniid , Sámuel hazhó'ó nihił hoolne'go ánihidííniid , Télii éí shónídaozt'e' . Nidi Saul éí aláahgo naat'áanii jidooleełgo Sámuel hoł hoolne'ii t'áadoo bee hazhé'é yázhí bił hojoolne' da .
PRED:	Saul said to his father , “ Samuel , tell us what you have done . ” But Saul told him not to tell his father Samuel .
GOLD:	“ He told us that the donkeys had already been found , ” Saul replied . But Saul did n't tell his uncle what Samuel said about the kingdom .

ID:	940
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí índa tł'ééhonaa'éí yidoojį́į́ł áádóó sǫ' doo da'diníłdíin da doo .
PRED:	The sun and the moon will be like the stars , and the stars will not shine .
GOLD:	The sun and moon will grow dark , and the stars will no longer shine .

ID:	941
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii áníinii dadoohts'į́į́h ; nízaadi tábąąhgóó kédaayahgóó nidahołne'go kódadohní , Ízrel dine'é tainooskaadii éí t'áá bí áłah ánéidoodlííł , áádóó dibé yaa áhályáanii bidibé yaa áhályánígi át'éego haa áhályą́ą doo ,
PRED:	Hear the word of the Lord , you nations , and say , “ Listen to Israel , ‘ He will gather the children of Israel from far away , and he will gather them as sheep .
GOLD:	“ Listen to this message from the Lord , you nations of the world ; proclaim it in distant coastlands : The Lord , who scattered his people , will gather them and watch over themas a shepherd does his flock .

ID:	942
INPUT:	áádóó hastą́ą́h góne' bá yizhchínígíí <unk> yam wolyé , éí David be'asdzą́ą́ <unk> wolyéii biyáázh jílį́ . Díí David éí Hííbrangi bá neheezhchį́ .
PRED:	And he had six sons : and he was the son of David ; and he was the son of David in Hebron .
GOLD:	The sixth was Ithream , whose mother was Eglah , David 's wife.These sons were all born to David in Hebron .

ID:	943
INPUT:	Diné ła'da atíhodeeshłííł hó'níigo , hazéé'dóó kǫ' hazdoosihgo hwe'ana'í danilíinii bee ázhdoołdįįł ; ła'da atíhodeeshłííł hó'níigo t'áá ákót'éego nabidi'dootsił .
PRED:	I will punish anyone with his mouth , and he will destroy his enemies , and I will destroy them , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	If anyone tries to harm them , fire flashes from their mouths and consumes their enemies . This is how anyone who tries to harm them must die .

ID:	944
INPUT:	Sálaman éí hódzą́ yíká sodoolzin
PRED:	Solomon 's Call for wisdom
GOLD:	Solomon Judges Wisely

ID:	945
INPUT:	Nidi Neiyómii bahastiin Elímelek daaztsą́ , áko hayáázh nidilt'éhígíí bił ch'íjookai .
PRED:	But Naomi 's husband was dead , and she went out with her two sons .
GOLD:	Then Elimelech died , and Naomi was left with her two sons .

ID:	946
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii deidósinii éí Bóhólníihii yił ahídadínéelná ; bibee aha'deet'áanii bił béédahózingo áyósin .
PRED:	The fear of the Lord is with them ; they know the covenant of the covenant .
GOLD:	The Lord is a friend to those who fear him.He teaches them his covenant .

ID:	947
INPUT:	Ákwii tł'iish k'aa' bit'oh anáyiil'įįhgo ná'álchíih doo áádóó biyázhí néidiiłjahgo bichaha'oh anéi'nił doo ; ákwii <unk> shóó' ałdó' t'ááłá'í nítínígo bi'áadii yił áłah nádleeh doo .
PRED:	And they shall gather a arrows there , and gather the young lions , and gather them together ; and every one shall gather together together .
GOLD:	There the owl will make her nest and lay her eggs.She will hatch her young and cover them with her wings.And the buzzards will come , each one with its mate .

ID:	948
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí Diyin God ííłní , Shizhé'é David yę́ę t'áá íiyisí ayóó át'éego baa a'ááh nínízingo bitsásk'ehgi nanisht'áago áshiinilaa .
PRED:	Solomon said to God , “ You have made me very great . You have made me a place for my father David . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied to God , “ You showed great and faithful love to David , my father , and now you have made me king in his place .

ID:	949
INPUT:	Áádóó naanáházhahgo , Rííjiyam hoolyéedi nihił aní'éél , áádóó t'ááłá'í yiską́ągo shádi'ááhdę́ę́' deeyolgo náábiiskání <unk> yoliigi nihił aní'éél .
PRED:	And we sailed from there , and sailed to the south side , and the next day we sailed at the south side of the south .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	950
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí niníyáago áádóó bąąh nahóókaadgo bik'i dah deeshááł , áko tsídidoolyisgo nídooldzííł áádóó diné t'áá ałtso bił naakaígíí yóó'adínóodzoł , índa aláahgo naat'áanii t'éiyá bił nizhdeeshxał .
PRED:	I will come upon thee , and upon him , and upon him , that he may be saved ; and if all the people that are with him shall flee , and upon the king .
GOLD:	I will catch up with him while he is weary and discouraged . He and his troops will panic , and everyone will run away . Then I will kill only the king ,

ID:	951
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ądi doo nidashídídóołkił da . T'áá aaníí , t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá ha'át'íhída aTaa' shízhi' bee bídayínóhkeedgo , nihaididoo'ááł .
PRED:	And in that day ye shall not ask me ; yea , I say unto you , I say unto you , If ye ask in my name , he shall give you the Father .
GOLD:	At that time you wo n't need to ask me for anything . I tell you the truth , you will ask the Father directly , and he will grant your request because you use my name .

ID:	952
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Diyin God ánáádoo'niid , <unk> ałníí' góne' haz'ą́ wóle'go tó ałts'ą́ą́hjí hólǫ́ǫ le' .
PRED:	Then God said , “ There is a place where there is water on each side . ”
GOLD:	Then God said , “ Let there be a space between the waters , to separate the waters of the heavens from the waters of the earth . ”

ID:	953
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago Mózes éí díí bee haz'áanii bits'ą́ą́dóó daasaadígíí naaltsoos bii' bee ak'e'jishchį́įgo hazhó'ó hasht'ejiilaago
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Moses wrote in the book of the law , that he wrote it in the book of the law ,
GOLD:	When Moses had finished writing this entire body of instruction in a book ,

ID:	954
INPUT:	Díidíígíí bidahoolníiłgo danół'į́įgo Diné Silį́į'ii k'ad t'áá áyídídę́ę́' nihich'éédą́ą'jį' nidi , bił ahoolzhiizh lá danohsingo nihił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	When you see these things , you will know that the Son of Man is near , but you will know that the hour is near .
GOLD:	In the same way , when you see all these things taking place , you can know that his return is very near , right at the door .

ID:	955
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo dashíísóołts'ą́ą' da , áko t'áá nihí baa nidaahkaígíí bee atí'ádadołnéehgo shá dahodoołchįįł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But you have not listened to me , and you have not listened to me , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ But you would not listen to me , ” says the Lord . “ You made me furious by worshiping idols you made with your own hands , bringing on yourselves all the disasters you now suffer .

ID:	956
INPUT:	Áádóó Háíram bá nidaal'a'í éí tónteel bikáá' na'al'eeł bił béédahózinígíí éí Sálaman bá nidaal'a'í yił táłkáá'góó tsinaa'eeł biyi' nidaalnish doo biniyé dayííł'aad .
PRED:	And Hiram sent his servants to work in the sea , to work in the sea .
GOLD:	Hiram sent experienced crews of sailors to sail the ships with Solomon 's men .

ID:	957
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii báhóóchįįd , áádóó bisiláo ákǫ́ǫ́ yiyííł'aadgo nida'astseedígíí dayííghą́ą́' , índa bikin haal'áhígíí yits'ą́ą́' deidííłid .
PRED:	And the king was angry , and sent his army to kill them , and burned them with fire , and burned the city .
GOLD:	“ The king was furious , and he sent out his army to destroy the murderers and burn their town .

ID:	958
INPUT:	Bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá ałtso díí jį́ bee nihich'į' haasdzí'ígíí ádaa daahsįįh , áko éí bee dahinohnáa doo áádóó k'ee'ąą dínóoht'į́įłgo kéyah biih doohnéełgo ádíí' ádadoohłíiłgo Bóhólníihii éí danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' .
PRED:	Be careful to do all the commandments I command you today , so that you may live and live in the land which the Lord swore to your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ Be careful to obey all the commands I am giving you today . Then you will live and multiply , and you will enter and occupy the land the Lord swore to give your ancestors .

ID:	959
INPUT:	Éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah hoo'a'ii dzizlį́į́' ; éí doo ho'didéeh da , áko náá'iiłniihii éí , Ts'ídá doo ni'didoodah da lá , hodidooniił ; naałniih éí hatsiits'iin bąąh hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And the priest shall pronounce him unclean , and he shall pronounce him unclean ; and the priest shall pronounce him unclean , and he shall pronounce him unclean ; his head is upon him .
GOLD:	the man is indeed infected with a skin disease and is unclean . The priest must pronounce him ceremonially unclean because of the sore on his head .

ID:	960
INPUT:	Áádóó bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áii nizhóníii bílátahdi dah naaznilígíí Bóhólníihii binááł t'áá áłahjį' hasht'eyósin doo .
PRED:	And he shall make a lamp of pure gold in the sight of the Lord all times .
GOLD:	Aaron and the priests must tend the lamps on the pure gold lampstand continually in the Lord 's presence .

ID:	961
INPUT:	Háálá éí jínígíí biyi' Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ak'eh didoodleełgo bá ha'doo'ááł ; bi'ana'í k'éídidoodlííł biniyé éí jínígíí biyi' ak'eh didoodleeł ; diltłish adooldiłgo dił ádii' haididoolbį́įłgo bił hódínóołdoh , háálá náhookǫsjígo kéyahígíí Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígíí bíighahgóó Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nááhidoonihii bee hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For in that day the Lord God of hosts will fight against the Lord of hosts , and he will give it into the hand of his enemies , and he will be filled with the sword , and the sword shall be filled with the sword , because the Lord , the God of hosts , is with you .
GOLD:	For this is the day of the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , a day of vengeance on his enemies.The sword will devour until it is satisfied , yes , until it is drunk with your blood ! The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will receive a sacrifice todayin the north country beside the Euphrates River .

ID:	962
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí dinééh nidilt'éego Bóhólníihii binááł ayóó át'éego ádił ni'iisíí' , háálá Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' nááda'iiłniihgo t'áá íiyisí ák'eh dahal'į́ daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	Therefore this young man sinned in the sight of the Lord , because the children of Israel offered sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	So the sin of these young men was very serious in the Lord 's sight , for they treated the Lord 's offerings with contempt .

ID:	963
INPUT:	Íínak jiináago hastą́diindóó ba'aan ashdla' honááhaigo Miithúzelah há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	When he had lived eight years old , he became the father of Shelah .
GOLD:	When Enoch was 65 years old , he became the father of Methuselah .

ID:	964
INPUT:	Nahachagiitsoh yááhiichahígi át'éegoósh łį́į́' dah náníljį́įhgo ádanile' ? <unk> tł'iidgo t'óó báhádzid łeh .
PRED:	Do you look at night like locusts ? Do n't you be afraid , like locusts ? ”
GOLD:	Did you give it the ability to leap like a locust ? Its majestic snorting is terrifying !

ID:	965
INPUT:	Áko Jesus éí siláo binanit'a'í áyidííniid , Nílááh yínááł ; t'áá iinídlánígi át'éego ná ádoolnííł . T'áá áko hanaal'a'í náádiidzá .
PRED:	Jesus said to the captain of the army , “ Go , just as you have believed . ” So his servant went back .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to the Roman officer , “ Go back home . Because you believed , it has happened. ” And the young servant was healed that same hour .

ID:	966
INPUT:	Nidi Jéíyel éí Hííber be'asdzą́ą́ nilíinii níbaal bá anídaalkałí ła' néidiitą́ áádóó bee atsidí néidii'ą́ , áko hazhó'ógo haa níyáago éí t'áá íiyisí <unk> deeyáago ajiłhosh , índa níbaal bá anídaalkałí hajaat'ah góne' yaa ayííłkaalgo ni'jį' yił i'ííłkaal , áko dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	But he took some of the wives of Hazor , and took the ark , and took it , and went to him , and he entered into the tent , and he died until he was dead .
GOLD:	But when Sisera fell asleep from exhaustion , Jael quietly crept up to him with a hammer and tent peg in her hand . Then she drove the tent peg through his temple and into the ground , and so he died .

ID:	967
INPUT:	Átséédą́ą́' bee aha'deet'áanii éí bik'eh hoogáałii hólǫ́ǫgo Diyin God bich'į' nahadláá nít'éé' , áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi Diyin God bich'į' nahadláago bił haz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the covenant was before , and the covenant was filled with God , and he was filled with God in the earth .
GOLD:	That first covenant between God and Israel had regulations for worship and a place of worship here on earth .

ID:	968
INPUT:	T'áá háiida aYe' doo ádízhdéélt'i'góó hadziidziihígíí éí aTaa' doo hwee hólǫ́ǫ da , nidi aYe' ádízhdéélt'i'go hadziidziihígíí éí aTaa' nilíinii hwee hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The one who speaks about the Son does not have the Son , but the one who speaks about the Son is in him .
GOLD:	Anyone who denies the Son does n't have the Father , either . But anyone who acknowledges the Son has the Father also .

ID:	969
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Réímah kin haal'áagi iinéé' diists'ą́ą́' . Yínííł yee chanahałe'go áádóó ayóó át'éego atínídindleeh . Réíchel ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii yaa yicha , ba'áłchíní biniinaa habidi'yoolníhígíí doo yinízin da , háálá éí ábi'disdįįd .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have heard a voice in Ramah , crying and crying for Rachel . Rachel 's descendants will weep because of his family , because they are destroyed .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ A cry is heard in Ramah — deep anguish and bitter weeping.Rachel weeps for her children , refusing to be comforted — for her children are gone . ”

ID:	970
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Azhą́ shį́į́ t'áá shí ádaa hashne' nidi , hashne'ígíí éí t'áá aaníí , háálá níyáádę́ę́' índa déyáágóó shił bééhózin , nidi nihí éí níyáádę́ę́' índa déyáágóó doo nihił béédahózin da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ If I speak to myself , I know that I am going out of the beginning , but you do not know where I am going . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ These claims are valid even though I make them about myself . For I know where I came from and where I am going , but you do n't know this about me .

ID:	971
INPUT:	Shich'į' ééhonísįįh ! Ayóó'ííní'níinii yisdádooltéłígíí biniyé nigaan nish'náájí bee shíká anilyeed .
PRED:	Give ear to me , my right hand to help me , to save your salvation .
GOLD:	Now rescue your beloved people.Answer and save us by your power .

ID:	972
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa Diyin God éí wooch'ííd dajoodlą́ą doo biniyé na'nitin yóó'ahodoo'ishii hach'į' yi'iiłnííh .
PRED:	For this reason , they worship God , that they may not believe him .
GOLD:	So God will cause them to be greatly deceived , and they will believe these lies .

ID:	973
INPUT:	Áko Mózes yaadaaní nilíní , Mídiya dine'é nilíinii Rúwel biye' Hóbab ííłní , Bóhólníihii , Kéyah nihaa dideesh'ááł , nihidííniidígóó yii'nééł ; hágo tį' , áko yá'át'éhígi ádaniil'į́į doo , háálá Bóhólníihii éí yá'ádaat'éehii Ízrel dine'é yeididoo'áałgo yee nihoní'ą́ .
PRED:	And Moses said to them , “ Lord , I will give you the land of Midian , that we may go , and go , and see what is good , for the Lord has given Israel . ”
GOLD:	One day Moses said to his brother-in-law , Hobab son of Reuel the Midianite , “ We are on our way to the place the Lord promised us , for he said , ‘ I will give it to you . ' Come with us and we will treat you well , for the Lord has promised wonderful blessings for Israel ! ”

ID:	974
INPUT:	t'áá ła' bizhi'ee díí t'áá ałtso kin hadaas'áhígíí binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił éí Béíya<unk> yer kin shijaa' bíighahjį' nineel'ą́ ; éí shádi'áahgi Réímath ałdó' hoolyé . Díí kéyah t'áá át'é Símiyan dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	All these cities were able to stand by their villages and their villages . This is the inheritance of Simeon according to their families .
GOLD:	including all the surrounding villages as far south as Baalath-beer ( also known as Ramah of the Negev ) .This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Simeon .

ID:	975
INPUT:	Ana'í nilíinii doo biya'iidooloh da . Diné doo yá'áshóonii doo atíbidoolíił da .
PRED:	He will not destroy his enemies ; he will not punish the wicked .
GOLD:	His enemies will not defeat him , nor will the wicked overpower him .

ID:	976
INPUT:	Éí bąą bik'eh dahonoł'į́ áádóó baa dahonohsą́ , háálá ał'ąą dine'é dabinááł díí nihibee hódzáanii áádóó nihibee ak'idi'yiitįįhii át'é ; éí díí yee nihwiiz'áanii t'áá ałtso deidiizts'ą́ą'go kódadidooniił , T'áá aaníí díí dine'é ayóó át'é hóyáanii índa ak'idi'yiitįįhii nilį́į́ lá .
PRED:	Therefore be careful , and be careful ; for these are the wisdom and understanding and understanding , which they have heard , saying , “ Surely this people are wise and understanding . ”
GOLD:	Obey them completely , and you will display your wisdom and intelligence among the surrounding nations . When they hear all these decrees , they will exclaim , ‘ How wise and prudent are the people of this great nation ! '

ID:	977
INPUT:	Shízhi' bee hada'íínółnínígíí áádóó bídanołdzilígíí índa doo dasidínóołna'góó shił bééhózin .
PRED:	I know that you are not afraid of my name , and you do not know what I am saying .
GOLD:	You have patiently suffered for me without quitting .

ID:	978
INPUT:	bighandi nádzáago dabik'isóó índa yił kéédahat'ínígíí áyididooniił , Shaa hohkááh , shił nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' , háálá shidibé yóó'ííłt'e'ígíí náádiiłtį́ .
PRED:	And when he came into his house , he said to his brethren and his brethren , “ Come with me , and rejoice with me ; for I have chosen my sheep . ”
GOLD:	When he arrives , he will call together his friends and neighbors , saying , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep . '

ID:	979
INPUT:	Áko nídzíldzidgo ázhdííniid , Dooládó' kwe'é náhádzid da lá ! Díí t'áá aaníí Diyin God bighan lá ; yá'ąąsh bich'é'étiin át'éé lá .
PRED:	And they were afraid , and said , “ How is it ! This is the house of God , the door of heaven ! ”
GOLD:	But he was also afraid and said , “ What an awesome place this is ! It is none other than the house of God , the very gateway to heaven ! ”

ID:	980
INPUT:	Nidi Jánathan hazhé'é éí hóyée'go diné bá ha'doodzihgo yee haadzíi'ii t'áadoo dzidiizts'ą́ą' da , áko hagish hálák'ee sitánígíí bee tsés'ná bitł'izh biih dzíítsigo bił á<unk> doolchid . Áádóó nít'éé' hoł ch'ídi'nídláád .
PRED:	But Jonathan did not listen to the words of the people , and he put it into the hand of his hand , and put it in the hand of his hand , and he went out .
GOLD:	But Jonathan had not heard his father 's command , and he dipped the end of his stick into a piece of honeycomb and ate the honey . After he had eaten it , he felt refreshed .

ID:	981
INPUT:	Jó , níłch'i nichxǫ́'íii t'áá íídą́ą́' ábizhdííniid , Diné bii'dę́ę́' haninááh . Háálá t'áá ahą́ą́h bik'i néilwo' lá , áko baa áháyą́ągo béésh da'ahólzha'í bee béé'átł'óóh áádóó akétsíín niná'niłí bąąh niná'nił , nidi béésh da'ahólzha'ígíí niyiiníísh áádóó honoojíígóó níłch'i bi'iiníziinii anábiniyo' lá .
PRED:	For he said to the unclean spirits , “ Bring him out of the man ! He has come to you , and he will put his chains on him , and put on his feet , but he will put the chains in the wilderness and in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	For Jesus had already commanded the evil spirit to come out of him . This spirit had often taken control of the man . Even when he was placed under guard and put in chains and shackles , he simply broke them and rushed out into the wilderness , completely under the demon 's power .

ID:	982
INPUT:	Áádóó ábizhdííniid , Atsiniltł'ish ahootahígi át'éego yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Séítan adadzííłhaalgo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I have seen Satan coming out of heaven like lightning . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , ” he told them , “ I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning !

ID:	983
INPUT:	Doo t'áá ákogi át'éii bee t'áadoo á nihodiyí'aahí ; diné bahojoobá'íii t'áadoo a'ohgo nił nilíní , doodaii' diné ayóó át'éii t'áadoo a'ohgo nił nilíní , nidi t'áá ákogi át'éego bił kééhót'íinii bá nihodiyí'aah .
PRED:	Do not judge the righteous ; do not judge the poor or the poor , but judge his neighbor .
GOLD:	“ Do not twist justice in legal matters by favoring the poor or being partial to the rich and powerful . Always judge people fairly .

ID:	984
INPUT:	Áádóó hayáázh dínéesą́ągo ła'a jį́ bizhé'é éí da'ayizhii yił da'ayizhgo ákǫ́ǫ́ yich'į' ííyá .
PRED:	And when his son was old , he went up to the father of his fathers in one day .
GOLD:	One day when her child was older , he went out to help his father , who was working with the harvesters .

ID:	985
INPUT:	Dóola yáázh áádóó deenásts'aa' éí Bóhólníihii baa didíí'ááł áádóó nááda'iiłniihii éí áshįįh yik'ídeidooniłgo deidiłidgo Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádeidiyoołnih .
PRED:	And thou shalt give a bull and a ram unto the Lord ; and the priests shall burn it with oil , and offer it unto the Lord .
GOLD:	You are to present them to the Lord , and the priests are to sprinkle salt on them and offer them as a burnt offering to the Lord .

ID:	986
INPUT:	Nidi doo oodlání nilíinii yoodeeshááł nízingo háni'dii yoodighááh , kwe'é haz'ą́ągi ak'is oodlání nilíinii , doodaii' alah oodlání nilíinii doo bóho'diistł'ǫ́ǫ da . Háálá Diyin God éí , Hózhǫ́ǫgo ahił dahinohná , nihidííniid .
PRED:	But if he is not able to come to the church , let him go down to the church or brother or sister , for God has said to you , “ You have peace . ”
GOLD:	( But if the husband or wife who is n't a believer insists on leaving , let them go . In such cases the believing husband or wife is no longer bound to the other , for God has called you to live in peace . )

ID:	987
INPUT:	Ákohgo , Háágóósh dadiikah ? daniłníigo kóbididííniił , Bóhólníihii kóní , Dadínóonéłígíí éí dadínóonééł . Diltłish bee nidadootsiłígíí diltłish bee nidadootsił . Dichin nidabidoołtsiłígíí éí dichin nidabidoołtsił , índa dadoolnéłígíí éí dadoolnééł .
PRED:	And they shall go , and say unto them , Thus saith the Lord : The sword shall die , and the sword shall fall by the sword , and the sword shall fall by the sword , and the famine shall die .
GOLD:	And if they say to you , ‘ But where can we go ? ' tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says : “ ‘ Those who are destined for death , to death ; those who are destined for war , to war ; those who are destined for famine , to famine ; those who are destined for captivity , to captivity . '

ID:	988
INPUT:	Ásaa' ííł'íní hashtł'ish yinaalnishgo bits'ą́ą́dóó na'nitinii
PRED:	The Woman of the Lord
GOLD:	The Potter and the Clay

ID:	989
INPUT:	Asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii béeso ayíínil
PRED:	The Woman of the Woman
GOLD:	The Widow 's Offering

ID:	990
INPUT:	Áko da'oodlání áłah nádleehii t'áá ałtso índa náádaała' t'áá ałtso díidí deidiizts'ą́ą'go , t'áá íiyisí yik'ee bił dahóóyéé' .
PRED:	When all the church and all the other churches heard these things , they were afraid .
GOLD:	Great fear gripped the entire church and everyone else who heard what had happened .

ID:	991
INPUT:	Áko da'iisoohdląąd yę́ędóó dasidoots'ą́ą'ii t'áá áłahjį' bíni'dii nihii' dahólǫ́ǫgo ádeínóhsin . Bitł'áahdidą́ą́' dasidoots'ą́ą'ii t'áá áłahjį' nihii' dahólǫ́ǫgo aYe' índa aTaa' t'áá áłahjį' bii' dahonohłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	And let your faith always be in you all times , that you have heard of him , and be in him always in him , and in him the Father always .
GOLD:	So you must remain faithful to what you have been taught from the beginning . If you do , you will remain in fellowship with the Son and with the Father .

ID:	992
INPUT:	Díí íhooł'aahii haa hwiinít'ínígíí hoł bééhózingo baa hojilne' , áádóó t'áá hó díidíígíí bee ak'e'jishchį́ , áko baa hojilne'ígíí éí t'áá aaníigo nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	And the disciples knew what he had done , and he wrote these things , and we know that the truth is true .
GOLD:	This disciple is the one who testifies to these events and has recorded them here . And we know that his account of these things is accurate .

ID:	993
INPUT:	T'áá háiida díí áłchínígi át'éego a'ohgo ádaa nitsídaakeesgo dashoodlánígíí ła'da bąąhági át'į́ ájiilaaígíí , t'áá hó tsé daashjéé' nitsaii hazéédéet'ą́ągo tónteel biih hodi'yoolghanjígo , há yá'át'éeh doo .
PRED:	It is better for anyone who does not believe in me to sin . It will be better for him to enter the sea . It will be better for him to be put to death .
GOLD:	“ But if you cause one of these little ones who trusts in me to fall into sin , it would be better for you to be thrown into the sea with a large millstone hung around your neck .

ID:	994
INPUT:	Záíyan kin haal'áii éí dił bee dahołbį' índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áii éí doo ákwii é'ét'éii bee dahołbį' .
PRED:	You shall build Zion 's house , and build Jerusalem for sin .
GOLD:	You are building Jerusalemon a foundation of murder and corruption .

ID:	995
INPUT:	áko áhodííniid , Asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh Váshtaishą' bee haz'áanii bik'ehgo haa dadiilnííł ? Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras bá nidaal'a'í binahjį' hach'į' haadzíi'ii doo yik'eh hóół'įįd da .
PRED:	And she said unto her , What shall we do according to the law ? For the king hath not obeyed the commandment of the king 's servants .
GOLD:	“ What must be done to Queen Vashti ? ” the king demanded . “ What penalty does the law provide for a queen who refuses to obey the king 's orders , properly sent through his eunuchs ? ”

ID:	996
INPUT:	Nihiya'iidleeh , daanínígíí ni t'áadoo ákódíníní , nidi yik'ee bił daayé'ígíí t'áadoo bik'ee nił yé'í , doodaii' t'áadoo náníldzidí .
PRED:	Do not say , “ Do n't be afraid of those who hate you . Do n't be afraid of them who hate you .
GOLD:	“ Do n't call everything a conspiracy , like they do , and do n't live in dread of what frightens them .

ID:	997
INPUT:	áádóó hahastiin haa łe'niizį́į'go be'asdzą́ą́ jílį́įgo ázhdoolchxǫ'go , doodaii' doo ázhdoolchxǫ' da nidi haa łe'nízingo ,
PRED:	and if her husband is defiled with her husband , and she is unclean , and she is not clean ,
GOLD:	If her husband becomes jealous and is suspicious of his wife and needs to know whether or not she has defiled herself ,

ID:	998
INPUT:	Hastóí da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii yá'át'éehgo bídahólníihii ahą́ą́h nániiláago hoł danilį́į dooígíí yą́ą́h danilį́į doo ; hane' yá'át'éehii yaa dahalne'go índa nida'nitingo yindaalnishígíí íiyisí ákódajił'į́į doo .
PRED:	The elders of the church shall be worthy to be worthy of money , and to preach the good news of the Good News , and to work .
GOLD:	Elders who do their work well should be respected and paid well , especially those who work hard at both preaching and teaching .

ID:	999
INPUT:	Áádóó níłch'i danchxǫ́'ígíí nídahoołtséehgo hayaajį' anída'diilghą́ąhgo éí yéego háádadilwoshgo ádaaní , Diyin God biYe' nílíinii ánít'į́ .
PRED:	When the unclean spirits saw it , they shouted , “ You are the Son of God ! ”
GOLD:	And whenever those possessed by evil spirits caught sight of him , the spirits would throw them to the ground in front of him shrieking , “ You are the Son of God ! ”

ID:	1000
INPUT:	<unk> tsoh Liiváíyathan wolyéii dabitsiits'iin dashíníłjizhgo honoojíidi naaldeehii dabich'iyą' biniyé baa dííní'ą́ .
PRED:	I have given them the heads of the sea , and their heads to be food in the wilderness .
GOLD:	You crushed the heads of Leviathanand let the desert animals eat him .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	Jó , diné doo áhályáanii hashké nídzinii bizéé' yit'įįhínda diné doo ak'idiitįįhii oołch'į́įdgo biiłhééh .
PRED:	For the mouth of a fool is in his mouth , and the mouth of a fool is full of understanding .
GOLD:	Surely resentment destroys the fool , and jealousy kills the simple .

ID:	1002
INPUT:	Jó , Éíhab bik'éí náás da'ahílchíihii t'áá ałtso ádoodįįł ; éí diné danilínígíí naalte' danilíinii índa doo naalte' danilíinii t'áá ałtso Ízrel kéyahgi dahojílónígíí áhodeeshdįįł :
PRED:	For I will cut off all the house of Ahab , and all the men of Israel , and all that are in the land of Ahab ;
GOLD:	The entire family of Ahab must be wiped out . I will destroy every one of his male descendants , slave and free alike , anywhere in Israel .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii áháłní , Haa lá néelą́ą'di bee nich'į' háádeesdzih ? Shą́ą́' , t'áadoo ha'át'íhída bee shił hólne'í , nidi Bóhólníihii bízhi' t'éí bee t'áá aaníinii bee shił hólne' , nidishníi ni' .
PRED:	The king said to him , “ How many things will I speak to you ? Do n't you tell me anything about me ? But tell me the truth of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But the king replied sharply , “ How many times must I demand that you speak only the truth to me when you speak for the Lord ? ”

ID:	1004
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , háni'dii chánahgo sodiszinígíí nidáahjį' ahosiilts'įįh ; nizaad bik'ehgo ak'idi'yiishtįįhgo áshíínísin !
PRED:	Let my prayer come before thee , O Lord , according to thy word , according to thy word .
GOLD:	O Lord , listen to my cry ; give me the discerning mind you promised .

ID:	1005
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Nik'éí díí yízhíhígíí doo ła' bee wójíi da .
PRED:	They said to him , “ There is no one named you . ”
GOLD:	“ What ? ” they exclaimed . “ There is no one in all your family by that name . ”

ID:	1006
INPUT:	Háálá yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán ániidíii áshłééh , jó'akon , áádóó áłtséédą́ą́' yę́ę doo bééhániih da , doo nidi baa nitsáhákees da .
PRED:	For behold , I am the heavens and the earth , and the first shall not be remembered , but it is not known .
GOLD:	“ Look ! I am creating new heavens and a new earth , and no one will even think about the old ones anymore .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	Jó , shibid éí wáin bizis doo bii'dę́ę́' háách'i daígíí nahalin , índa wáin bizis ániidíii k'adę́ę diilchxoshígíí nahalin .
PRED:	For my flesh is like a new wine , and my wine is like a new wine .
GOLD:	I am like a cask of wine without a vent , like a new wineskin ready to burst !

ID:	1008
INPUT:	Danihighan yę́ędóó ch'ídanihineeskaadígíí biniinaa kéyah yóó'adasidiit'ánígíí biniinaa , Dooládó' nihi'doolchǫ' da ! Dooládó' t'óó nihaa yáhóósįįd da ! níigo Záíyandę́ę́' iinéé' ayóó íits'a'go yichago diits'a' .
PRED:	How terrible it will be done for you , because you have gone out of your houses , because you have forsaken us ! How terrible it is a voice from Zion !
GOLD:	Hear the people of Jerusalem crying in despair , ‘ We are ruined ! We are completely humiliated ! We must leave our land , because our homes have been torn down . ' ”

ID:	1009
INPUT:	níłtsą́ nahasdzáán yaa néidi'ááh , índa kédaayahgóó tó yaa néidi'ááh ,
PRED:	He has seen the earth , and has mercy on the land , And He has given them water to the land .
GOLD:	He gives rain for the earthand water for the fields .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii índa doo haada yit'éii ayóó'áyó'ní ; nahasdzáán éí Bóhólníihii bibee aa a'ááh hasinii bił si'ą́ .
PRED:	He loves righteousness and justice ; the Lord loves the earth .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	Doo ákwii ádaot'įįdígíí díí nihits'ádeideez'ą́ , áádóó ádił nida'ayoosíhígíí éí yá'ádaat'éehii nihits'ą́ąjį' áyósin .
PRED:	He has taken away your sins from your sins , and he has removed your sins from you .
GOLD:	Your wickedness has deprived you of these wonderful blessings.Your sin has robbed you of all these good things .

ID:	1012
INPUT:	Mózes nihich'į' yee haadzíi'ii éí bee haz'áanii Jéíkab dine'é áłah nádleehii bíí' dooleełii át'é .
PRED:	This is the law which Moses commanded you to give to the sons of Jacob .
GOLD:	Moses gave us the Lord 's instruction , the special possession of the people of Israel .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	Díí kin haal'áago ánályaago áádóó nida'aztł'inígíí ałtso hadiidzaago , díí aláahgo naat'áanii bił bééhózingo ádeiilnééh : éí díí tooh nílíní e'e'aahjígo doo bee nóhólníih da dooleełgo át'é .
PRED:	This city and all its walls have been done , and we know that this is what the king says : “ This is the king 's rule over the river . ”
GOLD:	We declare to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are completed , the province west of the Euphrates River will be lost to you . ”

ID:	1014
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí diné jííłta' ; Bóhólníihii saad yee haadzí'ígíí bi'jiilaa ; jó , t'áá ákózhdoolíiłgo hach'į' bee ha'oodzíí' .
PRED:	And Moses read the people , as the Lord had commanded him : for he had spoken to them .
GOLD:	So Moses listed them , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso níká dadéez'į́į'go niba' ádaat'é , áko baa náhwiilzhíishgo bich'iyą' baa hidí'aah .
PRED:	They look for all , and wait for them , and give them their food at the appointed time .
GOLD:	The eyes of all look to you in hope ; you give them their food as they need it .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	Áko tsosts'id nídízííd binih tsosts'idts'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo <unk> gi dził naaznil bikáa'di tsinaa'eeł dah náz'éél .
PRED:	And on the seventh day of the seventh month he set up a ark on the mountain , on the seventh day of the seventh month .
GOLD:	exactly five months from the time the flood began , the boat came to rest on the mountains of Ararat .

ID:	1017
INPUT:	Diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii bá nidahosoo'ą́ áádóó dasoołhį́ , nidi t'áadoo nihich'į' deesdzil da .
PRED:	You have put to death the righteous , but you have not been able to stand against you .
GOLD:	You have condemned and killed innocent people , who do not resist you .

ID:	1018
INPUT:	t'ah doo dah nídiishdááhdą́ą́' háádeeshyįh ; áadi índa doo nídeeshdááłgóó kéyah chahałheeł bii'góó áádóó anoonééł chaha'oh bii'góó deeshłeeł .
PRED:	I will set my face before them , and there will be no rest in the land of darkness and darkness .
GOLD:	before I leave — never to return — for the land of darkness and utter gloom .

ID:	1019
INPUT:	áádóó áshidííniid , Ízrel nílíinii , shá naal'a'í nílį́ ; ni nee shaa ha'niih doo .
PRED:	He said to me , “ You are my servant Israel , and I will praise you . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ You are my servant , Israel , and you will bring me glory . ”

ID:	1020
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus and the Prince of Demons

ID:	1021
INPUT:	Díí deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'óó dadéesxéél . Áádóó Diyin God yaa dahaniihgo ádaaní , Ákola' doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ałdó' łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdahidookosgo iináajį' yee anáhákáah dooleełii bá ashja'ósingo Diyin God beidiní'ą́ą́ lá .
PRED:	When they heard this , they praised God . They said , “ It is a time for the Gentiles to turn back from God to return to life . ”
GOLD:	When the others heard this , they stopped objecting and began praising God . They said , “ We can see that God has also given the Gentiles the privilege of repenting of their sins and receiving eternal life . ”

ID:	1022
INPUT:	Áko tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí hastą́ądi neeznádiingo atah haasdláa'go áádóó Ííjip kéyahdi tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí t'áá ałtso bee índa bik'ehgo nida'abaahígíí t'áá bił dashdiiná .
PRED:	And he went out with him six hundred chariots , and all his chariots , and all his chariots .
GOLD:	He took with him 600 of Egypt 's best chariots , along with the rest of the chariots of Egypt , each with its commander .

ID:	1023
INPUT:	Éí daashíínéelą́ą'di mííl bíighahgo baa a'ááh nínízin , áádóó da'azhé'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii bik'é bikéédę́ę́' bada'áłchíní hanínáánoot'áanii k'éédadídlééh . Ayóó'át'éii , Diyin God Ayóó'ábóodziilii éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii wolyé .
PRED:	You have mercy on me for a thousand , and give no children to their children from the land of their fathers . The Almighty God Almighty is the name of the Almighty .
GOLD:	You show unfailing love to thousands , but you also bring the consequences of one generation 's sin upon the next . You are the great and powerful God , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	1024
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God ábidííniid , Jéíkab éí nízhi' ; k'ad éí doo Jéíkab yinílyée da doo , nidi Ízrel yinílyée doo , áádóó Ízrel yee hóózhi' .
PRED:	God said , “ Jacob 's name will not be called Jacob , but Israel 's name will be called Israel . ”
GOLD:	saying , “ Your name is Jacob , but you will not be called Jacob any longer . From now on your name will be Israel. ” So God renamed him Israel .

ID:	1025
INPUT:	Níłch'i Diyinii éí iiná eidii'aah , nidi ats'íís éí t'áadoo nídoodleełí da ; saad bee nihich'į' hahásdzí'ígíí éí Níłch'i Diyinii bits'ą́ą́dóó bee iináanii át'é .
PRED:	The Spirit gives life to life , but not to the flesh ; but the word that I have spoken to you is of the Spirit .
GOLD:	The Spirit alone gives eternal life . Human effort accomplishes nothing . And the very words I have spoken to you are spirit and life .

ID:	1026
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naadiin táá' náhááh góne' siláo yinanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan éí Jew dine'é tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' anááyíí'eezh , áko t'áá át'é aheesht'eezhígíí dį́įdi mííldóó ba'aan hastą́ądi neeznádiin .
PRED:	In the third year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar king of the army , Nebuchadnezzar the captain of the Jews , two hundred and five hundred and five hundred and five thousand and six thousand .
GOLD:	In Nebuchadnezzar 's twenty-third year he sent Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , who took 745 more — a total of 4,600 captives in all .

ID:	1027
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ bee hadadohne' , áádóó ts'ísee k'ehgo bidádahonooníinii t'áadoo bá nahosooł'ání .
PRED:	But ye shall declare the word of the Lord Jesus Christ , and do not seek the flesh .
GOLD:	Instead , clothe yourself with the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ . And do n't let yourself think about ways to indulge your evil desires .

ID:	1028
INPUT:	Háálá baa hasti'go dah nool'į́įłii nidi bééhodoozįįłgo át'é , áko ha'át'íhída bik'é'ésti'ii hahgoda báádi'dooltsosgo bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	For there is nothing to be hidden , but it will be known , and it will be known for seven times .
GOLD:	For all that is secret will eventually be brought into the open , and everything that is concealed will be brought to light and made known to all .

ID:	1029
INPUT:	áko náhookǫsjigo hoodzooígíí éí Hánathan kin haal'áajį' nááhodeesdzo , áádóó <unk> yel yíldzisíjį' nihoodzo ,
PRED:	And the border went up to the north side of the north , and the border went up to the border .
GOLD:	The northern boundary of Zebulun passed Hannathon and ended at the valley of Iphtah-el .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Baasha Rules in Israel

ID:	1031
INPUT:	táá' yiłkaah góne' , jó , diné léi' Saul bisiláo yił dah yinééłdę́ę́' níyáago bi'éé' ák'iniyiis<unk> lá , índa łeezhígíí bitsiits'iin yik'íyiizhjaa' lá , áko David yaa níyáago tsé'yaa neeshjoolgo a'ohgo í'diilyaa .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the third day , that , behold , a man came out of the army , and cut off his head , and put it on the head of his head , and he bowed down , and bowed down before David .
GOLD:	On the third day a man arrived from Saul 's army camp . He had torn his clothes and put dirt on his head to show that he was in mourning . He fell to the ground before David in deep respect .

ID:	1032
INPUT:	Hada'ísídół'į́į́' áádóó sodadołzin , áko doo nihídahodínóotah da ; níłch'i ii' sizíinii éí lą́ nízin , nidi ats'íís éí doo bidziil da .
PRED:	Be careful , and pray , that the spirit may not be put to death ; but the body is not strong .
GOLD:	Keep watch and pray , so that you will not give in to temptation . For the spirit is willing , but the body is weak ! ”

ID:	1033
INPUT:	Nihítł'ahgi nihitsii' doo dadoohshih da ; nihidághaa' bibąąhgóó doo dahidooshih da .
PRED:	You shall not wash your hair on your head ; you shall not wash the hair of your hair .
GOLD:	“ Do not trim off the hair on your temples or trim your beards .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	áádóó Fílipaijį' niikai , éí Masedóniya kéyahdi aláahgo kin haal'á , Rome dine'é bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii át'é . Díí kin haal'áagi naháatą́ągo t'áá díkwíí danihiiską́ ,
PRED:	And we came to pass through the land of Macedonia , which is in Macedonia , the kingdom of Asia , a few days in this city .
GOLD:	From there we reached Philippi , a major city of that district of Macedonia and a Roman colony . And we stayed there several days .

ID:	1035
INPUT:	nidi t'áadoo baa níjít'įįhí biyáázh yishchį́ , áádóó Jesus bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	But he gave birth to a son , and he named his name Jesus .
GOLD:	But he did not have sexual relations with her until her son was born . And Joseph named him Jesus .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	Díí diné t'áá ałtso t'áá sáhí náás yish'ish dooígíí doo bíneesh'ą́ą da , háálá t'áá íiyisí shá nantł'a .
PRED:	All this man could not take care of me , because he is very hard for me .
GOLD:	I ca n't carry all these people by myself ! The load is far too heavy !

ID:	1037
INPUT:	índa Sabíyadóó dine'é bik'i dah yizhjée'go adeiniiskaad , áko , t'áá aaníí , nidaal'a'í ałtso diltłish bee nidabidiztseedgo t'áá shí t'éiyá yisdááshwodgo nił hashne' .
PRED:	And the men of Samaria fell upon them , and cast them away , and they cast them away ; yea , all thy servants are slain by the sword , that I may tell thee .
GOLD:	when the Sabeans raided us . They stole all the animals and killed all the farmhands . I am the only one who escaped to tell you . ”

ID:	1038
INPUT:	Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah Bábilangi át'ée dooleełii yiyiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	I saw what Isaiah son of Amoz did to Babylon .
GOLD:	Isaiah son of Amoz received this message concerning the destruction of Babylon :

ID:	1039
INPUT:	Áko kin bii' áłah ná'ádleehdóó táá'oosdee'go Jew dine'é índa Jew dine'é binahagha' yihidiikaii lą'í Paul índa Bárnabas yikéé' yíkai , áko Diyin God bibee ajooba' yéego yaa dadzólíi dooleełígíí baa nídzooskango bee bich'į' hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	And when they had washed the synagogue , they followed Paul and Barnabas , and Barnabas and Barnabas , and cried out to the grace of God .
GOLD:	Many Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas , and the two men urged them to continue to rely on the grace of God .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bił hólne' , Bóhólníihii díí yee haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Aaron and his sons , saying ,
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron and his sons and all the people of Israel . This is what the Lord has commanded .

ID:	1041
INPUT:	Áko diné áłah nilínígíí ninaagóó ahénál'áa doo , áádóó wót'áahdi bá dah sínídáhídi dah nánídaah .
PRED:	And the people shall sit upon the high places , and sit on the throne .
GOLD:	Gather the nations before you.Rule over them from on high .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	Nidine'é dadiyinii éí nihodiyingo haz'ánígíí t'óó kónígháníjį' daabí nít'éé' nidi , nihi'ana'í danilíinii yik'i naaskai .
PRED:	Your people are far away from far away , but their enemies against you .
GOLD:	How briefly your holy people possessed your holy place , and now our enemies have destroyed it .

ID:	1043
INPUT:	Áko David t'áá íiyisí ádił niseedzá ; jó , diné hoł nidazdoołniiłgo yádaałti' , háálá diné t'áá ałtso dabiye'ké índa dabitsi'ké yąąh dabíni' . Nidi David éí Bóhólníihii haDiyin God binahjį' hadziil ízh'diilyaa .
PRED:	David was very angry , because the people were afraid of him , because all the people and daughters were afraid of him . But David became strong .
GOLD:	David was now in great danger because all his men were very bitter about losing their sons and daughters , and they began to talk of stoning him . But David found strength in the Lord his God .

ID:	1044
INPUT:	Dabiinéé' yéego didoots'į́į́ł ; tónteeldę́ę́' ayóó íits'a'go hadadidoolwosh ; Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii yaa dahaniihgo dahataał doo .
PRED:	The voice of their voice will cry out out of the sea ; they will sing to the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	But all who are left shout and sing for joy.Those in the west praise the Lord 's majesty .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	Áko níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'gi Názarait nilíinii ats'á'ádeet'ánígíí bitsii' bee bééhózinígíí yidooshih , áádóó ats'á'ádeet'ą́ągo bitsii' néididoołjołgo nááhidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii nááhániihgo biyaa góne' tsídzaii doołjoł .
PRED:	And he shall make the hair of the tabernacle of meeting , and make the hair of the tabernacle of meeting ; and he shall offer it to the head of the peace offering .
GOLD:	“ Then the Nazirites will shave their heads at the entrance of the Tabernacle . They will take the hair that had been dedicated and place it on the fire beneath the peace-offering sacrifice .

ID:	1046
INPUT:	Áádóó bich'į' bee handziihgo nááda'iiłniihii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii deí'aahígíí ábidiní , Jórdan tooh bibąąhjį' oohkaigo Jórdan tooh ałníi'gi hazhó'ó deidoosįįł .
PRED:	Speak unto them , and say unto the priests that were in the midst of the ark of the covenant of the covenant , Come out , and take them in the midst of the Jordan .
GOLD:	Give this command to the priests who carry the Ark of the Covenant : ‘ When you reach the banks of the Jordan River , take a few steps into the river and stop there . ' ”

ID:	1047
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é bitahdóó Jiifáneh biye' Kéíleb .
PRED:	Of the tribe of Judah , Caleb the son of Caleb , the son of Caleb .
GOLD:	JudahCaleb son of Jephunneh

ID:	1048
INPUT:	Gíírar kin shijaa'dę́ę́' Abímelek bik'is Ahó<unk> índa bisiláo binanit'a'í Fáíkal wolyéii yił haa yíkaigo
PRED:	Abimelech 's brother Abimelech and his army came to him .
GOLD:	One day King Abimelech came from Gerar with his adviser , Ahuzzath , and also Phicol , his army commander .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	Nihi'ana'í bich'į' nihíká anánílwo' , háálá diné t'éiyá áká iilwo'go t'áadoo nádleehí da .
PRED:	help your enemies , because no one can help you .
GOLD:	Oh , please help us against our enemies , for all human help is useless .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	Job hodísinígíí bóhoneestą́ą́'
PRED:	Job 's Death
GOLD:	Prologue

ID:	1051
INPUT:	Áko díí bee nanihinítą́'ígíí dasétsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' t'áá ooleełgi bik'ehgo nibéédahołníihgo nihá áshłééh nihósh'ní .
PRED:	And I want you to teach you according to these things , after that I have taught you .
GOLD:	so I will work hard to make sure you always remember these things after I am gone .

ID:	1052
INPUT:	Asíriya dine'é nilíinii doo yisdánihidoonił da ; łį́į́' doo bee náádadiibah da índa nihíla' bee bindashiilnishgo ádeiilyaii náásgóó doo bich'į' kónáádadidii'niił da , Nihidiyin danohłį́ . Niniit'aa áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii aa a'ááh hasin bee dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And we will not deliver us , neither shall we escape with the hand of our hand , and with our hands , and with our hands , saying , Ye are gods , and have mercy upon our fathers .
GOLD:	Assyria can not save us , nor can our warhorses.Never again will we say to the idols we have made , ‘ You are our gods . 'No , in you alonedo the orphans find mercy . ”

ID:	1053
INPUT:	Jesus Christ tó áádóó dił yee níyá . Doo tó t'éiyá bee da , nidi tó áádóó dił bee jiníyá . Áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii oo'íinii nilį́įgo éí yee nihił halne' , háálá Níłch'i Diyinii t'áá aaníinii nilį́ .
PRED:	The water of Jesus Christ and blood is not in blood , but blood and blood . And the Holy Spirit declare to you , because he is the true Spirit .
GOLD:	And Jesus Christ was revealed as God 's Son by his baptism in water and by shedding his blood on the cross — not by water only , but by water and blood . And the Spirit , who is truth , confirms it with his testimony .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	Háálá Christ doo t'áá bí ádił hóshǫ́ǫ da nít'éé' ; jó , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání , Danéédzíi'ii yee danéédzíí' yę́ę shik'ijį' silį́į́' .
PRED:	For Christ himself was evil , because it is written , “ The words of the prophets have appeared against me . ”
GOLD:	For even Christ did n't live to please himself . As the Scriptures say , “ The insults of those who insult you , O God , have fallen on me . ”

ID:	1055
INPUT:	Áko Jííhu éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh , áádóó Samériya kin haal'áagi yóó'áho'diilyaa . Nít'éé' haye' Jiihó'ahaz hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And Jehu slept with his fathers , and was buried in Samaria . And Jehoash his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Jehu died , he was buried in Samaria . Then his son Jehoahaz became the next king .

ID:	1056
INPUT:	Ákóyaa níjoodááł , nít'éé' há nidaal'a'í hadááh yíkaigo hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , Niye' náádiidzá .
PRED:	And when he was going to meet him , his servants came to meet him and told him , “ Your son is going . ”
GOLD:	While the man was on his way , some of his servants met him with the news that his son was alive and well .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	Yádiłhił nílíinii , ąą ánínééh ; bíni'dii t'áá ákogi át'éii naałtin ; bíni'dii nahasdzáán ąą ánéehgo yisdá'iildééh bits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' haleeh áádóó bíni'dii t'áá ákogi át'éii yił hanisé . Bóhólníihii nishłíinii shí éí ádaashłaa .
PRED:	Be opened , heaven , and send rain in the morning ; let the earth be opened , and bring forth the fruit of salvation , and bring forth righteousness from the earth ; I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Open up , O heavens , and pour out your righteousness.Let the earth open wideso salvation and righteousness can sprout up together.I , the Lord , created them .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	Áko Áízak haye' Íísa bich'į' yájíłti'go Rebékah hodiizts'ą́ą́' . Áádóó Íísa halgaidę́ę́' bįįh nizhdooyééł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ ajoolzhee' .
PRED:	And Isaac heard that Esau was speaking to Esau his son , and Esau stayed in the field to kill him .
GOLD:	But Rebekah overheard what Isaac had said to his son Esau . So when Esau left to hunt for the wild game ,

ID:	1059
INPUT:	Áádóó índa nahjį' anídeesh'nii'go shine'dę́ę́' t'éí yidííłtsééł , nidi shinii' éí doo yidííłtséeł da .
PRED:	Then I will lift up my hand from me , but you will not see my face .
GOLD:	Then I will remove my hand and let you see me from behind . But my face will not be seen . ”

ID:	1060
INPUT:	Áko azhdooyį́į́ł biniyé hayaa nizh'níką́ , nidi , Biniyé níyáhígíí baa hweeshne'go índa adeeshį́į́ł , jiní . Hágoónee' , hólne' , hozhdííniid .
PRED:	And she came to eat for her , but I have told her what I have done , and he said to her , “ Go , tell her . ”
GOLD:	Then food was served . But Abraham 's servant said , “ I do n't want to eat until I have told you why I have come. ” “ All right , ” Laban said , “ tell us . ”

ID:	1061
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Original Peoples of Edom

ID:	1062
INPUT:	Na'ák'íyáshti'ii índa baa ná'ooshkąąhii k'ad deísółts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Listen to my words , and I cry out to you .
GOLD:	Listen to my charge ; pay attention to my arguments .

ID:	1063
INPUT:	Jó , ná naal'a'í nishłíinii ádee haasdzíí' ; éí Gíísher kin haal'áadi Síriya kéyahgi naashá yę́ędą́ą́' ádíshní , Bóhólníihii t'áá aaníí Jerúsalem kin haal'áajį' shił nát'áazhgo índa Bóhólníihii bá naash'a' doo .
PRED:	For I have sworn by thy servant , saying , ‘ The Lord has brought me to Jerusalem , and I will serve the Lord in Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	For while your servant was at Geshur in Aram , I promised to sacrifice to the Lord in Hebron if he would bring me back to Jerusalem . ”

ID:	1064
INPUT:	Háálá dziil t'ahdii nihee ádindą́ą́' , ts'ídá Diyin God yee nihoní'ą́ąjį' ahoolzhiizhgo , doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádajít'éii há Christ daaztsą́ .
PRED:	For if there is no strength in the end of God , he died in the end of the end of the end of God .
GOLD:	When we were utterly helpless , Christ came at just the right time and died for us sinners .

ID:	1065
INPUT:	Éí bąą doo yá'ádaashóonii nik'i hwiidooleeł , áko bee bił yóó'ahodííłáałii doo nił bééhózin da doo , áádóó báhádzidii nik'ijį' dooleełgo nahjį' kodíílíłígíí doo bíninil'ą́ą da doo índa atíndoolíiłii doo nił bééhózinii t'áadoo hooyání nik'i hwiidooleeł .
PRED:	Therefore the wicked shall come upon thee , and thou shalt not know that thou shalt not know his voice , and that thou mayest not know the judgment of thy wrath , and that thou mayest not come upon thee .
GOLD:	So disaster will overtake you , and you wo n't be able to charm it away.Calamity will fall upon you , and you wo n't be able to buy your way out.A catastrophe will strike you suddenly , one for which you are not prepared .

ID:	1066
INPUT:	Kódíshní , Da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó tahoniiłkaad doo nít'éé' áádóó diné bitahgóó doo hwéédahaniihgóó áhooshłaa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	I said , “ I will scatter them , and I will scatter them among the people .
GOLD:	I would have annihilated them , wiping out even the memory of them .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílam ádííniidígíí bik'ehgo Béílak ádzaa ; éí dóola yázhí índa deenásts'aa' éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí t'áá ałtso yik'eh nítį́įgo nááyiyiisnii' .
PRED:	And Balak did according to the word of Balaam , and Balak offered a bull , and a ram , and all the altar .
GOLD:	So Balak did as Balaam ordered and offered a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	1068
INPUT:	Áko díí ał'ąą át'éii át'éhígíí baa nitsókees : badaa'ihígíí áádóó doo badaa'ihígíí índa naaldlooshii daadánígíí áádóó doo daadánígíí .
PRED:	And these are the names of the nations : the beasts , and the beasts , and the beasts , and the beasts , and the beasts .
GOLD:	By these instructions you will know what is unclean and clean , and which animals may be eaten and which may not be eaten . ”

ID:	1069
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Diné nidaaztseedgo bidił kin taazlį́įgo kin haal'áii doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Ákwii ałdó' bee dididooljah biniyé t'óó ahayóí yanáa'áago ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord God : “ Woe to the people of the city ! Woe to the city ! How terrible will I make many things for them ? ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : What sorrow awaits Jerusalem , the city of murderers ! I myself will pile up the fuel beneath her .

ID:	1070
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí Jerobówam ni'iilzííh yaa naayáhígíí t'áá át'é bééjískaigo t'áadoo yóó'adazdeez'ą́ą da ;
PRED:	And the children of Israel left all that Jeroboam had done , and did not forgive him .
GOLD:	And the people of Israel persisted in all the evil ways of Jeroboam . They did not turn from these sins

ID:	1071
INPUT:	Sálaman éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin íílééh
PRED:	Solomon 's Temple
GOLD:	Solomon Builds the Temple

ID:	1072
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Bóhólníihii hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bik'eh ádziidzaa ; dah oonéłígíí t'áá ałtso binááł Dził Hor góde hadziskai .
PRED:	Moses did as the Lord had commanded him . They went up to Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded . The three of them went up Mount Hor together as the whole community watched .

ID:	1073
INPUT:	Ła' ádeizniizį́į́' , Jesus éí Júdas béeso bizis nei'áhígíí biniinaa , Hodílzingo áłah adooleełgi chodeidoo'įįłígíí nahidííłnih , doodaii' , Badahojoobá'íígíí t'áadoo le'é bitaa díínih , yiłní dazniizį́į́' .
PRED:	Some of them wanted to kill Jesus , who had taken the money of Judas , who had given him to keep the feast , or to the poor .
GOLD:	Since Judas was their treasurer , some thought Jesus was telling him to go and pay for the food or to give some money to the poor .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' awéé' ashkii éí <unk> bad bee jíízhi'go kózhdííniid , Ízrel dine'é bee ayóó ájít'éii hats'ą́ą́' dahodiile' ! Háálá Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii hats'ą́ą́' nídiit'ą́ áádóó asdzání yizháá'áád nilíinii daaztsą́ índa hahastiin ałdó' daaztsą́ .
PRED:	And there was a child named him him : “ Let 's hear the glory of Israel ! For the ark of God has taken away from the ark of God , and her husband died . ”
GOLD:	She named the child Ichabod ( which means “ Where is the glory ? ” ) , for she said , “ Israel 's glory is gone. ” She named him this because the Ark of God had been captured and because her father-in-law and husband were dead .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bich'į' nidahwii'náanii t'áá át'é bik'éniná'nídléego háání'nííł .
PRED:	O God , forgive all the troubles of Israel .
GOLD:	O God , ransom Israelfrom all its troubles .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	Naat'á ch'ah éí Jéshuwa bik'i dí'aah , hodoo'niid
PRED:	The crown of Joshua
GOLD:	The Crowning of Jeshua

ID:	1077
INPUT:	Nihisodizin doo didoots'į́įł da biniyé k'os ách'ą́ą́h diniłkǫ' .
PRED:	He will not listen to your prayer , so that the fire will not listen to you .
GOLD:	You have hidden yourself in a cloudso our prayers can not reach you .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' géeso neeznáá hasht'eelyaaígíí éí siláo miil yilt'éego yinanit'a'í nilíinii bich'į' dííjih . Áádóó nínaaíké haa lá daat'éé lá baa nidíníítaał , índa ha'át'íí lá yaa naakai lá bee nihił hodíílnih .
PRED:	He also brought ten thousand pieces to the master of the thousand . And I will sing to you what you have done , and what you have done . ”
GOLD:	And give these ten cuts of cheese to their captain . See how your brothers are getting along , and bring back a report on how they are doing . ”

ID:	1079
INPUT:	Háálá ni , díí t'áá ałtso nił bééhózingo , e'elyaii bich'į' nahadlá bá haz'ą́ą́ góne' ííníyą́ą'go diné ła'da bi'oodlą' t'ah doo yiłdziłígíí niiłtsą́ągo éí eda'alyaii bich'į' ch'iyáán náádahaaznii'ii yidooyį́įłgi bił t'áá áko ádíílííł .
PRED:	For thou hast known all these things , and hast gone into the place of worship , and if any man sees it , thou shalt eat it ; and thou shalt eat bread with them .
GOLD:	For if others see you — with your “ superior knowledge ” — eating in the temple of an idol , wo n't they be encouraged to violate their conscience by eating food that has been offered to an idol ?

ID:	1080
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes kót'éego yich'į' haadzíí' ,
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1081
INPUT:	éí ni ánít'į́ , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , ayóó ánít'é áádóó nidziil sínílį́į́' ; bee ayóó ánít'éii yádiłhiłjį' nininísą́ índa bee níhólníihii ni' nidahonees'ą́ąjį' silį́į́' .
PRED:	You , O king , are great and strong ; you have become great and powerful , and your kingdom has become the end of the earth .
GOLD:	That tree , Your Majesty , is you . For you have grown strong and great ; your greatness reaches up to heaven , and your rule to the ends of the earth .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	Ákondi ánihwiish'aah ládą́ą́' , bee ánihwiish'aahii éí t'áá aaníí , háálá doo t'áá sáhí ánihwiish'aah da , nidi shí áádóó aTaa' shiníł'a'ii biłgo t'éiyá .
PRED:	But if I keep my statutes , I am not alone ; for I am not alone , but the Father who sent me .
GOLD:	And if I did , my judgment would be correct in every respect because I am not alone . The Father who sent me is with me .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	Éí bąą kódíníigo bich'į' handziih , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kónihiłní , Shoo , shidine'é nohłíinii , danihijishcháá' nihá ąą ádadeeshłííł ; áádę́ę́' nánihidideeshjahgo Ízrel dine'é bikéyah biih nánihideesh'nił .
PRED:	Therefore say unto them , Thus saith the Lord God : Behold , I will open your eyes , O my people ; and I will bring you into the land of Israel .
GOLD:	Therefore , prophesy to them and say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : O my people , I will open your graves of exile and cause you to rise again . Then I will bring you back to the land of Israel .

ID:	1084
INPUT:	Áko ákwe'é kin haal'áhígi diné t'áá íiyisí bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	And the people were very glad in the city .
GOLD:	So there was great joy in that city .

ID:	1085
INPUT:	Áko sozdilzingo ájíní , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shinanit'a'í Éíbraham biDiyin God nánooshkąąh ; díí jį́ shíká anilyeed ; Éíbraham shinanit'a'í baa jiiníbaah .
PRED:	Then he prayed , “ Lord , my master Abraham , help me today , and have mercy on my master Abraham . ”
GOLD:	“ O Lord , God of my master , Abraham , ” he prayed . “ Please give me success today , and show unfailing love to my master , Abraham .

ID:	1086
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel biye'ké ákódaadzaa ; Féro ádííniidígi át'éego Jóseph tsinaabąąs haa yiiznil , áádóó hast'e' bikiin níjookah dooleełígíí há hasht'éyiilaa .
PRED:	And the sons of Israel did as Pharaoh had commanded : and Joseph gave him a chariot , and he gave him his food for him .
GOLD:	So the sons of Jacob did as they were told . Joseph provided them with wagons , as Pharaoh had commanded , and he gave them supplies for the journey .

ID:	1087
INPUT:	Éíbram áádóó Néíhor t'áá ájíłah hwe'asdzą́ą́ hazlį́į́' : Éíbram hwe'asdzą́ą́ éí Sérai wolyé , áádóó Néíhor hwe'asdzą́ą́ éí Mílkah wolyé , éí Héíran yitsi' nilį́ ; Héíran éí Mílkah áádóó <unk> bizhé'é jílį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Abram and Abram had two wives , Abram 's wife , Abram 's wife , Abram 's wife , Abram 's wife , Abram 's wife , Abram 's daughter , Abram 's daughter , and Abram became his father .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Abram and Nahor both married . The name of Abram 's wife was Sarai , and the name of Nahor 's wife was Milcah . ( Milcah and her sister Iscah were daughters of Nahor 's brother Haran . )

ID:	1088
INPUT:	Abínígo ádadohníi doo , I'íí'ą́ laanaa nisin . E'e'áahgo ádadohníi doo , Abíní doo yę́ę nisin . Háálá bik'ee hóyée'ii bik'ee nihił daayée' doo índa bik'eda'íyée'ii baa ákódanohsin doo .
PRED:	You will say to them in the morning , ‘ I have given you the evening , ' and you will say , ‘ You will fear and fear . '
GOLD:	In the morning you will say , ‘ If only it were night ! ' And in the evening you will say , ‘ If only it were morning ! ' For you will be terrified by the awful horrors you see around you .

ID:	1089
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii díí ałdó' łahgo át'éego yąąh tsíńdeezkéezgo ání , Nich'į' yit' íní ályaii doo bik'ehgo ákóhodooníił da , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	And the Lord turned back and said , What shall it be , that it may be done , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	Then the Lord relented from this plan , too . “ I will not do that either , ” said the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	1090
INPUT:	Samériya biyi' kin haal'áá léi'gi jiníyá , ákwii Sáíkar hoolyéé lá , Jéíkab biye' Jóseph kéyah yeidiní'ą́ yę́ędóó t'áá áyídígi .
PRED:	And he came to a city of Samaria , which was in Samaria , because he had given to Joseph the son of Jacob , as he had given to them .
GOLD:	Eventually he came to the Samaritan village of Sychar , near the field that Jacob gave to his son Joseph .

ID:	1091
INPUT:	Áádóó Miirárai dine'é bada'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí t'áá ałtso dabizhé'é yę́ę ya'áłchíní danilį́įgo dabi'déélta' ;
PRED:	And the sons of Merari , by their families , by their families , by their fathers ' houses ,
GOLD:	The Merarite division was also listed by its clans and families .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	Áko dine'é danilínígíí bitahdóó naat'áanii danilíinii t'ááłá'ígo éí kéyah hóó' dadooleełígíí hazhé'é deidoozoh biniyé nidíínił .
PRED:	And thou shalt give an inheritance among the tribes of the tribes of the peoples , that they may give an inheritance unto their father .
GOLD:	Enlist one leader from each tribe to help them with the task .

ID:	1093
INPUT:	Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi da'ílíinii bee ída'azįįdgo índa dówózhii biyi' hojílǫ́ǫ́ nít'ée'ii ach'oha'ní yee ak'ijidlíi doo . Bíni'dii bee ak'ihojidlíii Jóseph hatsiit'áajį' ahodooleeł , áádóó hatsiikáa'jį' ahodooleeł ; hak' isóó bits'ázdineesdlį́į'ii bitahgóó naat'áanii jílį́ .
PRED:	And he shall bless them that dwell on the earth , and bless him , and bless him : and let him be the head of Joseph , and he shall come upon his head , and he shall be a prince among his brethren .
GOLD:	with the best gifts of the earth and its bounty , and the favor of the one who appeared in the burning bush.May these blessings rest on Joseph 's head , crowning the brow of the prince among his brothers .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , shiye' baa jiiníbaah , háálá tsi'nídídááh , áko t'áá íiyisí ti'náhoo'nih ; jó , t'áá ahą́ą́h tsídza nágoh , áádóó t'áá ahą́ą́h taah nágoh .
PRED:	Be merciful to me , my son , because you are going to meet him , and he will cast them into the fire , and he will cast them down .
GOLD:	“ Lord , have mercy on my son . He has seizures and suffers terribly . He often falls into the fire or into the water .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' ts'ídá yá'át'éehgo nitsídaakeesii yá'át'éehgo bá ánít'į́ .
PRED:	O Lord , do good in the heart of the righteous , in the heart of the righteous .
GOLD:	O Lord , do good to those who are good , whose hearts are in tune with you .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	Áko Júdas éí aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa Férisii danilíinii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' siláo índa bindanit'a'í ła' ba'í'nilgo ákwe'é yił yíkai , bee hool'iní nidaadlo'í áádóó honooyééł índa dadeeníinii dayíjáahgo .
PRED:	Then Judas took some of the chief priests and the leaders of the Pharisees , and brought them to the place where they had a lamp and a lamp .
GOLD:	The leading priests and Pharisees had given Judas a contingent of Roman soldiers and Temple guards to accompany him . Now with blazing torches , lanterns , and weapons , they arrived at the olive grove .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	Áko asdzání danilíinii Neiyómii ádeidííniid , Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih , díí jį́ áhánígo nik'éí nilíinii t'áá ádingo doo ániilaa da ; Ízrel dine'é bitahgi ashkii bízhi' ts'ídá bee béého'dílzin doo .
PRED:	And the women said to Naomi , Blessed be the Lord , that thou hast not done any of thy brethren , that thou hast not made a daughter among the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the women of the town said to Naomi , “ Praise the Lord , who has now provided a redeemer for your family ! May this child be famous in Israel .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	Hérad t'óó bił haada
PRED:	Herod and Herod
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy

ID:	1099
INPUT:	Bízhi' hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo ; jį́honaa'éí has'ahgóó hólónígi át'éego házhi' has'ahgóó náás yit'ih doo . Hanahjį' diné bik'idahojidlíi doo ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso , Baa hózhóonii , dahałníi doo .
PRED:	Let his name be forever and ever , as the sun is in the place of the sun , so shall the people be blessed , and all the nations shall call for joy .
GOLD:	May the king 's name endure forever ; may it continue as long as the sun shines.May all nations be blessed through himand bring him praise .

ID:	1100
INPUT:	nidi Jesus ábidííniid , Júdas , da' Diné Silį́į'iísh yiits'ǫsgo ninádiní'aah ?
PRED:	But Jesus said to them , “ Are you going to take Judas the Son of Man ? ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ Judas , would you betray the Son of Man with a kiss ? ”

ID:	1101
INPUT:	Áko haa nínáádzídzá , nít'éé' nááda'jiłhosh lá , háálá t'áá íiyisí bił ho'niighą́ą́' .
PRED:	And he returned to him , and found him sleep , because he was very afraid .
GOLD:	When he returned to them again , he found them sleeping , for they could n't keep their eyes open .

ID:	1102
INPUT:	Áko díí bitsásk'ehjį' doo ła' anízhdoołteeł da ; yá'át'éehii áádóó doo yá'át'éehii doo bił ałgháázhdooltéeł da , índa doo yá'át'éehii áádóó yá'át'éehii doo bił ałgháázhdooltéeł da , ákódziidzaago naaldlooshii ałgháá'jíltį́įgo éí t'áá áłah dílzin dooleeł .
PRED:	And he shall not take up his bed , neither shall he make it better than the good and the good , and it shall not be more than the good , and the beast shall be holy .
GOLD:	You may not exchange or substitute it for another animal — neither a good animal for a bad one nor a bad animal for a good one . But if you do exchange one animal for another , then both the original animal and its substitute will be considered holy .

ID:	1103
INPUT:	Áko béésh łitsoii íí'áa dooígíí bílátah dah doo'niłígíí éí yah a'atiindę́ę'go hastą́ą́h ké silá áníłtsogo ch'ilátah hózhóón lílii wolyéii nahalin .
PRED:	And the pillars of brass was six cubits , and the breadth of the gate was six cubits , and six cubits .
GOLD:	The capitals on the columns inside the entry room were shaped like water lilies , and they were six feet tall .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	Éí bąą łahgo át'éego Diyin God bich'į' tsíńdahidohkeesgo beełt'éego nihits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' dahóle' , áádóó t'óó ádaa dadzíínóhdlíigo t'áá nihiyi'ídi , Éíbraham yę́ę éí nihizhé'é nilį́ , t'áadoo dadohníní , háálá ánihidishní , Diyin God díí tsé kǫ́ǫ́ naaznilígíí bee Éíbraham ba'áłchíní íidoolíiłgo yíneel'ą́ .
PRED:	Therefore , do n't turn back from your sins , and put on your faith , but say to your father Abraham , ‘ He is able to make these stones . ' ”
GOLD:	Prove by the way you live that you have repented of your sins and turned to God . Do n't just say to each other , ‘ We 're safe , for we are descendants of Abraham . ' That means nothing , for I tell you , God can create children of Abraham from these very stones .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	T'óó baa'ihgo nitsíkeesii éí doo bił nilį́į da , nidi Bóhólníihii deidósinii bił nilį́ . Azhą́ bik'ee ti'hojooníih nidi , bee nihojii'aahígíí baa nijighá .
PRED:	The heart of the wicked is not a fool , but the fear of the Lord is in fear , but he does his judgments .
GOLD:	Those who despise flagrant sinners , and honor the faithful followers of the Lord , and keep their promises even when it hurts .

ID:	1106
INPUT:	Áko asdzání Jézebel éí shá nidaal'a'í áádóó shá dahalne'ii neistseedgo bidił dadeezna'ígíí t'áá ałtso bá k'éédideeshnííł biniyé ninanit'a'í Éíhab bik'éí danilíinii t'áá ałtso nidííłtsxił .
PRED:	And she killed all my servants , and all my prophets , and I will give them the blood of Ahab , that they may kill all the princes of Ahab .
GOLD:	You are to destroy the family of Ahab , your master . In this way , I will avenge the murder of my prophets and all the Lord 's servants who were killed by Jezebel .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	K'ad nihich'į' nidahwiiłnánígíí biniinaa diné t'áá ájít'éhígi át'éego nijigháago há yá'át'ééh nisin .
PRED:	It is better for you to do good for you , because of your affliction .
GOLD:	Because of the present crisis , I think it is best to remain as you are .

ID:	1108
INPUT:	Éí níla' bik'ídeesdiz le' ; nijéíkáa'gi bee bik'ida'íłchi' .
PRED:	They put their hands on their hands , put them on their hands , and write them on their hands .
GOLD:	Tie them on your fingers as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	Sha'ákéí índa sha'áłchíní bideená ná nishishnish nít'é'ígíí shaa nínííł , áko shíni' dah diishnééh , háálá ná nishishnishígíí nił bééhózin .
PRED:	I have done what I have done for my children and children , for you know what I have done .
GOLD:	Let me take my wives and children , for I have earned them by serving you , and let me be on my way . You certainly know how hard I have worked for you . ”

ID:	1110
INPUT:	Dį́į'go naanáz'áhídóó adee' hadaaz'áago t'áá ła' bizhi'ee áyiilaa , índa béésh łitsoii yik'íísti' .
PRED:	And he made four horns of the four corners of the four horns , and covered them with bronze .
GOLD:	He made horns for each of its four corners so that the horns and altar were all one piece . He overlaid the altar with bronze .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	Áko asdzání ná naal'a'í nishłíinii ádíshní , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii saad yee haadzí'ígíí bee ha'íídéeshniił , háálá diyingo naal'a'í Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó nahalingo bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nilíinii éí yá'át'éehii áádóó doo yá'át'éehii yaa ákonízin . Éí bąą Bóhólníihii niDiyin God nił hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Then I said to your servant , “ I will give you the words of the Lord , because the angel of God is like the angel of God , and the Lord your God will be with you . ”
GOLD:	Yes , my lord the king will give us peace of mind again . ' I know that you are like an angel of God in discerning good from evil . May the Lord your God be with you . ”

ID:	1112
INPUT:	Sálaman éí kin bii' sohodizin góne' tsits'aa' dílzinii niiní'ą́
PRED:	The ark of the Temple
GOLD:	The Ark Brought to the Temple

ID:	1113
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go shaa hwííníle'go shijéí át'éegi háínísidgo nabínínítą́ą́' ; doo yá'ádaat'éehii doo ła' shii' hólǫ́ǫ́góó nił bééhózin ; doo t'áá k'ad bee haz'áanii heshtíihgo hahideesdzih da niizį́į́' .
PRED:	Thou hast come to me in the night , and hast taught me like a heart : thou hast not known evil in me : now I have known that I will speak against thy law .
GOLD:	You have tested my thoughts and examined my heart in the night.You have scrutinized me and found nothing wrong.I am determined not to sin in what I say .

ID:	1114
INPUT:	Átséédą́ą́' bee aha'deet'áanii t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahígóogo doo bee aha'náádeet'ą́ą da doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	If the covenant was not found in the first covenant , he would not keep the covenant with them .
GOLD:	If the first covenant had been faultless , there would have been no need for a second covenant to replace it .

ID:	1115
INPUT:	Jiihóíyakim éí naadiin ashdla' binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' , áádóó Jerúsalemgi nant'áago ła'ts'áadah nááhai áádóó biDiyin God Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa naayá .
PRED:	Jehoiakim was thirty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem , and he did evil in the sight of the Lord his God .
GOLD:	Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord his God .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	áádóó áyidííniid , Nílááh , Sailóom tó sikánígíí biyi' tá'ádígis ( Sailóom jiníigo éí <unk> 'a' jiníigo óolyé ) . Ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago tá'ázdeesgiz , áko áádę́ę́' ajoo'į́įgo nídzídzá .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Go , and sent it to pass , that he should wash it in the waters of Beersheba , and washed it , and went forth , and went forth .
GOLD:	He told him , “ Go wash yourself in the pool of Siloam ” ( Siloam means “ sent ” ) . So the man went and washed and came back seeing !

ID:	1117
INPUT:	Áko Líyah ání , Shá naal'a'í shahastiin baa níłtį́įgo bąą Diyin God shich'į' na'nílá , áko ashkii éí Ísakar bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	Then Leah said , “ I have given my servant to my husband , because God has given me a son , and she named him Issachar . ”
GOLD:	She named him Issachar , for she said , “ God has rewarded me for giving my servant to my husband as a wife . ”

ID:	1118
INPUT:	Ak'ahígíí t'áá át'é yits'éidooniłgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' yididoołił .
PRED:	And he shall take away all the fat from them , and burn them upon the altar .
GOLD:	Then the priest must remove all the animal 's fat and burn it on the altar ,

ID:	1119
INPUT:	Áko doo dasinooh<unk> góó , doodaii' doo dasinoohdohgóó , nidi t'óó dasoozílígo t'óó nihídideeshkoh .
PRED:	And I will cause you to go , and you will not stand , but I will make you a little while .
GOLD:	But since you are like lukewarm water , neither hot nor cold , I will spit you out of my mouth !

ID:	1120
INPUT:	Áádóó óola názbąsgo naaki ánáádayiidlaa , áko éí íífad bik'ijį' awostisdóó t'áá ałch'ijí háát'i'ígíí yaago ninít'i'gi bąąh dah sinilgo ádayiilaa ; t'áá sis íífad bąąh nít'i'ígíí baa nahodeesgį'go yistł'ónígíí béheeshcha'gi bąąh sinilgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And they made two gold rings of gold , and they made them on the two ends of the two ends of the ephod ; and they made them under the ends of the ephod .
GOLD:	Then they made two more gold rings and attached them to the front of the ephod , below the shoulder-pieces , just above the knot where the decorative sash was fastened to the ephod .

ID:	1121
INPUT:	Áko hazhé'é Azáíyah yę́ę áát'įįdígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł t'áá ákogi ájít'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	He did what was right in the sight of the Lord , just as his father Amaziah had done .
GOLD:	Jotham did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight . He did everything his father , Uzziah , had done .

ID:	1122
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bik'ee yínííł na'adáii shináhaazláá nít'éé' ; aniné biloh shiyah náhodiłhis nít'éé' .
PRED:	The death of death were round about me ; the death of death were round about me .
GOLD:	The grave wrapped its ropes around me ; death laid a trap in my path .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	Ani'įįhii dichin nilį́įgo , hwiih dooleeł biniyé aneez'į́į'go diné doo dabiił<unk> da ,
PRED:	When a thief sees the hungry , they would not be filled with food .
GOLD:	Excuses might be found for a thiefwho steals because he is starving .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	Diné ła' Bóhólníihii yich'į' ádee hadoodzíi'go , doodaii' yee nihoní'áanii yee ádee hadoodzíi'go bii' sizíinii yá nihodiní'ą́ągo , yá nihodiní'ánígíí bizaad doo ałtah ánáyoodlíił da ; yee haadzí'ígíí t'áá át'é bik'ehgo ye'eł'į́į doo .
PRED:	If a man swear to the Lord , or a vow , he shall not make an oath to the Lord ; he shall not do according to all that he has commanded .
GOLD:	A man who makes a vow to the Lord or makes a pledge under oath must never break it . He must do exactly what he said he would do .

ID:	1125
INPUT:	Bíni'dii t'áá ałtsoní yá'át'éehgo índa hasht'ehodít'éego baa na'aldeeh le' .
PRED:	Let all things be filled with good and peace .
GOLD:	But be sure that everything is done properly and in order .

ID:	1126
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh biniyé doo bááh nilíinii nihibéeso bik'é nidahohłé áádóó doo bee hwiih ídlíinii bik'é nidaołnish ? Haleebee dashíínółts'ą́ą'go yá'ádaat'éehii daohsą́ áádóó nihii' naazíinii áda'azįįd yee hwiih danilį́įgo bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Why do you give money to your money , and give it to you ? Listen to me , and you will be filled with good , and you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Why spend your money on food that does not give you strength ? Why pay for food that does you no good ? Listen to me , and you will eat what is good.You will enjoy the finest food .

ID:	1127
INPUT:	séigi át'éego na'áłchíní t'óó ahayói doo nít'éé' , índa t'áá éí tsé yázhígi át'éego nits'ą́ą́dóó náás oochíłígíí hólǫ́ǫ doo nít'éé' ; shidáahgi nízhi' doo nahjį' kódoolníił da , doo nidi ádooldįįł da nít'éé' .
PRED:	As it was cut down , and thy children shall be many , and thy seed shall be like a stone , and thy name shall not be cut off before me , but it would not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Your descendants would have been like the sands along the seashore — too many to count ! There would have been no need for your destruction , or for cutting off your family name . ”

ID:	1128
INPUT:	Áko k'adísh Bóhólníihii t'áágééd díí kéyahígíí ádeeshdįįł biniyé níyá ? Bóhólníihii áshíłní , Nílááh , díí kéyah bik'ijį' hasínáahgo áhółdįįh .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Go and destroy this land . Go and destroy it . ”
GOLD:	What 's more , do you think we have invaded your land without the Lord 's direction ? The Lord himself told us , ‘ Attack this land and destroy it ! ' ”

ID:	1129
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Gedaliah Governs in Judah

ID:	1130
INPUT:	Áko doo da'oodlání k'ad t'áá íiyisí tsi'naaldeehgi doo éédadoohjahgóó yik'ee t'óó bił adahayóí , áádóó danihi'į́įgo yádaałti' .
PRED:	And now you will be amazed , and you will be amazed , and you will speak .
GOLD:	Of course , your former friends are surprised when you no longer plunge into the flood of wild and destructive things they do . So they slander you .

ID:	1131
INPUT:	Aláahgo jidiyinígíí bik'ehgo Diyin God biYe' jílį́įgo bee adziilii bee aninéédę́ę́' náázdiidzáhígíí bee hwééhoozin .
PRED:	And he knew that the Son of God was given to him according to the power of the Most High .
GOLD:	and he was shown to be the Son of God when he was raised from the dead by the power of the Holy Spirit . He is Jesus Christ our Lord .

ID:	1132
INPUT:	Lk . 19 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Two Sons

ID:	1133
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kót'éego nidziizyeel , jó'akon , nahasdzáán bikáá'dóó haaz'éí yádiłhił biní'á ; éí bikáá'dóó Diyin God bidiyingo nidaal'a'í dego áádóó yaago ałnánákahgo jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	And when he had seen a dream , behold , the sun was upon the earth , and behold , the angels of God came down from under the throne of God .
GOLD:	As he slept , he dreamed of a stairway that reached from the earth up to heaven . And he saw the angels of God going up and down the stairway .

ID:	1134
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' , shoo , k'ad shá oo'íinii yá'ąąshdi hó<unk> dóó bee shaa hóóne'ígíí bił bééhózinii áadi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And now , behold , my witness is in heaven , and there is a witness in heaven .
GOLD:	Even now my witness is in heaven.My advocate is there on high .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	Áádóó Jéíkab biye'ké dayíínii'go nida'niłkaadę́ę́' nináhaaskai , áko éí yik'ee bíni' dei'a' áádóó t'áá íiyisí doo bił dahaldin da , háálá Ízrel dine'é bitahgi bąąhági ádziidzaa . Jéíkab bitsi' bił jineezhtéézh lá . Ákót'éii doo ádoolníił da nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Jacob heard that the sons of Jacob had come out of the flock , they served him , and they were not afraid , because he had sinned in Israel , and Jacob had not done such as he had done .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jacob 's sons had come in from the field as soon as they heard what had happened . They were shocked and furious that their sister had been raped . Shechem had done a disgraceful thing against Jacob 's family , something that should never be done .

ID:	1136
INPUT:	T'áá nihí baa nitsídaahkees ; da' asdzáníísh bitsii' doo bik'é'ésti'góó Diyin God yich'į' sodilzingo beełt'é ?
PRED:	Do you think about what you have done ? Do n't you pray to God for a woman 's hair ?
GOLD:	Judge for yourselves . Is it right for a woman to pray to God in public without covering her head ?

ID:	1137
INPUT:	Jerúsalem kin haal'áii ayóó ánóolningo áńdoolnííł
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	1138
INPUT:	Háálá diyingo áda'ale'ii áádóó diyingo ádabi'dilne'ii t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'íígíí yits'ą́ą́dóó danilį́ . Éí bąą doo baa yáznízingóó shik'isóó bijiní ,
PRED:	For they were ashamed of all the holy things , and of all the holy prophets ; therefore they said to my brethren ,
GOLD:	So now Jesus and the ones he makes holy have the same Father . That is why Jesus is not ashamed to call them his brothers and sisters .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , dah daask'id bighą́ą'di ádaalyaaígóó diné t'ahdii nááda'iiłniihgo biDiyin God Bóhólníihii t'éiyá yich'į' nááda'iisnii' .
PRED:	But while the people offer sacrifices to the Lord their God on the high places , they sacrificed sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	However , the people still sacrificed at the pagan shrines , though only to the Lord their God .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	Éí bąą ádííniid , T'áá aaníí , díí diné doo nidaneestą́ą' da , índa doo ádahalyą́ą da , háálá Bóhólníihii bik'ehgo áhoot'éii índa biDiyin God bibik'ehgo hoogáałii doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	Therefore he said , “ Surely these men do not find you , and they do not find them , because they do not know the way of the Lord , and the statutes of God . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ But what can we expect from the poor ? They are ignorant.They do n't know the ways of the Lord.They do n't understand God 's laws .

ID:	1141
INPUT:	Ahééh danohsingo yah ada'iiztiin góne' yah adahohkááh , áádóó baa dahohniihgo bikin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi nidahohkááh ! Bich'į' ahééh danohsin ; bízhi' baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Give thanks to the gates , and praise him in the temple ! Praise him in his name ! Praise him !
GOLD:	Enter his gates with thanksgiving ; go into his courts with praise.Give thanks to him and praise his name .

ID:	1142
INPUT:	Áko Abímelek ání , Díishą' haa nihííníł'įįd ? Diné ła'da ne'asdzą́ą́ yił neezhtéezhgo dashą' ; bąąhági át'éii yiih nihíínil doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then Abimelech said , “ What have you done to us ? If a man had sex with his wife , they would have put you in prison . ”
GOLD:	“ How could you do this to us ? ” Abimelech exclaimed . “ One of my people might easily have taken your wife and slept with her , and you would have made us guilty of great sin . ”

ID:	1143
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso bídin danohłíinii Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bídeínóhkeedgo Hórebgi áłah nohłį́įgo yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' ádadooniid , Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God biinéé' doo náádideests'į́įł da , doodaii' díí kǫ' ayóó át'éii doo néideestséeł da , áko doo dadeestsaał da .
PRED:	All these things , when you asked the Lord your God at Sinai , you said , “ I will not hear my voice , nor will I see the voice of the Lord my God , nor will I see this great fire . ”
GOLD:	For this is what you yourselves requested of the Lord your God when you were assembled at Mount Sinai . You said , ‘ Do n't let us hear the voice of the Lord our God anymore or see this blazing fire , for we will die . '

ID:	1144
INPUT:	Áko díí diné danół'ínígíí áádóó béédahonohsinígíí Jesus bízhi' bee adziilii bee bidziilgo ánábi'diilyaa , áko t'áá ánółtso nihinááł Jesus woodlą́ągo baa dzódlíhígíí bee díí diné doo bąąh tééhgóó ánábi'diilyaa .
PRED:	And this man is given to us in the name of Jesus , and to all of you that believe in him , that we may be healed in him .
GOLD:	“ Through faith in the name of Jesus , this man was healed — and you know how crippled he was before . Faith in Jesus ' name has healed him before your very eyes .

ID:	1145
INPUT:	Éí kéyah hodiłhiłii ts'ídá hodiłhiłgo hazhóodii át'é , áádóó anoonééł chaha'oh bii' t'áá ałtsoní ił ałtaa nás'nil , índa áadi adinídíinii chahałheełígíigi át'é .
PRED:	The land is like a land , and everything that is in it , and the shadow of the shadow of death is like darkness .
GOLD:	It is a land as dark as midnight , a land of gloom and confusion , where even the light is dark as midnight . ' ”

ID:	1146
INPUT:	áko Hínam biye' bikéyah yíldzis bíighah góde éí Jííbas kin haal'áhígíí shádi'ááhjígo hodeesdzo ; t'áá éí Jerúsalem hoolyé , áádóó e'e'aahjígo Hínam yíldzis binaashii dziłígíí bighą́ą́' góde hodeesdzo , éí náhookǫsjí yé'iitsoh biyíldzis nineel'ánídi át'é ,
PRED:	And the border went up to the valley of the valley of Merari , which is in the south side of the valley : and the border of the valley of the valley , and the valley of the north , and the valley of the valley of the valley .
GOLD:	The boundary then passed through the valley of Ben-Hinnom , along the southern slopes of the Jebusites , where the city of Jerusalem is located . Then it went west to the top of the mountain above the valley of Hinnom , and on up to the northern end of the valley of Rephaim .

ID:	1147
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ání , Shibee haz'áanii hadááhgóó ninínilii yóó'adazdeez'ą́ áádóó ádíshníinii t'áadoo bik'eh dahojííł'įįd da índa t'áadoo bik'ehgo dajíkai da ; díí lá biniinaa ni .
PRED:	And the Lord said , They have forsaken thy law , and have not obeyed my commandments , and have not obeyed my commandments , and have not obeyed them ; for thou art this .
GOLD:	The Lord replies , “ This has happened because my people have abandoned my instructions ; they have refused to obey what I said .

ID:	1148
INPUT:	Łį́į́' áádóó łį́į́' nida'ayéhígíí deidoołchoshii nidahidoohééł dahodoo'niid yę́ęjį' t'ááłá'í jinítínígo tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz ákwii nidajiiyeeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they called for horses to kill the horses , and each man had grain and wheat .
GOLD:	They also brought the necessary barley and straw for the royal horses in the stables .

ID:	1149
INPUT:	Dadi'doots'į́įłgoda diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo doo yá'át'éehii yaa nidaakaii yits'áhidookahgo da'át'é , áko doo yá'áshónígi ádajíít'įįdii biniinaa doo yá'áshónígi áhodeeshłííł , niizį́į'ii łahgo át'éego baa tsíńdeeskos .
PRED:	And they shall hear , and hear , and turn away from every man from his evil ways , and I will declare the evil which I have done .
GOLD:	Perhaps they will listen and turn from their evil ways . Then I will change my mind about the disaster I am ready to pour out on them because of their sins .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	Laanaa hwiindzinígíí biláahgo t'áadoo le'é dadziił<unk> go yá'át'ééh . Díí ałdó' t'áadoo nánídlíní da áádóó níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalin .
PRED:	It is better for the king to give it , and this also is vanity , and as a wind .
GOLD:	Enjoy what you have rather than desiring what you do n't have . Just dreaming about nice things is meaningless — like chasing the wind .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	Áko biiskání Béílak éí Béílam yił dah dii'áazhgo Béíyal e'elyaii yich'į' ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaadóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá dah yinééł nít'éé' yizdoołtsééł biniyé ákóde hoł haazh'áázh , <unk> t'áadoo ałtso jiiłtsą́ą da .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that Balak took Balaam , and took up the high places of Baal , that he might see the whole assembly of Israel , that he would not see them .
GOLD:	The next morning Balak took Balaam up to Bamoth-baal . From there he could see some of the people of Israel spread out below him .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	Nánooshkąąh , nich'į' yáłti'go bee haz'áanii yínaniniłtinígíí nídiilé , áádóó bizaad nijéí bii' hasht'e'nihidí'nííł .
PRED:	I pray thee , hear the law of thy law , and the heart of thy words shall be filled with thee .
GOLD:	Listen to his instructions , and store them in your heart .

ID:	1153
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó dinééh ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ ayiis'a' ; éí didlidgo nááhániihii náádayiisnii' , índa náádahaaznii'ii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego béégashii éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádayiisnii' .
PRED:	And he sent a young man among the children of Israel , and offered a burnt offering , and a burnt offering , and a burnt offering made by fire unto the Lord .
GOLD:	Then he sent some of the young Israelite men to present burnt offerings and to sacrifice bulls as peace offerings to the Lord .

ID:	1154
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , Jesus yił naakaígíí ła' bidiltłish hayíítą́ągo aláahgo náá'iiłniihii binaalte' bijaa' na'iidiiłhaal .
PRED:	And behold , there was a sword with the sword of Jesus the high priest , and cut off his ear .
GOLD:	But one of the men with Jesus pulled out his sword and struck the high priest 's slave , slashing off his ear .

ID:	1155
INPUT:	Nidi tsosts'id náhááh góne' dá'ák'eh hanínályįh doo ; éí Bóhólníihii bá háá'áyį́į́h át'é . T'ááká k'ida'doohłééł lágo , t'ááká nihich'il na'atł'o'ii bílátah dahoohgéésh lágo .
PRED:	But in the seventh year you shall rest , and you shall keep the Sabbath of the Lord ; do not plant it . Do not sow your vineyard .
GOLD:	but during the seventh year the land must have a Sabbath year of complete rest . It is the Lord 's Sabbath . Do not plant your fields or prune your vineyards during that year .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	Áko David bi'éé' ák'iniyiis<unk> ; t'áá ákót'éego diné yił naakaígíí t'áá ałtso ák'inda'iis<unk> .
PRED:	So David cut off his robe , and all the men who were with him were with him .
GOLD:	David and his men tore their clothes in sorrow when they heard the news .

ID:	1157
INPUT:	Ériyel áádóó bi'ana'í
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	A Message about Jerusalem

ID:	1158
INPUT:	Bilą́ąjį' t'áá ákogi át'éii yigáałgo nihá atiin áhodoolííł .
PRED:	He will go ahead of his righteousness , and he will judge him .
GOLD:	Righteousness goes as a herald before him , preparing the way for his steps .

ID:	1159
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nihíká anilyeed , háálá Diyin God k'ehgo át'éii áádįįł , áádóó diné bada'ahódlíii diné bitahdóó ch'ééh hádahat'į́ .
PRED:	O Lord , help us , for they are the way of God , and they are a faithful man among men .
GOLD:	Help , O Lord , for the godly are fast disappearing ! The faithful have vanished from the earth !

ID:	1160
INPUT:	<unk> yéítas , Bóhólníihii binahjį' ayóó'óósh'níinii , shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	Give thanks to Eleazar , my beloved , my love .
GOLD:	Greet Ampliatus , my dear friend in the Lord .

ID:	1161
INPUT:	Áádóó ni , Pásher , índa nighan góne' nił kééhat'íinii t'áá ałtso nihidi'doolnéełgo Bábilangóó doohkah , áko áadi dadíítsaałgo ni lá áádóó nik'isóó t'áá ałtso wooch'ííd bee bił dahwíínílne'ii t'áá bił yóó'ándi'doolnííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt go to Babylon , and all thy men , and all thy men shall go to Babylon , and thou shalt die , and thou shalt die there , and all thy brethren shall be buried with thee .
GOLD:	As for you , Pashhur , you and all your household will go as captives to Babylon . There you will die and be buried , you and all your friends to whom you prophesied that everything would be all right . ' ”

ID:	1162
INPUT:	Áko éí dayiiłtsą́ągo bik'ee t'óó bił adahóóyóí ; bił yéé' dahazlį́į'go dah diijéé' .
PRED:	When they saw it , they were afraid , and they were afraid .
GOLD:	But when they saw it , they were stunned ; they were terrified and ran away .

ID:	1163
INPUT:	Josáíyah hasht'éénáhoodlaaígíí
PRED:	Josiah 's King Josiah
GOLD:	Josiah 's Religious Reforms

ID:	1164
INPUT:	Naalye'é éí dé'éyóní baa dideesh'ááł ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá íiyisí doo yá'ádaashóonii éí daasnáanii baa dideesh'áałgo deidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	I will give the wealth to strangers , and I will give them the wicked nations into their hand .
GOLD:	I will give it as plunder to foreigners , to the most wicked of nations , and they will defile it .

ID:	1165
INPUT:	Gadtsoh bits'áoz'a' éí nihikin bá áah sitáán áádóó ch'ó éí bééhéeshjéé' nahalin .
PRED:	Your walls are like a branch , and your walls are like a wall .
GOLD:	fragrant cedar branches are the beams of our house , and pleasant smelling firs are the rafters .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	tó ádá náhálchįįhgo nihik'i ch'ídadziisxaal doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	They beat us with a flood , and they would not destroy us .
GOLD:	Yes , the raging waters of their furywould have overwhelmed our very lives .

ID:	1167
INPUT:	Háálá díí kéyah bii' hodichingo k'ad naaki nááhai , áádóó ashdla' nináádoohah hadziih ; éí bii' doo nidahwiildlaad da doo , índa doo da'agizh da doo .
PRED:	For this land is two years old , and it will be five years old , and it will not be cut off , nor harvest .
GOLD:	This famine that has ravaged the land for two years will last five more years , and there will be neither plowing nor harvesting .

ID:	1168
INPUT:	áko índa Bóhólníihii bee nił hózhǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó nihokáá' wódahdi nahaz'ą́ą́góó nahóle' doo , índa nizhé'é yę́ę Jéíkab baa deet'ánígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó ni' iisą́ą doo . Jó , Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	and the Lord will be glad , and he will sit on the high places , and he will eat the fruit of your father Jacob , because the Lord has spoken .
GOLD:	Then the Lord will be your delight.I will give you great honorand satisfy you with the inheritance I promised to your ancestor Jacob.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1169
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Temple 's Interior

ID:	1170
INPUT:	áko nighangóó bił nídíít'ashgo áadi bitsii' yik'iidooshih áádóó bíláshgaan yidiyoogish .
PRED:	And thou shalt go to his house , and cut off his head , and cut off his arm , and cut off his arm .
GOLD:	If this happens , you may take her to your home , where she must shave her head , cut her nails ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ayóó át'éii nilį́ , áádóó nihiDiyin God bikin haal'áagi , bidził hodiyinígi ayóó át'éego baa ha'niih doogo yą́ą́h nilį́ .
PRED:	The Lord is great , and he is worthy of glory in the city of our God .
GOLD:	How great is the Lord , how deserving of praise , in the city of our God , which sits on his holy mountain !

ID:	1172
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii nizhónígo adinídínígíí nahalin , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii bee hool'iní neeztsizii nahalin .
PRED:	The righteous is like a lamp , but the light of the wicked is like a lamp .
GOLD:	The life of the godly is full of light and joy , but the light of the wicked will be snuffed out .

ID:	1173
INPUT:	Éí Jesus daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' néidiisáhígíí bee danihizhé'é baa deet'ánígíí ba'áłchíní daniidlínígíí k'ad nihá yi'iilaa ; t'áá sin naaki góne'ígíí bee bik'e'ashchínígi át'éego : ShiYe' nílį́ , díí jį́ nishchíinii sélį́į́' ,
PRED:	He raised us from the dead , whom he raised us to our father 's children , as it is written , “ You are my Son , today I have become a son . ”
GOLD:	and God has now fulfilled it for us , their descendants , by raising Jesus . This is what the second psalm says about Jesus : ‘ You are my Son.Today I have become your Father . '

ID:	1174
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' éí bijį́į́ góne' t'óó yówehda ałk'i jiijéé' , áko i'íí'ą́ąjį' Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí biyi'dóó Síriya dine'é yich'į'go de <unk> dólzin nít'éé' , áko jį́honaa'éí ííyáago índa dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that it was a little time , that the king of Israel went up out of the chariot of the king of Israel , and he died .
GOLD:	The battle raged all that day , and the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot facing the Arameans . In the evening , just as the sun was setting , he died .

ID:	1175
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Díí saadígíí éí t'ah nihił naashkai yę́ędą́ą́' bee nihich'į' haasdzíí' , éí bee haz'áanii Mózes baa deet'áanii áádóó Diyin God yá dahalne'ii índa sin biyi' shí shaa dahalne'go yee ak'eda'ashchínígíí bidahodoolníłígíí át'é .
PRED:	And he said unto them , This is the words which I have with you before I have spoken unto you : and the law , and the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ When I was with you before , I told you that everything written about me in the law of Moses and the prophets and in the Psalms must be fulfilled . ”

ID:	1176
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1177
INPUT:	Ánathathdi Jeremáíyah éí kéyah nayiisnii'
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Death
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Land Purchase

ID:	1178
INPUT:	áko nízhdiinilgo binááł jííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	And he took them and ate them before them .
GOLD:	and he ate it as they watched .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	Ni lą́ą shii' sizíinii ayóó'ánó'níinii , shił hólne' : Háadishą' nidibé nída'ałchosh ? Ałné'é'áahgo háadishą' hanínádaalyįh ? Ha'át'íísh biniyé nida'niłkaadii bił ałch'odani'níinii yikéé' asdzání binii' yik'íná'áłtihgo yóó'anádáhígi ásht'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ You , my soul , tell me , ‘ Where is my soul sitting at night ? Where is the shepherd of the flock ? Let the young man be found with him , and I will dwell in his sight . ' ”
GOLD:	Tell me , my love , where are you leading your flock today ? Where will you rest your sheep at noon ? For why should I wander like a prostituteamong your friends and their flocks ?

ID:	1180
INPUT:	Kéínan jiináago tsosts'idiin honááhaigo Mahéílalíyel há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	And Canaan lived thirty years old when he became the father of Shelah .
GOLD:	When Kenan was 70 years old , he became the father of Mahalalel .

ID:	1181
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné doo yá'ádaashóonii deinízinii doo baa didíí'áał da ; doo yá'át'ééhgóó yinahazgizii doo bá náás kódíílíił da ! Áko doo ayóó át'éego ádadi'doolníił da . Síilah .
PRED:	O Lord , do not give the wicked to the wicked ; do n't let the wicked be done for them , and they will not be exalted . Selah
GOLD:	Lord , do not let evil people have their way.Do not let their evil schemes succeed , or they will become proud.Interlude

ID:	1182
INPUT:	Dahazhé'é ádáát'įįdígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii baa nijiyá ; Nííbat biye' Jerobówam yee ni'iisí'ígíí éí bee Ízrel dine'é nida'iisíihgo áyiilaii éí t'áadoo yóó'iidíí'ą́ą da .
PRED:	He did evil in the sight of the Lord , according to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat , who made Israel sin .
GOLD:	Zechariah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , as his ancestors had done . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1183
INPUT:	Áádóó dízdiingo béésh łigaii biih dahasdzą́ągo tsin neheeshjíí' naadiingo bitł'ááh naaznil doo biniyé áyiilaa ; tsin neheeshjíí' t'ááłá'ígo biyaadóó naaki bąąh ha'íí'áago áyiilaaígíí bá atł'ááh sinilii naakigo biih dahasdzánígíí t'áá ahedaałt'éego áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he made forty silver sockets of silver , two sockets under each side , two sockets under each side .
GOLD:	He also made forty silver bases — two bases under each frame , with the pegs fitting securely into the bases .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	Ákohgo na'ízhdééłkidgo ázhdííniid , Díkwíigi oolkiłgoshą' t'ah nít'éé' yá'át'ééh nídzísdlį́į́' ? Áko ádahodííniid , Adą́ą́dą́ą́' yaa'adeez'ą́ągo hatah honeezgaii yę́ę hats'áldoh .
PRED:	And he asked him , How much more than the hour ? And they said unto him , It is good in the beginning .
GOLD:	He asked them when the boy had begun to get better , and they replied , “ Yesterday afternoon at one o'clock his fever suddenly disappeared ! ”

ID:	1185
INPUT:	T'áá bí dabijéí doo bił adahojoobá'ígóó ádaa dadzódlíigo yádaałti' .
PRED:	They are proud in their heart , and they speak lies .
GOLD:	They are without pity.Listen to their boasting !

ID:	1186
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nihik'isóó danilíinii hasht'ehodít'é yeidiní'ą́ągo áádóó nihí ałdó' nihaidiní'ą́ągo áádóó Jórdan tooh wónaanídi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii kéyah haidiní'ánígíí hóó' ádajiilaago índa t'ááłá'í nootínígo kéyah nihaa diní'ánígíí nihíí' ádadooh<unk> góó nihéédahidoohkah .
PRED:	The Lord your God has given you the rest of your brethren , and he has given you the land which the Lord your God has given you , and you shall return to the land that the Lord your God has given you .
GOLD:	When the Lord has given security to the rest of the Israelites , as he has to you , and when they occupy the land the Lord your God is giving them across the Jordan River , then you may all return here to the land I have given you . '

ID:	1187
INPUT:	K'ééhodidoo'níłígíí éí bee shóhólnííh ; shí k'éédideesh'nííł ; baa hoolzhiizhgo ałtádadidooghas ; bijį́ bich'į' hodiyoo'náłígíí koshídę́ę́' hadziih áádóó ábidoołdįįłii tsxį́įłgo bik'i hwiidooleeł .
PRED:	I will repay them , and I will repay them ; at the end of the end of the end , and the day of the end shall come upon them , and upon the day of their destruction .
GOLD:	I will take revenge ; I will pay them back.In due time their feet will slip.Their day of disaster will arrive , and their destiny will overtake them . '

ID:	1188
INPUT:	Háishą' Bóhólníihii bintsíkees hoł bééhózin ? Háishą' Bóhólníihii kót'éego yiłníí nít'éé' ?
PRED:	Who knows the thoughts of the Lord ? Who knows the word of the Lord ?
GOLD:	For who can know the Lord 's thoughts ? Who knows enough to give him advice ?

ID:	1189
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí naaldeehii áádóó nidaat'a'ii t'áá ałtso ni' bits'ą́ą́dóó łeezh yee áyiilaa , áko haash yit'éego dabízhi' ádaazhdoolííł nízingo Ádam yaa yiizh'eezh , áko hináanii nináneel'ą́ąjį' t'áá bee dajíízhi'ígíí bízhi' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the Lord God made them out of the dust of the earth , and from all the birds of the earth ; and they brought them to the name of Adam , and they gave them the name of the living creature .
GOLD:	So the Lord God formed from the ground all the wild animals and all the birds of the sky . He brought them to the man to see what he would call them , and the man chose a name for each one .

ID:	1190
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus ánáádí'ní , Diné doo bee hool'iní yidiiłtłi'go tsits'aa' yił yaa nií'aah da , doo nidi tsásk'eh yiyaa ii'aah da , da' bá ya'ii'áhígíísh doo yikáa'gi dah yidoo'áał da ?
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ Do n't you put a lamp on a lamp ? Do n't you put it on his bed ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus asked them , “ Would anyone light a lamp and then put it under a basket or under a bed ? Of course not ! A lamp is placed on a stand , where its light will shine .

ID:	1191
INPUT:	Té'é'į́ danilíinii da'ayą́ą doo , áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii bił hasht'edahodít'éego náníjah doo ; nehétł'óól dichin bee diyeeshxééł , índa daohdzí'ígíí nanihideestsił .
PRED:	The donkeys will be wise , and the needy will be ready for battle ; I will kill you by the sword , and you will kill you .
GOLD:	I will feed the poor in my pasture ; the needy will lie down in peace.But as for you , I will wipe you out with famineand destroy the few who remain .

ID:	1192
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi hoolzhishígíí biyi' Júdah áádóó Jerúsalem dine'é yisnááh danilį́į́dóó nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo daabíí' yę́ę bíí' nídadoodleełgo ádeeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	Behold , in those days I will take away the captivity of Judah and Judah from the captivity of Judah .
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	1193
INPUT:	Áko diné dahoołtsą́ągo bidiyin yaa dahaniihgo ádaaní , Nihikéyahgi nihi'ana'í náhoo<unk> go lą'í niilt'éego nanihistseedígíí nihidiyin nihílák'ee hodíí'ą́ .
PRED:	When the people saw him , they praised other gods , saying , “ He has given us many gods into our land . He has given us many gods into our hand . ”
GOLD:	When the people saw him , they praised their god , saying , “ Our god has delivered our enemy to us ! The one who killed so many of us is now in our power ! ”

ID:	1194
INPUT:	Háálá doo ats'ííd bijéí bii' dahólǫ́ǫgo yindaha'á , áádóó ádílááh yaa yádaałti' .
PRED:	For their hearts are in their heart , and their tongue speak lies .
GOLD:	For their hearts plot violence , and their words always stir up trouble .

ID:	1195
INPUT:	Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áii naa adeidiyoołkałgo áádóó ákwii mą'ii ba'áán ádahodoolíiłgo ge' náhookǫsdi kéyahdę́ę́' ayóó íits'a'go nihich'į' oonéełgo hodiits'a' .
PRED:	He will destroy the cities of Judah , and he will hear a loud voice from the north side of the north .
GOLD:	Listen ! Hear the terrifying roar of great armiesas they roll down from the north.The towns of Judah will be destroyedand become a haunt for jackals .

ID:	1196
INPUT:	Diné t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii , T'áá aaníí dadíítsaał , bidííniidgo t'áadoo bee bi'ííníłnii'góó diné t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii bidoo yá'áshǫ' bits'ą́ą́dóó yisdádoogááł biniyé t'áadoo bee bił hwíínílne'góó t'áá éí diné doo yá'ájíshǫ́ǫ́góó ádił ni'dziisíi'ii éí t'áá bił dazdootsaał , áko ni bidił bee nihodiit'i' doo .
PRED:	If you say to the wicked , “ If you say , ‘ If you do not listen to the evil man , you will be saved from his evil people , and you will die . ' ”
GOLD:	If I warn the wicked , saying , ‘ You are under the penalty of death , ' but you fail to deliver the warning , they will die in their sins . And I will hold you responsible for their deaths .

ID:	1197
INPUT:	Nidi Ízrel dine'é éí tónteel biyi' ni' yíłtseii yikáá' ha'naa niníná , jó , honish'náájí índa honishtł'ají ałts'ą́ą́hjí tó nihidii'á .
PRED:	But the children of Israel went through the sea into the midst of the sea , behold , there was a flood between us on the right hand and on the left .
GOLD:	But the people of Israel had walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , as the water stood up like a wall on both sides .

ID:	1198
INPUT:	Ódziih bił ayóó áhoot'éé nít'éé' , áko nábi'dódziih ! Ła'da yik'iizhdoodliiłígíí doo yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ́góó doo ła'da hak'i <unk> doodliił da !
PRED:	He was filled with glory , and he should be put to death . No one will put his hand on his side .
GOLD:	He loved to curse others ; now you curse him.He never blessed others ; now do n't you bless him .

ID:	1199
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus halą́ąjį' yigáałgo Jerúsalem góde bikéé' jookahgo t'óó hoł adahóóyóí , índa bikéé' jookahígíí nídadzildzid . Áko naakits'áadahígíí bił ats'ádzískaigo áhodi'doolníłígíí bee bił ahozhniilne' ,
PRED:	As Jesus went ahead of them , they were amazed at Jerusalem . They were afraid of him and followed him . Then he told the twelve disciples ,
GOLD:	They were now on the way up to Jerusalem , and Jesus was walking ahead of them . The disciples were filled with awe , and the people following behind were overwhelmed with fear . Taking the twelve disciples aside , Jesus once more began to describe everything that was about to happen to him .

ID:	1200
INPUT:	Hastą́ą́h nínáhahjį' k'ééda'dohdléeh doo , áádóó hastą́ą́h nínáhahjį' nihich'il na'atł'o'ii nídahohgish doo , índa nídant'į́įhii áłah áńdaał'įįh doo .
PRED:	In the sixth year you shall sow your fruit , and you shall gather vineyards , and gather your harvest .
GOLD:	For six years you may plant your fields and prune your vineyards and harvest your crops ,

ID:	1201
INPUT:	Hach'į' haadzíi'go ánááhodoo'niid , Dízdiin yik'íníyáagoshą' ? Áko áhodííniid , Dízdiin ázhnéelą́ą'go biniinaa doo áhodeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	He answered , “ Where have I found forty years ? ” He answered , “ I will not destroy them for forty years . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham pressed his request further . “ Suppose there are only forty ? ” And the Lord replied , “ I will not destroy it for the sake of the forty . ”

ID:	1202
INPUT:	Ákohgo deidoodlį́įłii doo deinízingóó nílák'eedóó t'áadoo nídeidiiką́ą́góogo áadi ábididííniił , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Ts'ídá t'áá dadoohdlį́łí .
PRED:	If they do not drink from their hand , then you will say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord of Armies says : ‘ You will die . ' ”
GOLD:	And if they refuse to accept the cup , tell them , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : You have no choice but to drink from it .

ID:	1203
INPUT:	Ákohgo nááda'iiłniihii aląąjį' naazíinii naakits'áadah yilt'éego éí Sheriibáíyah wolyéii áádóó Hashabáíyah wolyéii índa bik'isóó neeznált'éego ats'ánínil .
PRED:	And the elders of the priests went up with twelve men , and they cried out , Zechariah , and Zechariah , and his brethren , and ten .
GOLD:	I appointed twelve leaders of the priests — Sherebiah , Hashabiah , and ten other priests —

ID:	1204
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii ánáádoo'niid , Sádam kin haal'áii índa Gomárah kin haal'áii ayóó át'éego cha hahoyiinííh áádóó ádił da'ílzíihgo ts'ídá bąąh yínínígi ádaat'į́ ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ As Sodom , Sodom , Sodom , and Gomorrah , as you have sinned .
GOLD:	So the Lord told Abraham , “ I have heard a great outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah , because their sin is so flagrant .

ID:	1205
INPUT:	Áko kót'éego ch'ikę́ę́h éí aláahgo naat'áanii yił yah iigháahgo ch'ikéí baa ádahayánídóó t'áá yinízinígíí éí yooléełgo aláahgo naat'áanii yił yah iighááh nít'éé' .
PRED:	So she went in to the king 's house and went in to the king 's house . She went in to the king 's house .
GOLD:	When it was time for her to go to the king 's palace , she was given her choice of whatever clothing or jewelry she wanted to take from the harem .

ID:	1206
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ągo dadzooltsánígíí índa awéé' dahałt'o'ígíí doo hasht'e'ígóó doo há hojooba' haz'ą́ą da doo !
PRED:	How terrible it is for those who are pregnant and women in those days !
GOLD:	How terrible it will be for pregnant women and for nursing mothers in those days .

ID:	1207
INPUT:	Éí lą́ą , Diyin God yinahaz'áanii bik'ehgo bizaad ánínígíí t'áadoo ła' doodaí baa hodeeshnihgo nihá shaa yiszįįd .
PRED:	They have no one to tell me all the words of God , according to the law of God .
GOLD:	God has given me the responsibility of serving his church by proclaiming his entire message to you .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	Jéíbesh biye' Shálam honahaz'ą́ągo dine'é yinááł atíhoolaago hwiisxį́ áádóó hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	He struck him in front of the men of Jabesh , and killed him , and he reigned in his place .
GOLD:	Then Shallum son of Jabesh conspired against Zechariah , assassinated him in public , and became the next king .

ID:	1209
INPUT:	Bee na'abaahii biláahgo hódzą́ yá'át'ééh , nidi diné t'ááłá'í ádił ni'iilzíhígíí t'óó ahayóí yá'ádaat'éehii áyoołdįįł .
PRED:	It is better to be better than an enemy , but a multitude of sins will destroy many .
GOLD:	Better to have wisdom than weapons of war , but one sinner can destroy much that is good .

ID:	1210
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Bénjamin dine'é bich'į' anaa' biniyé dah náádii'ná áádóó Gíbiyah kin haal'áagi Ízrel dine'é hach'į' ałkéé' niná'ahi'niłgo hak'i néijah nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the children of Israel rose up against the children of Benjamin , and the children of Israel followed him in Gibeah .
GOLD:	Then they advanced toward Gibeah to attack the men of Benjamin .

ID:	1211
INPUT:	Áko Jánathan éí David áyidííniid , Ízrel biBóhólníihii Diyin God binááł ! Yiską́ągo , doodaii' naakiiską́ągo t'áá kwe'é nahalzhiishgo shizhé'é naa nitsíkeesígíí shił bééhodoozįįł ; ákohgo yá'át'éehgo naa nitsíkees ládą́ą́' doósh nił nínáhodeeshnih da ?
PRED:	Jonathan said to David , “ The Lord God of Israel , do you think that you would know that you would know how to come to this time , and I will not tell you what is good . ”
GOLD:	Then Jonathan told David , “ I promise by the Lord , the God of Israel , that by this time tomorrow , or the next day at the latest , I will talk to my father and let you know at once how he feels about you . If he speaks favorably about you , I will let you know .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	Nihighan góne' bee ída'neel'ąąhí ał'ąą át'éii t'áadoo nisoołnilí ; éí nitsaaígíí índa áłts'íísígíí t'áadoo chodaoł'íní .
PRED:	You shall not make an ephah in your house , a small , a small , and a small .
GOLD:	and you must use full and honest measures .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ayóó'ádeínóh'ní ; éí yich'į' nihííł'aadii áádóó yee nihwiiz'áanii áádóó yee nihodii'aahii índa bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá áłahjį' bik'eh dahonoł'į́ .
PRED:	Therefore love the Lord your God , whom I commanded you , his statutes , his statutes , and his commandments always .
GOLD:	“ You must love the Lord your God and always obey his requirements , decrees , regulations , and commands .

ID:	1214
INPUT:	Diné hóyáaniísh t'áadoo biniyéhígóó bił bééhoozinii yee yáłti' doo , áádóó ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyolígíísh yee nídínóochał ?
PRED:	Can a wise man speak in vain , and a wind of the east wind ?
GOLD:	“ A wise man would n't answer with such empty talk ! You are nothing but a windbag .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	Ákohgo óola łeets'aa' índa béésh łigaii łeets'aa' éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin biyi'dę́ę́' ch'íheeshjaa'ígíí nidahaashjaa'go éí aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó naat'áanii danilíinii , hwe'asdzą́ą́ danilíinii áádóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ dajíł'ínída éí yee da'oodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then the gold , the silver , and the vessels that was in Jerusalem , and the vessels of the king , and the princes , and his wives , and his wives , and his wives .
GOLD:	So they brought these gold cups taken from the Temple , the house of God in Jerusalem , and the king and his nobles , his wives , and his concubines drank from them .

ID:	1216
INPUT:	nít'éé' t'áá yá'át'ééh náádleełgo tł'óó'góó bigish yee nihéédiidzáago , éí náhodííłhaalígíí doo bee bihodiit'i' da doo , nidi hanaanish dooleeł nít'é'ígíí yik'é hach'į' niná'doodlééł , áádóó náázdiidzáajį' haa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	If he has taken his staff in the open court , he will not be able to pay back what he has done , but he will pay back to him until he comes .
GOLD:	If he is later able to walk outside again , even with a crutch , the assailant will not be punished but must compensate his victim for lost wages and provide for his full recovery .

ID:	1217
INPUT:	nídíshdááhgóó díí bee bádahadzidii bitaa séyá , tooh danílíinii , aghada'ii'níiłii , t'áá shí shidine'é nilíinii , doo Jew dine'é danilíinii , kin hadaas'áii dabiyi'góó , dahonoojítahgóó áádóó tónteel bikáá'góó , áádóó ałk'isóó ádahodil'íinii bee bádahadzidii bitaa séyá ,
PRED:	I did this to them in front of these things . I was a Jew , a Jew , a Jew , a Jew , a Jew , and a poor among the sea , and among the brethren ,
GOLD:	I have traveled on many long journeys . I have faced danger from rivers and from robbers . I have faced danger from my own people , the Jews , as well as from the Gentiles . I have faced danger in the cities , in the deserts , and on the seas . And I have faced danger from men who claim to be believers but are not .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í jinítínígo Níłch'i Diyinii aidiyii'aahii oodlání danilíinii t'áá ałtso bá chodayooł'į́į doo biniyé haidiyii'aah .
PRED:	He gave gifts to every one according to the Holy Spirit , that he may give all the churches .
GOLD:	A spiritual gift is given to each of us so we can help each other .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	Táadi shich'į'go dahodíínóhsingo áłah náhdleehgo nínáhah doo .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass on the third day , that ye shall keep the feast of the feast .
GOLD:	“ Each year you must celebrate three festivals in my honor .

ID:	1220
INPUT:	Jiihóram éí Júdah kéyahgi nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Jehoram 's King Jehoram of Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	1221
INPUT:	Nidi diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo baa nijigháii ádá hadazdoolził , áko yá'át'éehgo baa nijigháá ládą́ą́' éí baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫ doo . Diné náánáła' yaa naagháii éí t'áá bí bíni'dii yaa naaghá .
PRED:	But everyone who does what is right will be glad , and if he does what is good , let him be glad .
GOLD:	Pay careful attention to your own work , for then you will get the satisfaction of a job well done , and you wo n't need to compare yourself to anyone else .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	one male goat for a sin offering ;
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	Jesus áhodííniid , T'óó kónízahíjį' nihił honishłǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó shiníł'a'ígíí bich'į' nídeeshdááł ;
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I will be with you , and I will return to you that sent me . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus told them , “ I will be with you only a little longer . Then I will return to the one who sent me .

ID:	1224
INPUT:	Yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí kót'é : diné léi' náánáła' kéyahgóó deeyáago bá nidaal'a'í hágo yidííniidgo , hanaalye'é há yaa ádahalyą́ą doo biniyé bitaazdeez'ą́ ,
PRED:	The Kingdom of heaven is this : A man went to his own land , called his servants , and gave them his wealth .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven can be illustrated by the story of a man going on a long trip . He called together his servants and entrusted his money to them while he was gone .

ID:	1225
INPUT:	Nít'éé' dahasiłgo nídahoneesxaalgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii t'áágééd anídahas'a' .
PRED:	And they took him , and sent him away , and sent him away without the vineyard .
GOLD:	But the farmers grabbed the servant , beat him up , and sent him back empty-handed .

ID:	1226
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Kéyah bii' kéédahoht'į́į dooleełii nihaa dinish'aahígíí biih woonáago
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , saying , When ye come into the land which I am giving you ,
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ When you finally settle in the land I am giving you ,

ID:	1227
INPUT:	Kót'éego ádaalyaa : bii' tá'ádígisí bá naaznil dooleełígíí dadeekį́į́góó nihidadii'áhígíí éí bita' gónaa dah naazkaadígíí biih daaz'á ,
PRED:	And it came to pass , that the four corners of the pillars were cast down from the four corners of the pillars ,
GOLD:	They were constructed with side panels braced with crossbars .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	Áko Mózes áádóó Éran éí Bóhólníihii hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bi'jiilaa .
PRED:	Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord had commanded them .

ID:	1229
INPUT:	Léímek ha'ákéí ábijiní : Éídah áádóó Zílah , shizaad yínółts'ą́ą́' ; Léímek ba'ákéí nohłínígíí , ádísh'nínígíí yínółts'ą́ą́' , Háálá diné shijizhgishígíí biniinaa hoséłhį́ , Índa diné ániid naagháii atíshijiilaaígíí biniinaa hoséłhį́ .
PRED:	“ Listen to my words ! Listen to my words ! Listen to my words ! I say to you , ‘ I have killed the man who has killed me because he has killed me . ' ”
GOLD:	One day Lamech said to his wives , “ Adah and Zillah , hear my voice ; listen to me , you wives of Lamech.I have killed a man who attacked me , a young man who wounded me .

ID:	1230
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii dajílíinii éí tsídiida , éí doodaii' naaldlooshiida t'áá bíni' daaztsą́ągo , éí doodaii' náánáła' naaldlooshiida biisxį́įgo éí doo dajilghał da doo .
PRED:	And the priests shall not eat the blood of the priest , or of the beast , or of the beast , or of the beast , or of the beast , or of the beast shall eat it .
GOLD:	The priests may not eat meat from any bird or animal that dies a natural death or that dies after being attacked by another animal .

ID:	1231
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Iiyehii t'ah yił naakaigo iigehgi neheeskaígíísh dahodísingo doo da'ayą́ą́góó ádadoohłííł ? Dooda lą́ą !
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Do you want to make them fools when they have been with him ? Do n't you make them fools ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Do wedding guests fast while celebrating with the groom ? Of course not .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	Ak'ah áádóó łikání dahalchinii ajéí yił nihooshǫǫh ; diné bik'is nizhónígo kót'é bidííniidii ałdó' t'áá ákót'é .
PRED:	The oil and the oil is in your heart , as you have chosen your brother .
GOLD:	The heartfelt counsel of a friendis as sweet as perfume and incense .

ID:	1233
INPUT:	Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel áádóó Karíyah biye'ké Johéínan áádóó Jánathan áádóó <unk> biye' Siiréíyah áádóó Niitófa kin shijaa'dę́ę́' <unk> biye'ké áádóó Méíyakahdę́ę́' diné léi' biye' Jezanáíyah bí áádóó bidine'é yił Mízpah kin haal'áadi Gedaláíyah yaa yíkai .
PRED:	And they came to Gedaliah the son of Ishmael , and to Ishmael , and to his sons , and to his sons , and to Gedaliah , and to Mizpah , and to Mizpah , and to Mizpah .
GOLD:	So they went to see Gedaliah at Mizpah . These included : Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth , the sons of Ephai the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	1234
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' yizhchíinii bá bee haz'áanii
PRED:	The child 's Son
GOLD:	Rights of the Firstborn

ID:	1235
INPUT:	Áádóó Christ bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' ił ééhósin yilááh neel'áanii nihił béédahodoozįįłgo Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní yee át'éii nihii' hadidoo<unk> łígíí bíká sodiszin .
PRED:	And so that you may know that the grace of Christ may be able to pray for all things .
GOLD:	May you experience the love of Christ , though it is too great to understand fully . Then you will be made complete with all the fullness of life and power that comes from God .

ID:	1236
INPUT:	Áko hach'į' hadaasdzíi'go ánáádahodoo'niid , Da' niísh ałdó' Gáliliidę́ę́' naniná ? Diyin God bizaad naniłkaah , jó , Gáliliidóó Diyin God yá halne'ii doo hodooleełgóó nił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	They answered and said to him , “ Are you also from Galilee ? Do you know the words of God , for you will know that the prophet will not come from Galilee ? ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Are you from Galilee , too ? Search the Scriptures and see for yourself — no prophet ever comes from Galilee ! ” -- -- -- -- -- [ The most ancient Greek manuscripts do not include John 7:53–8:11 . ]

ID:	1237
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar éí Jiihóíyakim biye' Konáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í áyiilaii bitsásk'ehgi Josáíyah biye' Zedekáíyah nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	Zedekiah son of Josiah , king of Judah , reigned in his place .
GOLD:	Zedekiah son of Josiah succeeded Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim as the king of Judah . He was appointed by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .

ID:	1238
INPUT:	Ákondi t'áá danihiníghanígi aałk'ee áńdahooł'įįhgo da'ołghał , danohsinii éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'ijidlíigo nihaidii'aahígíí bik'ehgo doo bi'didéehii , doodaii' bi'didéehii danohłíinii éí jádí bitsį' , doodaii' bįįh bitsį' daohsą́ą doo .
PRED:	But you shall eat it from among you , and eat it , which the Lord your God has given you , and you shall eat the meat of the dead , or of the flesh , or of the flesh .
GOLD:	“ But you may butcher your animals and eat their meat in any town whenever you want . You may freely eat the animals with which the Lord your God blesses you . All of you , whether ceremonially clean or unclean , may eat that meat , just as you now eat gazelle and deer .

ID:	1239
INPUT:	Nidi ánihidííniid , Dabikéyah danihíí' dooleeł , nihaa dideesh'áałgo nihíí' ádadoohłííł ; éí kéyah bii' abe' áádóó tsésná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįd ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ ; éí ał'ąą dine'é bits'ánihinínilígíí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	But he said to you , “ I will give you the land that I have given you . I will give you milk and honey . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	But I have promised you , ‘ You will possess their land because I will give it to you as your possession — a land flowing with milk and honey . ' I am the Lord your God , who has set you apart from all other people .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	Jesus haadzíi'go ání , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kóní : Diné doo bááh t'éí yee hináa da doo , nidi saad t'áá ałtso Diyin God yee hahadziihii yee hináa doo .
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ It is written , ‘ The Scriptures will not live bread , but all the words of God will live . '
GOLD:	But Jesus told him , “ No ! The Scriptures say , ‘ People do not live by bread alone , but by every word that comes from the mouth of God . ' ”

ID:	1241
INPUT:	Éí bijį́į́dóó Saul éí David hajisíidgo hodeeshzhiizh .
PRED:	And it came to pass on that day , that Saul was ready for David .
GOLD:	So from that time on Saul kept a jealous eye on David .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihijéí bii' hazhó'ó hasht'e'nitsídanohkees , bee ák'ihadadidoohdzihii t'áá bítséedi t'áadoo nabik'ítsídaałkeesí ,
PRED:	“ Therefore , be careful to understand what you say ,
GOLD:	So do n't worry in advance about how to answer the charges against you ,

ID:	1243
INPUT:	Nahat'á baa hwiinít'į́įgo hazhó'ó hasht'edaalne' , áádóó kót'éego nidi'níigo anaa' áníł'į́ .
PRED:	They are ready for peace , and they are ready for battle .
GOLD:	Plans succeed through good counsel ; do n't go to war without wise advice .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	Azáíyah éí hastą́'áadah binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' ; Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nant'áago ashdladiindóó ba'aan naaki nááhai . Bimá éí Jekoláíyah wolyéego Jerúsalemdóó naaghá .
PRED:	Amaziah was thirty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem . His mother 's name was from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem .

ID:	1245
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus ábidííniid , Bíni' daneeznáanii t'áá bí łeeh da'ahii'nííł , nidi ni , dah diináahgo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii t'áá níłtéél nít'éé' baa nahólne' .
PRED:	But Jesus said to them , “ Let the dead be buried , but go and tell the kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus told him , “ Let the spiritually dead bury their own dead ! Your duty is to go and preach about the Kingdom of God . ”

ID:	1246
INPUT:	Níłch'i deezt'i'dę́ę́' doo nił bééhózinígi át'éego áádóó asdzání yiltsą́ągo awéé' yééltsánígíí bits'in nooséełii doo nił bééhózinígíigi át'éego , t'áá éigi át'éego Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní áyoolíiłii binaanish nilíinii doo nił bééhózin da .
PRED:	You do not know the way of the Spirit , like a woman who has been born , so you do n't know the work of God of all things .
GOLD:	Just as you can not understand the path of the wind or the mystery of a tiny baby growing in its mother 's womb , so you can not understand the activity of God , who does all things .

ID:	1247
INPUT:	Áádóó łį́į́' yee nídahastį́įgo Júdah kéyahgi kin haal'áagi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaagi yóó'ádahoolaa .
PRED:	And they took him , and buried him in the city of Judah .
GOLD:	They brought his body back on a horse , and he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David .

ID:	1248
INPUT:	Áko Manówah éí Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í ánéidoo'niid , T'áá shǫǫdí átsé t'áá kǫ́ǫ́ sínídáago tł'ízí yázhí ła' ná nídiil'ah .
PRED:	Then Manoah said to the angel of the Lord , “ Please let me go and take a young goat . ”
GOLD:	Then Manoah said to the angel of the Lord , “ Please stay here until we can prepare a young goat for you to eat . ”

ID:	1249
INPUT:	Nidi Jew dine'é [ doo da'oodlánígíí] da'oołch'į́įdgo , diné nichxǫ́'ógo nidaakaígíí ła' áłah ádayiilaago , kin haal'áagi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' hadahoneeshchaad , áádóó Jéísan bighan yaa tiih yíjée'go Paul áádóó Sáílas éí diné yíl'áhígíí bich'į' ch'ídahodiit'ish danízingo ch'ééh ádáát'įįd .
PRED:	But the Jews gathered together , and gathered together the whole city , and they brought them out to Paul and Silas .
GOLD:	But some of the Jews were jealous , so they gathered some troublemakers from the marketplace to form a mob and start a riot . They attacked the home of Jason , searching for Paul and Silas so they could drag them out to the crowd .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' yikahígíí , T'áadoo ádíníní , dahałníigo hach'adahashké , nidi t'ah yówehgo hanáázhdoolghaazhgo ájíní , David biYe' nílíinii , shaa jiiníbaah !
PRED:	And those who were before him said , “ Do not rebuke him , ” but he cried out more , “ Son of David , have mercy on me . ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the people in front yelled at him.But he only shouted louder , “ Son of David , have mercy on me ! ”

ID:	1251
INPUT:	Nidi shí éí áłahjį' shił chohoo'į́į doo áádóó t'ah yówehgo hózhǫ́ naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	But I will put my hope on you , and I will praise you more .
GOLD:	But I will keep on hoping for your help ; I will praise you more and more .

ID:	1252
INPUT:	Jó , yee łá'í daazlį́į'go nidahaz'ą́ ; nik'ijį' danilį́įgo ahada'deet'aah :
PRED:	For they have become one , and they have sinned against them ;
GOLD:	Yes , this was their unanimous decision.They signed a treaty as allies against you —

ID:	1253
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jáshowa ha'éé' ák'inijooldláadgo Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii bidáahjį' tsé'yaa jishjoolgo hwee i'íí'ą́ ; hó áádóó Ízrel dine'é aląąjį' naazíinii bił łeezh dibahí ák'ídajiilkaad .
PRED:	So Joshua tore his clothes , and fell down before the ark of the Lord until evening , and the elders of Israel cast it into dust .
GOLD:	Joshua and the elders of Israel tore their clothing in dismay , threw dust on their heads , and bowed face down to the ground before the Ark of the Lord until evening .

ID:	1254
INPUT:	Ayóó'ánihósh'níinii , Níłch'i Diyinii shii' hólǫ́ , daanínígíí t'áadoo t'áá ałtso deinohdlání , nidi éí t'áá ałtso nidaałkaah , t'áá daats'í aaníí Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii bii' dahólǫ́ . Háálá t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii nihokáá'góó t'óó ahayóí deíkááh .
PRED:	My dear friends , do n't believe all that are in me , but all those who believe in him are in the Spirit of God , for many prophets are in the world .
GOLD:	Dear friends , do not believe everyone who claims to speak by the Spirit . You must test them to see if the spirit they have comes from God . For there are many false prophets in the world .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	Áádóó ábizhdííniid , Tį' , shikéé' woh'ash , áko łóó' hayiileehí nahalingo diné náhółbįįhgo ánihideeshłííł .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Come after me , and I will make you like a fish , like a fish . ”
GOLD:	Jesus called out to them , “ Come , follow me , and I will show you how to fish for people ! ”

ID:	1256
INPUT:	azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , ayóó át'éego baa a'ááh nínízingo honoojíidi t'áadoo yóó'ahodííní'ą́ą da : jį́įgo hakáa'di k'os níyizgo yildohgo bik'ehgo joonéłígíí t'áadoo hats'ą́ą́' yóó'eelzhóod da , índa tł'ée'go hakáa'di kǫ' níyizii bik'ehgo joonééłgóó bee hool'inii t'áadoo hats'ą́ą́' dahodiile' da .
PRED:	But when he had mercy on them , he did not leave them in the wilderness , but he did not turn away from them in the wilderness until the cloud , and did not turn away from them by night and by night .
GOLD:	“ But in your great mercy you did not abandon them to die in the wilderness . The pillar of cloud still led them forward by day , and the pillar of fire showed them the way through the night .

ID:	1257
INPUT:	Áko kéyah doo nihídidoołkoh da biniyé kót'éego doo dadoołchxǫǫł da ; shą́ą́' ał'ąą dine'é ákódaat'į́įgo nihilą́ąjį' kéyah bídeeskwi ni' .
PRED:	And thou shalt not destroy the land , and shalt not destroy it : and the nations shall go before thee to the land .
GOLD:	So do not defile the land and give it a reason to vomit you out , as it will vomit out the people who live there now .

ID:	1258
INPUT:	Éí haash yit'éego baa nitsídaahkees ? Nít'éé' , Hodiyoolyééł lą́ą , dadííniid .
PRED:	What do you think ? ” They said , “ He will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	What is your verdict ? ” “ Guilty ! ” they shouted . “ He deserves to die ! ”

ID:	1259
INPUT:	Nihoníyáajį' ahodoolzhish
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Time of the End

ID:	1260
INPUT:	Áko Ádam ádííniid , K'ad díí shits'inígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó ts'in áádóó shitsį'ígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó atsį' jílį́ , áko asdzání joolyée doo , háálá diné bits'ą́ą́dóó áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	And Adam said , Now is the flesh of my flesh , and of my flesh , and of the flesh ; and the woman shall call the name of the man .
GOLD:	“ At last ! ” the man exclaimed. “ This one is bone from my bone , and flesh from my flesh ! She will be called ‘ woman , 'because she was taken from ‘ man . ' ”

ID:	1261
INPUT:	Ádííniid , Bóhólníihii , Bóhólníihii lą́ą , dahináanii bikéyahdi doo yideestséeł da ; nihokáá' kéédahat'ínígíí bitahgi diné doo ła' néideestséeł da .
PRED:	And he said , Lord , I will not see the land of the living , neither will I see any man among the inhabitants of the earth .
GOLD:	I said , “ Never again will I see the Lord Godwhile still in the land of the living.Never again will I see my friendsor be with those who live in this world .

ID:	1262
INPUT:	Áádóó Mólak diyin bidi'níinii biníbaal nidaah'áá nít'éé' , áádóó <unk> , diyin bidi'níinii bisǫ' nidaah'áá nít'éé' ; éí be'elyaii bich'į' nidahohłáa doogo ádaahłaa , áko shí t'éiyá Bábilan bilááhgóó anihidínéeshkał .
PRED:	And ye shall worship the tents of Balak , and ye shall worship other gods ; and ye shall worship them , and I will scatter you beyond Babylon .
GOLD:	No , you carried your pagan gods — the shrine of Molech , the star of your god Rephan , and the images you made to worship them.So I will send you into exileas far away as Babylon . '

ID:	1263
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus áhodííniid , Łees'áánshą' díkwíí nidaahjaah ? Áko ádaaní , Tsosts'id lą́ą , áádóó łóó' ádaałts'íísígíí ałdó' t'áá díkwíí yee' .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Where have you some loaves ? ” They said , “ seven loaves and small fish . ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked , “ How much bread do you have ? ” They replied , “ Seven loaves , and a few small fish . ”

ID:	1264
INPUT:	doo Jew dine'é danilíinii éí adinídínígíí bá bee ééhózinii át'é , áádóó t'áá éí yee nidine'é Ízrel ayóó át'éii dadooleeł .
PRED:	This is a sign for the Gentiles , and all Israel will be exalted .
GOLD:	He is a light to reveal God to the nations , and he is the glory of your people Israel ! ”

ID:	1265
INPUT:	Saad t'áá ałtso bee hada'iidziihígíí ałdó' t'áadoo baa ná'áhodílt'íní , áko ná naal'a'í neinít'į́įgo doo didííts'į́įł da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of all the words that I speak to you , and you will not listen to your servant .
GOLD:	Do n't eavesdrop on others — you may hear your servant curse you .

ID:	1266
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad tsxį́įłgo David bee bił dahołne'go kódabidohní , Díí tł'éé' éí honoojíidi dah nídzílgaigi doo danihiidoołkáał da ; tsxį́įłgo ha'naa ninohkááh ; éí doodago aláahgo naat'áanii índa diné yił naakaígíí t'áá ałtso nabidi'dootsił .
PRED:	“ Now tell David , ‘ This night you will not be afraid in the wilderness , and you will not be afraid in the wilderness , and all the people with him will die . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Quick ! ” he told them . “ Find David and urge him not to stay at the shallows of the Jordan River tonight . He must go across at once into the wilderness beyond . Otherwise he will die and his entire army with him . ”

ID:	1267
INPUT:	Áko nihił dínínáá ládą́ą́' yá'ádaat'éehii Bóhólníihii nihá áyoolííł dooleełígíí t'áá ákót'éego nihí ałdó' nich'į' t'áá ákódeii'níił doo .
PRED:	If we have ten good things , we will also do to the Lord , just as you have done .
GOLD:	If you do , we 'll share with you all the blessings the Lord gives us . ”

ID:	1268
INPUT:	Háálá yá'át'éhígi ádeeshnííł nisinii éí doo ááshłíił da , nidi doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'éii doo nisinii , jó , éída ááshłíił łeh .
PRED:	For I do what is good , but I do not want to do evil , but I do not want to do evil .
GOLD:	I want to do what is good , but I do n't . I do n't want to do what is wrong , but I do it anyway .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	Háálá ádanoht'ée dooleeł nihósh'níinii doo ákódanoht'éégóó nihaa deeshááł dó'óshłí nisin , índa hójí ájít'ée dooleeł dashíínóh'níinii doo ákónísht'éégóó nihaa deeshááł dó'óshłí nisin . Nihitahgóó daats'í ałgha'dit'ááh , ooch'į́į́d , áháchį' , ałch'ą́ą́h na'a'na' , nichǫ́'ógo aa yá'áti' , aseezį́ , áshohódli' índa hahóó'á dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł dó'óshłí nisin .
PRED:	For I will come to you , my dear friends , that I may come to you , and that I may not come to you , lest I come to you , and be angry among you , evil , evil , and evil .
GOLD:	For I am afraid that when I come I wo n't like what I find , and you wo n't like my response . I am afraid that I will find quarreling , jealousy , anger , selfishness , slander , gossip , arrogance , and disorderly behavior .

ID:	1270
INPUT:	áádóó ni' ąą ádzaago ha'áłchíní t'áá bił , Kórah yidiikaii yę́ę t'áá ałtso índa hwee dahólónígíí t'áá át'é ałdó' t'áá bił ni' abiisna' .
PRED:	and the earth opened , and all that were with Korah , and all that were with him , and all that were with him .
GOLD:	The earth opened its mouth and swallowed the men , along with their households and all their followers who were standing with them , and everything they owned .

ID:	1271
INPUT:	Ayóní bá sézį́į dooleeł níigo naaltsoos bikáá' bízhi' áyiilaii ííshją́ą́ bi'éétsoh nídidííłtsos , áádóó ałjiłnii bá ákódziidzaago bee nihozhní'ánígíí binahjį' hwíínítą' doo .
PRED:	Take the robe that he had made for him , and put it on his robe , and put it in the hand of the prostitute .
GOLD:	Get security from someone who guarantees a stranger 's debt.Get a deposit if he does it for foreigners .

ID:	1272
INPUT:	Ásher biye'ké éí Jímna áádóó <unk> wah áádóó <unk> wai áádóó Biiráíyah índa bilah <unk> daolyé . Biiráíyah biye'ké éí Hííber índa Málkiyel wolyé ;
PRED:	And the sons of Asher : from the sons of Asher : of whom is the sons of Gershon , the sons of Jared , the sons of Jared , the sons of Kohath ;
GOLD:	The sons of Asher were Imnah , Ishvah , Ishvi , and Beriah . Their sister was Serah . Beriah 's sons were Heber and Malkiel .

ID:	1273
INPUT:	Áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii t'áá bí ałdó' kót'éego nihił halne' . Áłtsé ání :
PRED:	And the Holy Spirit is the same way , and the Holy Spirit said ,
GOLD:	And the Holy Spirit also testifies that this is so . For he says ,

ID:	1274
INPUT:	Áko da'ííyą́ą'go hwiih daazlį́į́' , áádóó bi'oh da'oodą́'ígíí náádadziisdláa'go ts'iizis tsosts'id hadazdeesbįįd .
PRED:	And when they had eaten , they filled up seven heads .
GOLD:	They ate as much as they wanted . Afterward , the disciples picked up seven large baskets of leftover food .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	k'ad dah doohnéehgo Ámor dine'é bikéyah deílk'idgóó áádóó k'ídahoneezláagi kéédahat'ínígíí bitahgóó , dadzígaigóó áádóó dah daask'idgóó áádóó dahoníts'aa'góó áádóó shádi'áahjigo áádóó tónteel bibąąhgóó Kéínan dine'é bikéyahjigo áádóó Lébanan kéyahgi dził daní'áágóó índa ayóó át'é Yufréítiiz wolyéego tooh nílínígíí bich'į'go dadohnééh .
PRED:	“ Now go up to the hill country of the Amorites , and in the hill country , and in the hill country , and in the hill country , and in the south , and in the sea , and in the sea , and in the sea , and in the great sea .
GOLD:	It is time to break camp and move on . Go to the hill country of the Amorites and to all the neighboring regions — the Jordan Valley , the hill country , the western foothills , the Negev , and the coastal plain . Go to the land of the Canaanites and to Lebanon , and all the way to the great Euphrates River .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	Áko áłah áda'diilyaago Mózes áádóó Éran yik'ijį' danilį́įgo ádeiłní , Nihí t'áá íiyisí ádíhwíínółnííh , háálá oonéłígíí t'áá ałtso dadiyin áádóó bitahgi Bóhólníihii hólǫ́ , ákoshą' ha'át'íí biniyé Bóhólníihii bidine'é dah yinéłígíí bilááh ánóht'éego í'doołyaa ?
PRED:	They gathered together and spoke against Moses and Aaron , saying , “ You are very great , because the Lord is among all the assembly and among all the people , why do you more than the camp of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	They united against Moses and Aaron and said , “ You have gone too far ! The whole community of Israel has been set apart by the Lord , and he is with all of us . What right do you have to act as though you are greater than the rest of the Lord 's people ? ”

ID:	1277
INPUT:	T'ááká t'áá nihí ádadoołchxǫǫh lágo , áádóó t'áadoo le'é be'elyaii biką'ii , doodaii' bi'áadii noolningo ádá ádaołnééh lágo .
PRED:	You shall not make yourselves unclean , and you shall not do any thing like a image or a male .
GOLD:	So do not corrupt yourselves by making an idol in any form — whether of a man or a woman ,

ID:	1278
INPUT:	Tsin nitł'izii níyizgo áyiilaa áádóó óola yik'íísti' ,
PRED:	He made poles of acacia wood , and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	Then he made poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	Áko bik'isóó áádóó Samériya dine'é bisiláo dah yinéełii áyidííniid , Díí lá ha'át'íí Jew dine'é t'óó nidanil'eełii yaa naakai ? Bee ohoníłdzi<unk> ádá ádeiilééh ? Nááda'iiłniihiísh doo ? T'áá ła'a jį́įjį'ísh ałtso ła'deidoolíiłgo ádaat'į́ ? Da' tsé ts'iilzéí bił dadíílidgo yáádaa'áhígíí bitahdóósh tsé háádeidiyoo'nił ?
PRED:	Then he said to his brothers and Samaria , “ What have you done to the Jews ? Do n't you make them an end to the Jews ? Do n't you make them a day ? Do n't you make them like stones in the first day ? ”
GOLD:	saying in front of his friends and the Samarian army officers , “ What does this bunch of poor , feeble Jews think they 're doing ? Do they think they can build the wall in a single day by just offering a few sacrifices ? Do they actually think they can make something of stones from a rubbish heap — and charred ones at that ? ”

ID:	1280
INPUT:	Áko diyingo naal'a'í bílák'eedóó naaltsoos áłts'íísígíí nídii'ą́ągo yíyą́ą́' , nít'éé' shizée'di tsés'ná bitł'izh nahalingo łikan , nidi ahéłna'go shibid bił dích'íí' silį́į́' .
PRED:	And when the angel had taken a little book from the hand of the angel , I began to eat my mouth like honey , but I threw them into captivity .
GOLD:	So I took the small scroll from the hand of the angel , and I ate it ! It was sweet in my mouth , but when I swallowed it , it turned sour in my stomach .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	Dził Záíyandi kéédahat'ínígíí bich'į' hane' yá'át'éehii baa hólne'ii nílíinii , dził aghánáhóó'áágóó hasínááh ; Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'ínígíí bich'į' hane' yá'át'éehii baa hólne'ii nílíinii , yéego hadílgháásh ; t'áadoo náníldzidí ; yéego hadílgháásh ; Júdahgi kin hadaas'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí , Shoo , nihiDiyin God danół'į́ ! bidiní .
PRED:	Speak , O Lord God , to the mountains of Zion , to the mountain , to the mountain , to the good news ; cry , O Lord God , in the cities of Judah !
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	1282
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso hayaajį' nitsidadidoogoh ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso há nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	All the kings shall bow down before him , and all the nations shall serve him .
GOLD:	All kings will bow before him , and all nations will serve him .

ID:	1283
INPUT:	Na'niłkaadii doo ílíinii
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	The Good and Evil Shepherds

ID:	1284
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí kin bii' nooh nída'ołchíihii áádóó bindadoołnishígíí t'áá át'é yee nihik'ijidlíi doogo yee hahadziih doo índa Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah nihaidiní'ánígíí bikáa'gi nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	The Lord your God will bless you and all your work , and the Lord your God will bless you on the land he has given you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will guarantee a blessing on everything you do and will fill your storehouses with grain . The Lord your God will bless you in the land he is giving you .

ID:	1285
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God bízhi' bee bééhániihii éí Bóhólníihii wolyé .
PRED:	The name of the Lord God of hosts is called the name of the Lord God of hosts .
GOLD:	the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord is his name !

ID:	1286
INPUT:	Haa nízáagishą' shá bíighah shijéí yínííł nilį́įgo shii' sizíinii bi'diił'áa doo ? Haa nízáagishą' shi'ana'í shide át'ée doo ?
PRED:	How long shall my soul be troubled all day long ? How long shall my enemies be lifted up against me ?
GOLD:	How long must I struggle with anguish in my soul , with sorrow in my heart every day ? How long will my enemy have the upper hand ?

ID:	1287
INPUT:	Áko dazneeznáanii , nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso baa nídahódóot'įįłígi át'éego haa dahwiiníst'įįd nidi , da'joosdląądgo t'áá Diyin God hinánígi át'éego dajiináa doo biniyé hane' yá'át'éehii bee hoł dahane' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when they had been done according to all the world , they preached the Good News of the Good News .
GOLD:	That is why the Good News was preached to those who are now dead — so although they were destined to die like all people , they now live forever with God in the Spirit .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah nihíí' ádadoohłííł biniyé yiih nihíí'eezhgo , ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí nihinááł baa ch'éheezhjée'go , jó , éí Het dine'é , <unk> dine'é , Ámor dine'é , Kéínan dine'é , Píírez dine'é , Háíva dine'é índa Jííbas dine'é danilį́įgo tsosts'idgo ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii nihiláahgo ayóó ádaat'é índa ayóó ádabóodziil ;
PRED:	When the Lord your God brought you into the land that you have given you , many nations went out before you , behold , the Hittites , the Hittites , the Jebusites , the Jebusites , the Jebusites , the Jebusites , and the Jebusites .
GOLD:	“ When the Lord your God brings you into the land you are about to enter and occupy , he will clear away many nations ahead of you : the Hittites , Girgashites , Amorites , Canaanites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites . These seven nations are greater and more numerous than you .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	Záíyan béédeiilnii' yę́ędą́ą́' Bábilan hoolyéedi tooh danílínígíí bibąąhgóó dineebingo deiicha nít'éé' .
PRED:	When we heard that it was in Zion , we began to weep on the rivers of Babylon .
GOLD:	Beside the rivers of Babylon , we sat and weptas we thought of Jerusalem .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	T'áadoo nidaneestą́ą'ii éí nida'iisííh , nidi kót'éego daaníinii t'óó ahayóí hólǫ́ǫgi hasih haz'ą́ .
PRED:	They have no fruit , but there are many who say , “ There are many who do wrong . ”
GOLD:	Without wise leadership , a nation falls ; there is safety in having many advisers .

ID:	1291
INPUT:	Táá' yiską́ągo Féro ch'éenidoołt'eełgo tsin yąąh dah nididooloh , áádóó nits'íís tsídii deidooyį́į́ł .
PRED:	On the third day Pharaoh will come with you , and they will eat the flesh of the birds .
GOLD:	Three days from now Pharaoh will lift you up and impale your body on a pole . Then birds will come and peck away at your flesh . ”

ID:	1292
INPUT:	T'óó kónígháníjį' náá'iideeshhosh , t'óó kónígháníjį' anáádínéeshyił , t'óó kónígháníjį' shijaat'ah díníshnii'go adínéeshyił , diníinii ,
PRED:	I will lie down a little sleep , a little while it is still a little while it is still a little while .
GOLD:	A little extra sleep , a little more slumber , a little folding of the hands to rest —

ID:	1293
INPUT:	Paul éí Bárnabas yił ał<unk> t'áázh
PRED:	Paul and Barnabas
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Separate

ID:	1294
INPUT:	Hane' yá'át'éehii éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ałdó' bá át'é
PRED:	The Good News for the Gentiles
GOLD:	Paul 's Reason for Writing

ID:	1295
INPUT:	Áko Jótham éí dahazhé'é yę́ę bitahjį' ajiiłhaazhgo hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi yóó'ádahojiilaa . Haye' Éíhaz éí hatsásk'ehgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Ahaz died among his fathers , and buried him in the city of David his father ; and Ahaz the son of Ahaz reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Jotham died , he was buried in the City of David . And his son Ahaz became the next king .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	Nidabi'diztseedii bidił índa ayóó ádaat'éii yę́ę bik'ah bits'ą́ą́dóóJánathan be'ełtį́į́' yee doo niseedáa da nít'éé'índa Saul bidiltłish yee ak'idiyaa nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	They did not sit in the sword of Jonathan , nor all the mighty men of the mighty men of the mighty men of the sword .
GOLD:	The bow of Jonathan was powerful , and the sword of Saul did its mighty work.They shed the blood of their enemiesand pierced the bodies of mighty heroes .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	Díí k'ad t'ah doo áhánééhdą́ą́' bee nihił hashne' , ákódzaago , shí Christ ásht'į́įgo deidoohdląął .
PRED:	Now I have told you before I am the Messiah , you will believe it .
GOLD:	I tell you this beforehand , so that when it happens you will believe that the Messiah .

ID:	1298
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ałtso t'áá bí diné nideideez'ánígíí nideistseed , áádóó Síriya dine'é adahineezhchą́ą'go Ízrel dine'é akéé' nídiijéé' nít'éé' ; Síriya dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii Ben-héídad éí siláo danilíinii łį́į́' yee nidaabaahígíí yił łį́į́' ayaa bił háájéé' .
PRED:	They killed all the people , and the Arameans fled , and fled after them , and the king of Aram fought against him .
GOLD:	Each Israelite soldier killed his Aramean opponent , and suddenly the entire Aramean army panicked and fled . The Israelites chased them , but King Ben-hadad and a few of his charioteers escaped on horses .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	T'áá ánółtso shijéí bee ayóó'ánihíínísh'níigo bąą kót'éego nihaa nitséskees dooígíí shá bohónéedzą́ , háálá awáalyaaí nishłį́įgo , doodaii' doo awáalyaaí nishłį́į da nidi , hane' yá'át'éehii bich'ą́ą́h yáshti'go índa bohoníłdzilgo áshłéhígíí shá ashja'ósingo , Diyin God yee shaa joozba'ígíí t'áá ánółtso shił ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz .
PRED:	I want to do this because I love you all of you , because I am not a prisoner or a prisoner , or a prisoner , but I have received the good news of God .
GOLD:	So it is right that I should feel as I do about all of you , for you have a special place in my heart . You share with me the special favor of God , both in my imprisonment and in defending and confirming the truth of the Good News .

ID:	1300
INPUT:	Shinish'náajigo déé'į́į́' nít'éé' , áko t'áadoo ła' shaa ákoniizį́'í da . T'áadoo biniiłt'a nóshchéłí da ; nádį́'ídi doo shináhodidzin da .
PRED:	I looked at my right hand , and there was no one in me ; they did not trust me .
GOLD:	I look for someone to come and help me , but no one gives me a passing thought ! No one will help me ; no one cares a bit what happens to me .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	Háálá da'oodlání bá aląąjį' dzizíinii éí da'oodlání Diyin God bá dah joo'ishgo ts'ídá t'áadoo bee hak'íhót'ahí da doo , doo házhą́ ílį́į da doo , doo hání dzis'ą́ą da doo , wáin doo bee tsi'nijigháa da doo , doo ats'ííd ádąąh jit'į́į doo , índa na'adlo'go bee béeso ál'íinii doo bíchą́yízhdéelni' da doo .
PRED:	For the elders of the church is not worthy of God , nor of wine , nor of wine , nor of sin , nor of sin , nor of sin .
GOLD:	A church leader is a manager of God 's household , so he must live a blameless life . He must not be arrogant or quick-tempered ; he must not be a heavy drinker , violent , or dishonest with money .

ID:	1302
INPUT:	Áko Gálilii kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' yii' kéédahat'íinii kin yii' áłah nídaadleehgóó Diyin God baa nahojilne'go , índa diné biyi'dę́ę́' níłch'i bida'iiníziinii hahizhniłkaadgo tázhdííyá .
PRED:	And he went throughout all the towns of Galilee , teaching God in the synagogue , and cast out demons .
GOLD:	So he traveled throughout the region of Galilee , preaching in the synagogues and casting out demons .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	Bąąhági át'éii nihii' ádin dadii'níigo ádinda'iidlo' , áko t'áá aaníinii doo nihii' dahólǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	We have no sin , and we are not in the truth .
GOLD:	If we claim we have no sin , we are only fooling ourselves and not living in the truth .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	Áńdahwii'aahii nii'nil
PRED:	The People of the Law
GOLD:	The Command to Leave Sinai

ID:	1305
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1306
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní , eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadláii bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ . [ T'áá ákót'ée doo . ]
PRED:	My children , take heed to the idols of idols . Amen .
GOLD:	Dear children , keep away from anything that might take God 's place in your hearts .

ID:	1307
INPUT:	Álílee k'ehgo yáti' yee yádaałti'go bíni'dii nidilt'éegoda , doodaii' tált'éegoda ákódaat'į́į doo , biláahgo éí dooda , t'ááłá'í nítínígo bik'eh hoolzhishgo yádaałti' doo , áádóó bíni'dii ła'da bá ata' halne' doo .
PRED:	Let there be three or three , or three , or three , that each one may speak , and let no one be counted .
GOLD:	No more than two or three should speak in tongues . They must speak one at a time , and someone must interpret what they say .

ID:	1308
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ábizhdííniid , Háájíshą' nihida'oodlą' daazlį́į́' ? Áko nídadzisdzíidgo t'óó hoł adahóóyóigo áda'ahizhdoo'niid , Ákoshą' díí háí át'į́įgo azhą́ níyol índa tó nidi yich'į' hahadziihgo bik'eh dahół'į́ ?
PRED:	And he said unto them , Where are we ? And they were amazed , and said unto them , Who are these ? And if they obey the wind and the wind ?
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ Where is your faith ? ” The disciples were terrified and amazed . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ When he gives a command , even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	1309
INPUT:	Áko ákwii Mózes áádóó Éran índa biye'ké dabíla' áádóó dabikee' tánínádeigis doo ,
PRED:	And there Moses , Aaron , his sons , and his feet shall wash their feet ,
GOLD:	Moses and Aaron and Aaron 's sons used water from it to wash their hands and feet .

ID:	1310
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Nihitahdóó ła' Bóhólníihii bich'į' náázhdi'yoołnihgo éí béégashii áádóó dibé ła' nááhizhdoołnihgo éí jidoolóós .
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , saying , If any of you offer a burnt offering unto the Lord , and a sheep , and a sheep .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . When you present an animal as an offering to the Lord , you may take it from your herd of cattle or your flock of sheep and goats .

ID:	1311
INPUT:	Índa dį́į́' yiłkaah bijį́ dóola yázhí neeznáá , deenásts'aa' naaki índa dibé yázhí dį́į́'ts'áadahgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	On the fourth day you shall offer ten bulls , two rams , fourteen male lambs without blemish .
GOLD:	“ On the fourth day of the festival , sacrifice ten young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	Áko díí bee haasdzí'ígíí bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo áko lá índa díí aláahgo naat'áanii bighanígíí dáń'da'ditį́į́h góne' yah anáhookah doo , áádóó David bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah náhidinoobįįł índa bí áádóó bá nidaal'a'í lá índa bidine'é éí tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yee áádóó łį́į́' yee yah anáhookah dooleeł .
PRED:	And ye shall keep these words , and shall go into the gate of the king , and shall sit on the throne of David , and his servants , and his people , and his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots .
GOLD:	If you obey me , there will always be a descendant of David sitting on the throne here in Jerusalem . The king will ride through the palace gates in chariots and on horses , with his parade of attendants and subjects .

ID:	1313
INPUT:	Hastą́ą́h jį́ díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii daohsą́ą doo ; tsosts'id yiską́ą́ góne' Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' hodílzingo áłah náhdleeh doo ; ákóne' t'áá ha'át'éegoda doo nidoołnish da .
PRED:	On the seventh day you shall eat unleavened bread . On the seventh day you shall keep a feast to the Lord your God ; you shall do no work .
GOLD:	For the next six days you may not eat any bread made with yeast . On the seventh day proclaim another holy day in honor of the Lord your God , and no work may be done on that day .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	Áko Áízak éí Éíbraham hazhé'é yę́ę hináádą́ą́' tó hadahaas'nil yę́ęgi tó hahadleeh náádahodeesbįįd yę́ęgi tó háádayiisnil ; éí Éíbraham daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Filístiya dine'é háádahodeesbįįd nít'éé' , áko hazhé'é yę́ę tó hadahadleeh yee dayízhi'ígíí t'áá éí bee náádajíízhi' .
PRED:	And Isaac filled the waters that were in the waters of his father Isaac , and filled them with water ; and the Philistines filled them with the waters of Abraham , and they called the name of his fathers .
GOLD:	He reopened the wells his father had dug , which the Philistines had filled in after Abraham 's death . Isaac also restored the names Abraham had given them .

ID:	1315
INPUT:	Mózes deisoohdląądgo , shí ałdó' dashoohdlą́ą doo nít'éé' , háálá éí shaa halne'go ak'e'ashchį́ .
PRED:	When you believed , you would believe me , because it is written in me .
GOLD:	If you really believed Moses , you would believe me , because he wrote about me .

ID:	1316
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii jílį́įgo tseebíí náhááh góne' , t'ah ániid nijigháago hazhé'é David yę́ę biDiyin God hájít'į́įgo hodideeshzhiizh , áádóó naakits'áadah yihah góne' Júdah kéyahgi índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígíí áádóó asdzání bida'alyaii índa hadahaashk'aazhgo eda'alyaii áádóó dadoolyį́į'go eda'alyaii ádaalyaaígíí nahjį' kódeile'go yaa nídiidzá .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the eighth year of the reign of King David his father , that he would seek the God of David , the God of David his father , and the high places of Judah , and the high places , and the high places that were in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	During the eighth year of his reign , while he was still young , Josiah began to seek the God of his ancestor David . Then in the twelfth year he began to purify Judah and Jerusalem , destroying all the pagan shrines , the Asherah poles , and the carved idols and cast images .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	Áádóó éí beiníłką́ądi t'ááłá'í aláahgo naat'áanii hinánígíí bik'ehgo tsosts'idiin nááhaijį' Táir baa hoyoosnah doo ; tsosts'idiin nááhai bíighah azlį́į'jį' ałjiłnii bí'díl'a'ígi át'éego Táir hó'díl'a' doo .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that the king shall remember Tyre seven years , according to the number of the year of the king shall be for Tyre .
GOLD:	For seventy years , the length of a king 's life , Tyre will be forgotten . But then the city will come back to life as in the song about the prostitute :

ID:	1318
INPUT:	Shį́įgo yi<unk> go doo beełt'ée daígi át'éego áádóó da'agizhgo nahałtingo doo beełt'ée daígi át'éego diné doo áhályáanii hoł danilį́į dooleełígíí ałdó' doo beełt'ée da .
PRED:	It is not good for the wise to be like the rain , and as the rain in the harvest , and as the rain in the harvest .
GOLD:	Honor is no more associated with foolsthan snow with summer or rain with harvest .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	Bił kéédahoht'íinii bich'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áhígi nidahisoohkaigo t'áá nihí danohsinígi ánéelt'e'go dadoohsį́įłgo t'áá áko , nidi nihe'ásaa' doo bii' hééł ádadoohłíił da .
PRED:	When you come to your neighbor 's vineyard , you shall eat it and eat it , and you shall eat it , but you shall not put it in it .
GOLD:	“ When you enter your neighbor 's vineyard , you may eat your fill of grapes , but you must not carry any away in a basket .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	óola łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo shékel wolyéii neeznáá dah hidiidloh bíighahgo éí bii' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadeezbingo ,
PRED:	one golden golden shekels of gold , full of incense ;
GOLD:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .

ID:	1321
INPUT:	Diné nidahagizii éí Bóhólníihii doo hółdin da , nidi t'áá ákogi ádaat'éego dahináanii éí yaa bił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	The Lord does not obey the Lord , but the living are glad .
GOLD:	The Lord detests people with crooked hearts , but he delights in those with integrity .

ID:	1322
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí dadine'é t'óó ahayóí áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bidziilgo dah deíkáahii t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii hádaat'į́įgo áádóó Bóhólníihii yee ak'ijidlíii yídayókeed biniyé Jerúsalemjį' nidahidookah .
PRED:	Surely they shall come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord of hosts , and to the nations that dwell in his strength , to seek the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	Many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord of Heaven 's Armies and to ask for his blessing .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ánínígi át'éego , Nihí nihiniinaa doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó Diyin God bízhi' t'óó baa'ihgo baa yáti' .
PRED:	For as it is written in the Scriptures , “ We have spoken evil in the name of God among the Gentiles . ”
GOLD:	No wonder the Scriptures say , “ The Gentiles blaspheme the name of God because of you . ”

ID:	1324
INPUT:	Áko Thomas , Naakií hodi'nínígíí , bił ídahojiił'aahii ábizhdííniid , Haa'íshą' nihí ałdó' Jesus bił dadíníi'nééł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ diikah .
PRED:	James said to the disciples , “ Let 's go with the disciples , and let us go with Jesus . ”
GOLD:	Thomas , nicknamed the Twin , said to his fellow disciples , “ Let 's go , too — and die with Jesus . ”

ID:	1325
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel bibee adinídíinii kǫ' nilį́į dooleeł , áádóó biDiyinii kǫ' diltłi'ii nilį́įgo bich'il deeníní áádóó bich'il ahoshí adíídeezígi át'éego ła'a jį́ áhodoołdįįł ;
PRED:	And the children of Israel shall be a fire , and the fire of fire , and the fire of the fire , and the fire of the forest , as the grass of the forest .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	1326
INPUT:	Índa Manáseh dine'é dah yinéłígíí éí Piidázer biye' Gaméíliyel á sizį́ .
PRED:	And the leader of the sons of Manasseh was over the camp of Manasseh .
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Manasseh , led by Gamaliel son of Pedahzur ,

ID:	1327
INPUT:	áko nándeesxis áádóó nizéé' góne' béésh názhahígíí adeeshniłgo bee niyaats'iin deeshah áádóó łį́į́' índa łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii t'áá át'éé nít'éé' béésh éé' yii' naazhjée'go nisiláo t'áá dah yinééł nít'éé' ; t'áá bił ayóó ánéelą́ą́' oonéełgo áádóó béésh téél ách'ą́ą́h dah yit'áałii índa naagé deíjáahgo áádóó diltłish deíjáahgo éí t'áá bił ch'índeesłóós :
PRED:	And I will make thee a yoke in thy mouth , and in thy mouth , and in thy mouth , and in thy mouth , and in all thy host , and in all thy host , with all thy army , and with shields , and with shields , and with shields , and with the sword , and with the sword ;
GOLD:	I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws to lead you out with your whole army — your horses and charioteers in full armor and a great horde armed with shields and swords .

ID:	1328
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Ak'eh dazhdeesdlį́į'go bąą dazhdilwoshígíí doo la' ákwíits'a' da ; haa dahoneeznáago biniinaa hahojííł'áhígíí ałdó' dooda , nidi dahataałgo diists'a' .
PRED:	And he said , Because they have fallen , they have not heard ; neither have they heard of the dead , nor hear , but hear .
GOLD:	But Moses replied , “ No , it 's not a shout of victory nor the wailing of defeat . I hear the sound of a celebration . ”

ID:	1329
INPUT:	Doo nidi nahjį' anída'ahilgoh da , t'áá ałtso t'áá bá haz'ą́ą́ góne' deíkááh índa bee na'abaahii yił ch'éhéjeeh , nidi doo ni' kódabiléeh da .
PRED:	But they will not stumble , but they will not stumble in all those who go out to the house of war , but they will not do it .
GOLD:	They never jostle each other ; each moves in exactly the right position.They break through defenseswithout missing a step .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shi'ana'í danilíinii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshíłteeh ! Náshididííł'į́į́ł biniyé nich'į' nídiishwod !
PRED:	O Lord , deliver me from my enemies ; I have come to hide me from the hand of my enemies .
GOLD:	Rescue me from my enemies , Lord ; I run to you to hide me .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	Tóojį' diné jiní'eezhgo Bóhólníihii éí Gídiyan áyidííniid , Łééchąą'í ałch'alígi át'éego da'ałch'alígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá sahdii bits'ádíínił , índa t'áá ałtso nitsidadéesgo'go da'oodlą́'ígíí ałdó' t'áá sahdii bits'ádíínił .
PRED:	He brought the men to Gideon , and said to Gideon , “ Take away all those who hate him , and all who worship him . ”
GOLD:	When Gideon took his warriors down to the water , the Lord told him , “ Divide the men into two groups . In one group put all those who cup water in their hands and lap it up with their tongues like dogs . In the other group put all those who kneel down and drink with their mouths in the stream . ”

ID:	1332
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é ninínáádóó Diyin God yaa dookah biniyé ch'íiní'eezhgo dził tsį́įdi áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	So Moses brought them out to the mountain to return to God .
GOLD:	Moses led them out from the camp to meet with God , and they stood at the foot of the mountain .

ID:	1333
INPUT:	háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí bił ííshją́ą́ ádajile'go , Jesus éí Christ nilį́ , jiníigo , dahasłą́ą́góó Jew dine'é bigha'hizdeest'ą́ .
PRED:	For when he saw the Scriptures , he gave them many things to the Jews , saying , “ Jesus is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	He refuted the Jews with powerful arguments in public debate . Using the Scriptures , he explained to them that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	Shida'ana'í ałdó' shílák'ee dadííní'ą́ , áko dashijijoołá yę́ę ádahodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	I have delivered my enemies into my hand , and I will destroy those who hate me .
GOLD:	You placed my foot on their necks.I have destroyed all who hated me .

ID:	1335
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné áłah nilínígíí t'áá ałtso ádadííniidgo ayóó íits'a'go ádaaní , T'áá ádííníniidígi át'éego ts'ídá t'áá ákódadii'nííł .
PRED:	Then all the people cried out with a loud voice , saying , “ As you have said , we will do . ”
GOLD:	Then the whole assembly raised their voices and answered , “ Yes , you are right ; we must do as you say ! ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	Áko nináá' nish'náájí bąąhági ánít'į́ ánóhsingo hani'aahgo yóó'ahíłhan , háálá nits'íís łahgo ádinjí doo ná yá'át'éeh da , nidi nits'íís hadaałt'éego hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'ą́ąjį' andi'yoolghą́ą́łjí agháago doo ná yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	If your right eye causes you to sin , forgive him because it is better for you to be thrown into hell , than to be thrown into hell .
GOLD:	So if your eye — even your good eye — causes you to lust , gouge it out and throw it away . It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to be thrown into hell .

ID:	1337
INPUT:	Dé'éyóní danilíinii nihaa nídaakahígíí bich'į' nihá ádahwiinít'į́'ígo nihił danilį́į dooleełígíí béédaałniih , háálá ła' ákódaat'į́įgo diyingo nidaal'a'í ádaat'į́įgo doo bił béédahózingóó yaa dajoozba' .
PRED:	Remember the mercy of strangers , for they do not know what they are doing .
GOLD:	Do n't forget to show hospitality to strangers , for some who have done this have entertained angels without realizing it !

ID:	1338
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' hodílyingo áłah ná'ádleeh Bóhólníihii náhodidoo'áłígi nídaoł'aah doo , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'iizhdoodliiłgo łą́ągo nínádanołt'į́hígíí t'áá át'é áádóó nihindaanishígíí t'áá át'é nihá bilááh ánáyoodlíił doo ; éí bąą t'áá íiyisí nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	On the seventh day you shall offer a feast to the Lord your God , because the Lord your God will bless you , and he will make you glad . Therefore you will be glad .
GOLD:	For seven days you must celebrate this festival to honor the Lord your God at the place he chooses , for it is he who blesses you with bountiful harvests and gives you success in all your work . This festival will be a time of great joy for all .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yinááł dahataał doo , háálá yíghááh ; nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ąjį' haa nídóot'įįł biniyé yíghááh . T'áá ákogi át'éii yee nahasdzáán yaa nídóot'įįł ; ba'ahódlíii bee nihokáá' dine'é yaa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	They shall sing in the sight of the Lord ; for he shall come near to the end of the earth ; he shall judge the world ; he shall judge the world .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming ! He is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with his truth .

ID:	1340
INPUT:	Diné t'óó báádahadzidii áádóó bizaad nantł'ago doo nił bééhózinii índa ałt'adandzihgo yádaałti'go doo bik'idiitįįhígíí doo néidííltséeł da .
PRED:	You will not see the words of the wicked and the words of the wicked , nor will you see the words of their mouth .
GOLD:	You will no longer see these fierce , violent peoplewith their strange , unknown language .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii éí hojooba' ádeinízinii yidiits'a' áádóó bidine'é awáalyaaí nidahaleehii doo yi'į́į da .
PRED:	For the Lord hear the cry of the poor , and he does not see the prisoners of the prisoners .
GOLD:	For the Lord hears the cries of the needy ; he does not despise his imprisoned people .

ID:	1342
INPUT:	Áádóó hazhé'é yę́ę David áát'įįdii bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł t' áá ákogi át'éego ádzaa .
PRED:	He did what was right in the sight of the Lord , just as his father David had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	Nidi náánáła' daal'aadii éí t'áadoo deiłtsą́ą da , t'áá hazhó'ó Bóhólníihii bitsilí James t'éiyá .
PRED:	But some of the apostles did not see him except James the brother of James , the brother of James .
GOLD:	The only other apostle I met at that time was James , the Lord 's brother .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	éí asdzání hane'dę́ę́' niníyáago ha'éé' bijánil yideelchid ; t'áá áko dił bighánílínígíí ásdįįd .
PRED:	When the woman came out , she touched his robe , and she touched the blood of her blood .
GOLD:	Coming up behind Jesus , she touched the fringe of his robe . Immediately , the bleeding stopped .

ID:	1345
INPUT:	Nich'į' hózhǫ́ǫ le' . Kodóó nik'is danilíinii k'é daniłní . Aadi nihik'is danilíinii shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	Blessed be ye peace : but bless my brethren , but bless my brethren .
GOLD:	Peace be with you.Your friends here send you their greetings . Please give my personal greetings to each of our friends there .

ID:	1346
INPUT:	áádóó kódaaníigo nidahódééłkid , Na'nitiní , Mózes yę́ę kót'éego nihá ak'e'ashchį́ , diné ła'da bił hajíí'áázh be'asdzą́ą́ hólǫ́ǫgo ba'áłchíní t'áadoo haleehí daaztsą́ągo , hak'is be'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí hwe'asdzą́ą dooleeł , áko hak'is yę́ę bá áłchíní hwee hodooleeł , níí nít'éé' .
PRED:	They asked him , “ Teacher , it is written to us , ‘ Teacher , ' and if a man is with his wife , he would have a wife for his brother 's wife , so that he would be his brother 's wife . ”
GOLD:	They posed this question : “ Teacher , Moses gave us a law that if a man dies , leaving a wife but no children , his brother should marry the widow and have a child who will carry on the brother 's name .

ID:	1347
INPUT:	Miithúzelah hwíídíiską́ą́dóó náhást'éidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan hastą́diindóó ba'aan náhást'éí honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	All the days of Adam were nine hundred and thirty years old , and he died .
GOLD:	Methuselah lived 969 years , and then he died .

ID:	1348
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí łóó' yich'į' haadzíi'go ni' hóółtseijį' Jónah łóó' bídeeskwi .
PRED:	The Lord spoke to the fish , saying , “ Jonah will fall into a dry ground . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord ordered the fish to spit Jonah out onto the beach .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	Háálá ana'al'į́į doogi adziil bee áká síszaazgo áshiinilaa ; shik'i néijah yę́ę shiyaajį' bik'eh dadínídlį́į́' .
PRED:	For thou hast made me strong in battle ; thou hast set my enemies against me .
GOLD:	You have armed me with strength for the battle ; you have subdued my enemies under my feet .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yił ahada'deest'ą́ągo ádííniid , Diyin dabidi'níinii t'áadoo dadíínóhsiní , áádóó t'áadoo bich'į' yaa áńdaoht'įįhí , áádóó t'áadoo bich'į' nidahohłáhí , índa t'áadoo bich'į' nááda'iyołniihí .
PRED:	The Lord made a covenant with the children of Israel , saying , “ Do not worship other gods , and do not turn back to other gods , and offer sacrifices to them .
GOLD:	For the Lord had made a covenant with the descendants of Jacob and commanded them : “ Do not worship any other gods or bow before them or serve them or offer sacrifices to them .

ID:	1351
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehgi ya'díníilzhin íí'á nahalingo doo yádaałti'ii ałtso nidei<unk> go k'éhézdon adaaz'áa łeh . Doo nidaakaígíí biniinaa ts'ídá nidaajaahgo t'éiyá . Doo yá'át'éehii yaa nidadookahgo doo yídaneel'ą́ą da índa yá'át'éehii yaa nidadookahgo ałdó' doo yídaneel'ą́ą da ; éí bąą t'áadoo béédaałdzidí .
PRED:	They are like a garden in the field , and all the words of their mouth are like a field ; they are not able to go down , but they are able to come down to evil , and do not be afraid .
GOLD:	Their gods are likehelpless scarecrows in a cucumber field ! They can not speak , and they need to be carried because they can not walk.Do not be afraid of such gods , for they can neither harm you nor do you any good . ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	Sáleiyai bits'ą́ą́dóó Káleiyai , Éímak bits'ą́ą́dóó Ííber ,
PRED:	And from him : of him : of him : of him : of him : of him :
GOLD:	Kallai was leader of the family of Sallu.Eber was leader of the family of Amok .

ID:	1353
INPUT:	Diné doo ádaa áhályáanii éí kin haal'áago atílyaadóó doo binaa ahééda'astł'in da nít'é'ígíí nahalin .
PRED:	A fool is like a fool , and a strong city is destroyed .
GOLD:	A person without self-controlis like a city with broken-down walls .

ID:	1354
INPUT:	Éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Ízrel dine'é bitahgi aláahgo naat'áanii doo hólǫ́ǫ da nít'ée'go Líívai diné léi' Dził Íífreiyimdę́ę́' níyáago Júdah kéyah nahós'a'gi Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó asdzání nilį́įgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ jíł'íní ájiilaa .
PRED:	In those days there was no king in Israel , a man of Levi came out of the hill country of Ephraim , and made him a wife from Bethlehem in Bethlehem .
GOLD:	Now in those days Israel had no king . There was a man from the tribe of Levi living in a remote area of the hill country of Ephraim . One day he brought home a woman from Bethlehem in Judah to be his concubine .

ID:	1355
INPUT:	Áko tó abid bii' tó ásdįįdgo ashkii ch'il nitsaa léi' biyaagi nizhníłtį́ .
PRED:	And he took the fish , and set it under the top of the mouth , and set it under the tree .
GOLD:	When the water was gone , she put the boy in the shade of a bush .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus áháłní , Nihí nihich'į'go yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bee na'nitinii doo bééhózin da yę́ę éí nihił béédahózin dooleełgo nihaa deet'ą́ , nidi bí , éí doo baa deet'ą́ą da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ The Kingdom of heaven has been given to you , but it is not given to you . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	1357
INPUT:	Háálá díí dine'é bijéí daneelk'ah , áádóó jéé'ádahodeeskał , índa daniilch'iil ; doodago éí dabináá' yee da'iidoołtsééł , áádóó dabijaa' yee dadi'doots'į́į́ł , índa bijéí yee ak'idadi'dootį́į́ł , áko shich'į' ninádookahgo náádabidideeshłááł .
PRED:	For the heart of this people have ears , and they have ears , and they have ears , and they have ears , and they have ears , and they have ears , and they will hear , and I will heal them .
GOLD:	For the hearts of these people are hardened , and their ears can not hear , and they have closed their eyes — so their eyes can not see , and their ears can not hear , and their hearts can not understand , and they can not turn to meand let me heal them . '

ID:	1358
INPUT:	Áádóó anáá'niiltsąądgo ashkii ła' náánéíshchį́ ; éí Shíílah bee jíízhi' ; Júdah éí Kíízib hoolyéegi nijigháago há ashchį́ .
PRED:	And she conceived and gave birth to a son , and she named him another son ; and she bore him a son in Judah .
GOLD:	And when she gave birth to a third son , she named him Shelah . At the time of Shelah 's birth , they were living at Kezib .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	Áko Féro bijéí yítł'isgo t'áadoo Ízrel dine'é yéé'níłnii' da . Bóhólníihii t'áá Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígi áhoodzaa .
PRED:	Pharaoh 's heart was stubborn , and he did not let the Israelites go . The Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Because his heart was hard , Pharaoh refused to let the people leave , just as the Lord had predicted through Moses .

ID:	1360
INPUT:	Ha'át'íhígíida bida'alyaii doo ádá ádíílíił da ; ha'át'íhígíida yádiłhił biyi'di dahólóonii , doodaii' nahasdzáán bikáa'gi dahólóonii , doodaii' táyi' naaldeehii doo béé'díídlíił da ,
PRED:	You shall not make anything that is in heaven or on earth . You shall not let any living thing that is in heaven or on earth .
GOLD:	“ You must not make for yourself an idol of any kind or an image of anything in the heavens or on the earth or in the sea .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	Asdzání éí diné bi'éé' doo bee hazhdít'ée da doo , doodaii' diné nidi asdzání bi'éé' doo bii' dziztį́į da doo , háálá ákódajit'ínígíí t'áá ádzíłtso éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' t'óó badají'ih .
PRED:	And the woman shall not wash his clothes , neither shall he wash his clothes , for they are unclean unto the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ A woman must not put on men 's clothing , and a man must not wear women 's clothing . Anyone who does this is detestable in the sight of the Lord your God .

ID:	1362
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéíkab éí Bíyer-shííbadóó dashdiináago Ízrel biye'ké dabizhé'é Jéíkab áádóó bada'áłchíní índa bida'asdzą́ą́ yił Féro tsinaabąąs <unk> doonééł biniyé hach'į' áyiilaaígíí bee jiníná .
PRED:	Then Jacob went out from Beersheba to meet his sons , Jacob , his sons , and his wives , and his wives .
GOLD:	So Jacob left Beersheba , and his sons took him to Egypt . They carried him and their little ones and their wives in the wagons Pharaoh had provided for them .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	Jesus ánáábidoo'niid , Da' k'adísh da'iinohdlą́ ?
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Have you faith ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked , “ Do you finally believe ?

ID:	1364
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Da'ootsxeełgo tsin <unk> <unk> łígíí Jerúsalem biná'ástł'inígíí bíilk'idgo ádaohłééh . Díí kin haal'áhígíí atídoolníiłii át'é ; ade áhólzinii t'éiyá ákwii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For thus saith the Lord of hosts , Make a city , and cast it up , and cast it up against it : this city is a city , and there is none there .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ Cut down the trees for battering rams.Build siege ramps against the walls of Jerusalem.This is the city to be punished , for she is wicked through and through .

ID:	1365
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaago Héízor kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Jéíbin wolyéii díí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go éí Méídan kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Jóbab wolyéii áádóó Shímran kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii índa Ákshaf kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' i'dziis'a' ,
PRED:	And it came to pass , when they were filled with the king of Hamath , that they had heard this , that he sent messengers to the king of Syria , saying ,
GOLD:	When King Jabin of Hazor heard what had happened , he sent messages to the following kings : King Jobab of Madon ; the king of Shimron ; the king of Acshaph ;

ID:	1366
INPUT:	Náádéésht'į́į́' nít'éé' , shoo , chérabim bíighahgóó bąąs dį́į́' naazį́ ; bąąs t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo chérabim yíighahgóó si'ą́ ; bąąs éí tsé béril wolyéii nahalingo bik'i nidazdiłtooł .
PRED:	I looked , and , and behold , there were four cherubim standing by the cherubim ; and they were like a stone .
GOLD:	I looked , and each of the four cherubim had a wheel beside him , and the wheels sparkled like beryl .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	Kót'éego hadzoodzíi'go dashdiiyá , áko hadeezhí Mary , hágo bizhdííniidgo t'áá nahont'inee ábijiní , Na'nitiní níyá , áko hágo niłní .
PRED:	And when he had said this , she called Mary , and called her sister Mary , and said unto him , Master , come , and called him .
GOLD:	Then she returned to Mary . She called Mary aside from the mourners and told her , “ The Teacher is here and wants to see you . ”

ID:	1368
INPUT:	Jó , danizhé'é yę́ę bił áłah ánándeeshdlííł , áádóó hózhǫ́ǫgo haz'ą́ągo yóó'ándi'doolnííł ; díí kéyah nahós'a'gi índa yikáá' kéédahat'ínígíí bik'ijį' doo yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é kódeeshłíłígíí éí doo yiidííłtséeł da . Kót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii hane' baa nídadziz'ą́ .
PRED:	For I will gather you together with your fathers , and you will be buried in peace ; you will see all the evil that I will do to you in this place , and to all the inhabitants of this place . So they gave it to the king .
GOLD:	So I will not send the promised disaster until after you have died and been buried in peace . You yourself will not see the disaster I am going to bring on this city and its people . ' ” So they took her message back to the king .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	Áko Éíbram éí béégashii áádóó béésh łigaii índa óola t'áá íiyisí bee ajit'į́ .
PRED:	Abram was very rich . He was very rich .
GOLD:	( Abram was very rich in livestock , silver , and gold . )

ID:	1370
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán daalkanii t'áadoo yishání , atsį' t'áadoo yishání áádóó wáin t'áadoo yishdlání índa t'áadoo adíshtłahí táadi damóo azlį́į́' .
PRED:	Do n't eat meat or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine .
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	1371
INPUT:	áádóó Kórah áádóó Géítam índa Ámalek daolyé . Díí t'áá ałtso naat'áanii danilį́įgo Íídam kéyahdi Élifaz ba'áłchíní náás da'ahideeshchíinii danilį́ ; díí t'áá ałtso Éídah binálíké ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Korah , Korah , and Amalekites . All these are the families of the princes of Esau . These are the sons of Esau .
GOLD:	Korah , Gatam , and Amalek . These are the clan leaders in the land of Edom who descended from Eliphaz . All these were descendants of Esau 's wife Adah .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	Díí ákót'éego ałk'idą́ą́' bee haz'áanii ayóó át'éii yee inaashnishgo , jó'áko Níłch'i Diyinii t'ah aláhídi ayóó át'éii yee inaalnish .
PRED:	This is what I have done in the law , so that I could do more than the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Should n't we expect far greater glory under the new way , now that the Holy Spirit is giving life ?

ID:	1373
INPUT:	T'áá ákónéehee nihił dahoneeni índa nihił dahózhǫ́ , háálá díí nitsilí daaztsą́ą́ nít'éé' hinááh násdlį́į́' ; yóó'ííyáá nít'éé' bénáhoosdzin .
PRED:	In the same way we were glad and rejoice , because this is our brother 's dead , and when he was dead , he was dead .
GOLD:	We had to celebrate this happy day . For your brother was dead and has come back to life ! He was lost , but now he is found ! ' ”

ID:	1374
INPUT:	índa bik'isóó danilínígíí ła' , Shebanáíyah , Hodáíjah , Kiiláíta , Piiláíyah , Héínan ,
PRED:	and one of his brethren , Hananiah , Hananiah , Hananiah ,
GOLD:	and their fellow Levites : Shebaniah , Hodiah , Kelita , Pelaiah , Hanan ,

ID:	1375
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jeremáíyah áháłní , Zedekáíyah kóbididoohniił ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah said to him , “ Tell Zedekiah ,
GOLD:	Jeremiah replied , “ Go back to King Zedekiah and tell him ,

ID:	1376
INPUT:	Shidine'é binahjį' yáá'iilt'e' yaa naaskai , áádóó ashkii éí ałjiłnii yił ałghááda'astį́ , índa wáin deidoodlį́į́ł biniyé at'ééd baa nidahaaz'nii' .
PRED:	They have cast salvation out for my people , and they have given the virgin to drink wine and drink wine .
GOLD:	They threw dice to decide which of my peoplewould be their slaves.They traded boys to obtain prostitutesand sold girls for enough wine to get drunk .

ID:	1377
INPUT:	Tsin yíl'áhígíí yaa yáłti'ii éí gad naazkaadii Lébanan kéyahgi deíl'áhígíí níléí hísap kódaníshéhígo ał'ąą ádaat'éii tsé yítł'in biták'izdę́ę́' hadaneesánígíí yaa yáłti'go hahaasdzíí' ; nidaaldlooshii ałdó' , nidaat'a'ii , nidaa'na'ii índa łóó' yaa yáłti'go hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	He spoke to the cedar tree of Lebanon , the cedar trees of Lebanon , and he spoke to them . He said , “ The wild animals , the birds , the birds , the birds , and the fish . ”
GOLD:	He could speak with authority about all kinds of plants , from the great cedar of Lebanon to the tiny hyssop that grows from cracks in a wall . He could also speak about animals , birds , small creatures , and fish .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	Diné hwiih silį́į'ii éí tsés'ná bitł'izh doo yinádízįįh da , nidi diné dichin nilíinii éí dadích'íi'ii t'áá ałtso bił łikan .
PRED:	The mouth of a man is full of honey , but all the hungry are sweet .
GOLD:	A person who is full refuses honey , but even bitter food tastes sweet to the hungry .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	Yínííł nishłínígíí doo nídoodzihígi ádzaa da ; shiyi'di shijéí doo bitah hóóts'íid da .
PRED:	My heart is troubled , and my heart is sick .
GOLD:	My grief is beyond healing ; my heart is broken .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	Áádóó Íísa hajííghal , nít'éé' asdzání índa áłchíní yiyiiłtsą́ągo ání , Eiishą' bił yíkahígíí háí ádaat'į́ ? Áko ájíní , Ná naal'a'í ba'áłchíní éí Diyin God jooba'ii beinínilígíí ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	And Esau lifted up his eyes , and saw the women and children , and said , Who are these ? And he said , Thy servant is the man of God .
GOLD:	Then Esau looked at the women and children and asked , “ Who are these people with you ? ” “ These are the children God has graciously given to me , your servant , ” Jacob replied .

ID:	1381
INPUT:	Shik'isóó danilíinii nízhi' bee bił dahodeeshnih ; áłah nádleehii bitahgi naa hashniih doo :
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , I will praise you in the assembly .
GOLD:	I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people .

ID:	1382
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Gálilii biyi' , Kéína hoolyéedi , tó wáin ájiilaa yę́ęgi náádzídzá . Nít'éé' Kapérniyamgi naat'áanii ła' biye' daatsaah lá .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he was in Galilee , that he came to him in Galilee . And the king 's son was sick .
GOLD:	As he traveled through Galilee , he came to Cana , where he had turned the water into wine . There was a government official in nearby Capernaum whose son was very sick .

ID:	1383
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' jooba' áádóó a'iinííł , índa ba'áłchíní bik'idahojidlí .
PRED:	Blessed is the kindness and needy , and the children of his children always .
GOLD:	The godly always give generous loans to others , and their children are a blessing .

ID:	1384
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' bikéyahgi dá'ák'eh łahjį' Bóhólníihii yá ats'éidee'aahgo ákwii álástsii' haa néelt'e'go anéíjihígíí bik'ehgo bą́ą́h aníłį́į doo ; tsits'aa' hómer wolyéii bii' tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í bináá' hadeezbingo éí béésh łigaii shékel wolyéii ashdladiin bą́ą́h aníłį́į doo .
PRED:	And if a man shall take from the land of a man 's field , he shall give it to the Lord , according to the number of the grain , a ram shall be twenty shekels of silver .
GOLD:	“ If someone dedicates to the Lord a piece of his family property , its value will be assessed according to the amount of seed required to plant it — fifty shekels of silver for a field planted with five bushels of barley seed .

ID:	1385
INPUT:	Bidiyin dabidi'níinii t'ááká bich'į' yaa áńdaaht'įįh lágo , doodaii' doo bich'į' nidahohłáa da doo , doodaii' áyoolíiłii t'áadoo bééda'ohdle'í , nidi bi'eda'alyaii t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́' naa'adahidoołtł'iłgo ahiih nídahidoohtih .
PRED:	You shall not bow down to other gods , neither shall you worship their gods , nor shall they worship them ; but all their idols shall destroy them with fire .
GOLD:	You must not worship the gods of these nations or serve them in any way or imitate their evil practices . Instead , you must utterly destroy them and smash their sacred pillars .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	Áádóó kót'ée doo : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God baa deisoonah ládą́ą́' , áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii bik'ehgo dah dahidoohkaigo áádóó bá nidaał'a'go índa bich'į' nidahohłáago , díí jį́ bee nihik'ijį' hadeesdzihgo , T'áá aaníí ádadoohdįįł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , if thou hast forgotten the Lord thy God , and walk in the ways of other gods , and serve other gods , and serve him , and serve him , and serve him today .
GOLD:	“ But I assure you of this : If you ever forget the Lord your God and follow other gods , worshiping and bowing down to them , you will certainly be destroyed .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ánááshidoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	The Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1388
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binaanish ayóó ádaat'é ; bił dahoneełninii t'áá ałtso hadeisíidgo nideiłkaah .
PRED:	The work of the Lord is great ; all those who hate him .
GOLD:	How amazing are the deeds of the Lord ! All who delight in him should ponder them .

ID:	1389
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God áháłní , Nílááh , ch'ínínáahgo Bóhólníihii binááł dził bikáá'dóó dah yiizįįh . Áko shoo , Bóhólníihii kǫ́ǫ́ ch'íníyá , nít'éé' ayóó át'éego bidziilgo deeyolgo daadził nidahastǫ' índa Bóhólníihii binááł tsé dadíízéí , nidi Bóhólníihii éí níyol doo yee honíle' da , áádóó ííyoldóó bik'ijį' ni' nahaasnáá' , nidi Bóhólníihii ni' hideesná'ígíí doo yee honíle' da ,
PRED:	And God said unto him , Go up , and stand on the mountain of the Lord . And behold , the Lord came out , and the mountain was broken , and the stone of the Lord was broken , and the wind of the Lord came upon thee , but the wind of the wind hath not spoken against thee .
GOLD:	“ Go out and stand before me on the mountain , ” the Lord told him . And as Elijah stood there , the Lord passed by , and a mighty windstorm hit the mountain . It was such a terrible blast that the rocks were torn loose , but the Lord was not in the wind . After the wind there was an earthquake , but the Lord was not in the earthquake .

ID:	1390
INPUT:	jó , Bóhólníihii éí dahootsogóó danihilį́į́' yik'ijį' dah didoolnihgo łį́į́' áádóó télii áádóó ghą́ą́'ask'idii áádóó béégashii índa dibéda t'óó ayóó át'éego iiłtį́į́h łóód báhádzidii bąąh dahodooleeł .
PRED:	For the Lord will send his hand upon you , and upon horses , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , and goats .
GOLD:	the hand of the Lord will strike all your livestock — your horses , donkeys , camels , cattle , sheep , and goats — with a deadly plague .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	Áko Sákath hoolyéédóó dah náázhdii'náago Íítam hoolyéedi honoojí bibąąhgi nizhníná .
PRED:	And they set out from thence , and set up his way on the rock of the rock of the rock .
GOLD:	The Israelites left Succoth and camped at Etham on the edge of the wilderness .

ID:	1392
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	and one male goat for a sin offering , and their grain offering , and their drink offering , and their drink offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	1393
INPUT:	Áko Mó'ab bik'ijį' kǫ' ádeeshłíiłgo Kíriyathgi bidziilgo bił nahaz'áanii ałtso adidook'ą́ą́ł áádóó hahóó'áago áádóó hahodidoodlałgo índa deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí ayóó íits'a'go áníigo Mó'ab dine'é nabízdįįd doo .
PRED:	And I will send fire upon Moab , and it shall be burned with fire , and with fire , and with a loud voice , and the trumpet shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on the land of Moab , and all the fortresses in Kerioth will be destroyed.The people will fall in the noise of battle , as the warriors shout and the ram 's horn sounds .

ID:	1394
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago ghą́ą́'ask'idii ałtso da'oodlą́ą'go óola yoostsah índa óola látsíní naakigo da'ílíinii baazhnínil .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when they had drink the camels , that they brought gold , and gold , and two gold .
GOLD:	Then at last , when the camels had finished drinking , he took out a gold ring for her nose and two large gold bracelets for her wrists .

ID:	1395
INPUT:	Yóó'adóó'ááł lágo , áádóó hódzą́ áá nidoosįįł ; ayóó'ííní'níi doo , índa naa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	Do n't leave wisdom , and you will love you . You will love you , and you will be wise .
GOLD:	Do n't turn your back on wisdom , for she will protect you.Love her , and she will guard you .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	didlidgo nááhániihii biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí néidii'ą́ągo níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'gi niiní'ą́ągo bikáa'gi didlidgo nááhániihii índa ak'áán nááhániihii nááyiisnii' ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniidígíí yi'iilaa .
PRED:	And he took the altar of burnt offering , and offered it at the entrance of the tent of meeting , at the entrance of the tent of meeting , and burnt offering , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	and he placed the altar of burnt offering near the Tabernacle entrance . On it he offered a burnt offering and a grain offering , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	1397
INPUT:	Díí éí Rúben dine'é bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ . Áko éí dízdiindóó ba'aan tádiindi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiingo ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	These are the families of the sons of Reuben according to their families : and the number of them were two hundred and thirty .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	Áádóó tsinaa'eeł biyi'dę́ę́' hajííyáago kin haal'áádóó diné léi' níłch'i bida'iiníziinii biyi' hólǫ́ǫgo hadááh níyá , áko díí diné t'áá shiidą́ą'dii bi'éé' t'áágéedgo naagháá lá , hooghan doo yii' kééhat'į́į da lá , nidi tsé'áán góne' dajishcháa'go ákǫ́ǫ́ t'éí kééhat'į́į́ lá .
PRED:	And when he came out of the boat , a man of the demons came out to meet him , and there was no man in his own house , but he dwelt in the pit .
GOLD:	As Jesus was climbing out of the boat , a man who was possessed by demons came out to meet him . For a long time he had been homeless and naked , living in the tombs outside the town .

ID:	1399
INPUT:	Mó'ab dine'é ándahałt'i' áádóó Áman dine'é da'ódziih ; shidine'é yá nidahałt'i'go t'áá bí ayóó át'éego ádaa daha'niihgo dahakéyah yik'ijį' ádá nidahalchįįhgo diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	I have heard of Moab and Ammon ; I have heard the words of the children of Ammon against their own land .
GOLD:	“ I have heard the taunts of the Moabitesand the insults of the Ammonites , mocking my peopleand invading their borders .

ID:	1400
INPUT:	áádóó ak'ah hak'i yadeidiyííziłgo bee dahodíí<unk> go bizhé'é ak'ah bik'i yeiniziidígi át'éego ádíílííł . Áko shá nidaal'a'go náá'iiłniihii danilį́į doo ; jó , dazhdiyingo ádaho'diilyaaígíí hool'áágóó nááda'iiłniihii dajílį́įgo náás da'ahijílchíih doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt anoint them with oil , and anointed them as the oil of thy father : and they shall serve me , for they shall be priests for ever .
GOLD:	Anoint them as you did their father , so they may also serve me as priests . With their anointing , Aaron 's descendants are set apart for the priesthood forever , from generation to generation . ”

ID:	1401
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ądi Ízrel daadzí'ígíí áádóó Jéíkab ba'áłchíní yisdáhineezhchą́'ígíí dine'é atídabiilaa yę́ę doo yaa nááda'íídóodliił da , nidi Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel biDiyin nilíinii t'áá aaníígóó yaa dadzólíi doo .
PRED:	And the remnant of Israel and the children of Jacob shall not be blessed in that day , but they shall trust in the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	In that day the remnant left in Israel , the survivors in the house of Jacob , will no longer depend on allieswho seek to destroy them.But they will faithfully trust the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	1402
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii , Aizéíyah kóníigo saad yee haadzíi'ii bohodoolnííł biniyé ákódzaa ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , baa nidahwiilne'ígíishą' háí dayoosdląąd ? Háishą' Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii bich'į' yit'íní ályaa ?
PRED:	This is what Isaiah the prophet said : “ Lord , who has believed in us ? Who has appeared to us ? ”
GOLD:	This is exactly what Isaiah the prophet had predicted : “ Lord , who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ? ”

ID:	1403
INPUT:	Dah dohkááh , dah dohkááh , bits'ą́ąjigo dah dohkááh ; chin bąąh hólóonii bidadoołchííd ; biníí'dę́ę́' ch'ínóhkááh ; Bóhólníihii bileets'aa' deínóhjáahii , chin nihąąh ádaadin áda'dołnééh .
PRED:	Go out from there , and go out of the clean ; take it out of the midst of the Lord ; ye shall not be clean .
GOLD:	Get out ! Get out and leave your captivity , where everything you touch is unclean.Get out of there and purify yourselves , you who carry home the sacred objects of the Lord .

ID:	1404
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , shich'į' dah díníit'aahgo shíísíníłts'ą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díghaałgo díní'į́į́' áádóó Senákerib saad yee hahaasdzíi'ii diits'į́į́h ; éí yiyííł'aadgo Diyin God hináanii yá nahast'i' .
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , and hear , and see , and see , and hear the words of Assyria , and hear the words of the living God .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	1405
INPUT:	Dan , Náftalai , Géed índa Ásher daolyé .
PRED:	Dan , Gad , Asher , Asher , Asher , and Asher .
GOLD:	Dan , Naphtali , Gad , and Asher .

ID:	1406
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ááníiłii áádįįł , áádóó diné doo ła' bijéí biyi'di bi'diił'áa da , índa Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii éí nahjį' kódabi'dilne' áádóó t'áá ákogi ááníiłii doo yá'át'éehii bik'i hwiidooleełígíí bits'ąą nahjį' kódabi'dilne'ígíí doo ła'da yaa nitsékees da .
PRED:	The righteous is cut off , and there is no one in his heart , and the way of God is cut off from the wicked .
GOLD:	Good people pass away ; the godly often die before their time.But no one seems to care or wonder why.No one seems to understandthat God is protecting them from the evil to come .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	Áádóó deenásts'aa' ła'ígíí diyingo hats'ąą hasti'go há nááhániihii nínéidiilóóz ; éí bitsiit'áagi Éran áádóó biye'ké dah dadees'nii' .
PRED:	And he took the other ram from the ram , and put them on the head of Aaron and his sons .
GOLD:	Then Moses presented the other ram , which was the ram of ordination . Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the ram 's head ,

ID:	1408
INPUT:	David éí Ámalek dine'é yik'eh deesdlį́į́'
PRED:	David and King of Israel
GOLD:	David Destroys the Amalekites

ID:	1409
INPUT:	Neeznáá náhásdzohgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'idoolyáhígíí éí ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' tseebíí yikááł bíighah doo ; bee í'neel'ąąhí ómer wolyéii bii' álástsii' hadeezbingo k'idoolyáago <unk> wolyéii neeznáá hadeezbingo bíighah nídoodleeł .
PRED:	On the tenth day of the vine , on the eighth day of the vine , it shall be an ephah of an ephah of an ephah of an ephah of fine flour .
GOLD:	Ten acres of vineyard will not produce even six gallons of wine.Ten baskets of seed will yield only one basket of grain . ”

ID:	1410
INPUT:	T'óó da'ahódziih , dabiyooch'ííd , t'óó nida'ałtseed , da'ni'įįh áádóó ahaa da'dilyéego t'óó tsé'édin áhooniił ; t'áá ałkéé' nida'ahiltseedgo bidił bits'ádaazlį́įgo ádaalne' .
PRED:	They speak lies , and they are lying , and there is no fear ; they are guilty of blood .
GOLD:	You make vows and break them ; you kill and steal and commit adultery.There is violence everywhere — one murder after another .

ID:	1411
INPUT:	Háálá Christ Jesus bee Níłch'i Diyinii bits'ą́ą́dóó iiná bibee haz'áanii éí bąąhági át'éii áádóó anoonééł bibee haz'áanii bits'ą́ąjį' <unk> dííchid .
PRED:	For the Spirit of Jesus Christ came from the law to sin and death .
GOLD:	And because you belong to him , the power of the life-giving Spirit has freed you from the power of sin that leads to death .

ID:	1412
INPUT:	Áko hamá áháłní , Shiyáázh , hóyée'go ha'doodzihígíí shígo shik'ijį' dooleeł ; ándííniidígíí bik'eh honíł'įįhgo níláhdę́ę́' shá náníjááh .
PRED:	His mother said to him , “ My son , the curse will come against me , and bring me here in the morning . ”
GOLD:	But his mother replied , “ Then let the curse fall on me , my son ! Just do what I tell you . Go out and get the goats for me ! ”

ID:	1413
INPUT:	Nihił chodahoo'ínígíí bee doo nihąąh nidahwiikaad da , háálá Níłch'i Diyinii nihaa deet'ánígíí Diyin God bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' nihijéí yii' haidééłbįįd .
PRED:	We do not drive out your hope , because the Spirit of God filled you with the hearts of the Spirit .
GOLD:	And this hope will not lead to disappointment . For we know how dearly God loves us , because he has given us the Holy Spirit to fill our hearts with his love .

ID:	1414
INPUT:	Jew dine'é ánáádahodoo'niid , Yá'át'éehii baa nanináhígíí biniinaa doo nił nidazniilne' da , nidi Diyin God doo díínísingóó baa yáníłti'ígíí biniinaa , háálá t'áá diné nílį́įgo Diyin God í'díl'į́ .
PRED:	The Jews said to him , “ We do n't tell you what is good , but you do not speak to God because you are a man . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ We 're stoning you not for any good work , but for blasphemy ! You , a mere man , claim to be God . ”

ID:	1415
INPUT:	Áádóó Béíyalath índa kin hadaas'áago bii' nooh nída'achíihii Sálaman bee hólónígíí áádóó kin hadaas'áago bii' tsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí nideiłbąąsii hólónígíí índa bii' siláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii hólónígíí áádóó Sálaman éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi , T'áá hodeeshbįįł , nízinígi t'áá át'é áádóó Lébanan kéyahgi índa kéyah t'áá át'é bee bóhólníihgo nahaz'ánígóó dahasbį' .
PRED:	And I will build cities , and cities , and chariots , and chariots , and chariots , and horsemen , and in Jerusalem , and in all the kingdoms of Lebanon , and in all the kingdom of Lebanon .
GOLD:	He also rebuilt Baalath and other supply centers and constructed towns where his chariots and horses could be stationed . He built everything he desired in Jerusalem and Lebanon and throughout his entire realm .

ID:	1416
INPUT:	áádóó Kíriyathéíyim áádóó Síbmah índa yíldzisgi yanáalk'idígíí bighą́ą'gi <unk> har kin hadaas'áii
PRED:	and he shall cry upon Ramah , and upon the high places , and upon the hill country .
GOLD:	Kiriathaim , Sibmah , Zereth-shahar on the hill above the valley ,

ID:	1417
INPUT:	Diyin God éí bine' ahiniichéehii áádóó bee danihidziilii nilį́ ; nihide áhoot'įįhgo t'áá áko nihíká iilwo'ii nilį́ .
PRED:	God is our strength and strong ; he is our strength ; he is our help .
GOLD:	God is our refuge and strength , always ready to help in times of trouble .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	nidi dahóyánígíí éí bee hool'iní dah deidiijaa' , índa ak'ah iih nídoodziłígíí tózis yee dah deidiijaa' .
PRED:	But they took the lamp , and put the oil on it , and put the oil on it .
GOLD:	but the other five were wise enough to take along extra oil .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	Nidi nihí Níłch'i Diyinii nihik'i hoole'go bee adziilii nihee dahodooleeł , áko Jerúsalemgi , índa Judíyagi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áádóó Samériyagi , índa nahasdzáán nidanees'ą́ą́góó shá dahołne' dooleeł .
PRED:	But the Holy Spirit will come upon you , and you will be strong , and you will declare to me in Jerusalem , in all Judea , and in all the earth .
GOLD:	But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you . And you will be my witnesses , telling people about me everywhere — in Jerusalem , throughout Judea , in Samaria , and to the ends of the earth . ”

ID:	1420
INPUT:	T'ahdii yáłti'go ła' náánálwodgo ání , Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó kǫ' yá biyi'dę́ę́' hadadíínáadgo dibé áádóó nidaal'a'í ałtso iidííłk'ą́ą'go t'áá shí t'éiyá yisdááshwodgo nił hashne' .
PRED:	While he was still speaking , another came out of the fire of God , and came down out of the fire , and the sheep and all his servants , and I told you only .
GOLD:	While he was still speaking , another messenger arrived with this news : “ The fire of God has fallen from heaven and burned up your sheep and all the shepherds . I am the only one who escaped to tell you . ”

ID:	1421
INPUT:	Doo yee yá'ádaashóonii t'áá ałtso Gílgal kin shijaa'gi hólǫ́ ; ákwii dahojooshłxáá nít'éé' . Doo yá'ádaashónígi ádaat'ínígíí biniinaa shighandóó ch'íhodínéeshkał , áko doo ayóó'ánááhwíínísh'níi da dooleeł ; binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso shik'ijį' danilį́ .
PRED:	I hate all the evil things at Gilgal , and I will drive out my house out of the house of the wicked , and I will not love them ; and all their princes are against me .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ All their wickedness began at Gilgal ; there I began to hate them.I will drive them from my landbecause of their evil actions.I will love them no morebecause all their leaders are rebels .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	Diné ła' bizhé'é bighangi hak'is yizdoołtsołgo ábizhdidooniił , Ni'éénééz nee hólóonii nihinanit'a'í dííleeł ; nidahaazhchǫ'go yáádaa'áhígíí bee níhólníih doo .
PRED:	And he shall take his brother 's house , and say unto him , Thou hast put on thy robe , thy master 's robe ; thou shalt rule over them .
GOLD:	In those days a man will say to his brother , “ Since you have a coat , you be our leader ! Take charge of this heap of ruins ! ”

ID:	1423
INPUT:	Dził Íífreiyimdóó diné ła' éí Máíkah wolyé .
PRED:	There was a man named Micah from the hill country of Ephraim .
GOLD:	There was a man named Micah , who lived in the hill country of Ephraim .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	T'áá áko ajoo'į́ nídzísdlį́į́' áádóó Diyin God baa hojiniihgo Jesus bikéé' dashdiiyá , áko diné t'áá ałtso dahoołtsą́ągo , Diyin God yaa dahaznih .
PRED:	And when he saw them , he went after God , and followed God . And all the people saw him , and they praised God .
GOLD:	Instantly the man could see , and he followed Jesus , praising God . And all who saw it praised God , too .

ID:	1425
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí níísísts'ą́ą'go bee háínídzíí'áádóó saad bee hahínídzí'ígíí diséts'ą́ą́' ; jó , ádíní ,
PRED:	I have heard your words , and you have heard your word , saying ,
GOLD:	“ You have spoken in my hearing , and I have heard your very words .

ID:	1426
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ayóó át'éego deeyolgo biniinaa tó náádadiidááh .
PRED:	And there arose a great wind , and came up with him because of the great wind .
GOLD:	Soon a gale swept down upon them , and the sea grew very rough .

ID:	1427
INPUT:	Áádóó ant'į́įhgo iigéeshjį' ahalzhishgo , t'áá áko bee iigéshí bee aneest'ánígíí jiigéeshgo baa nízhdiidááh .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the harvest , that it may come to pass , and cut it off in the field , and cut it off .
GOLD:	And as soon as the grain is ready , the farmer comes and harvests it with a sickle , for the harvest time has come . ”

ID:	1428
INPUT:	Nidi bee dah ní'diidlohí t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó bee ída'neel'ąąhí t'áá ákogi át'éii hazhó'ó nidasoołnil , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God kéyah nihaidiní'ánígíí bikáá' as'ahgóó anihídayiiłkaah doo .
PRED:	But you have set up righteousness and righteousness , so that you may live in the land which the Lord your God gives you .
GOLD:	Yes , always use honest weights and measures , so that you may enjoy a long life in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	1429
INPUT:	Nidi Jerobówam bisiláo ła' hane'dę́ę'go haa héeshjée'go áyiilaa ; ła' éí Júdah dine'é bidááhdę́ę'go yaa héeshjéé' , áádóó ła' yine'dę́ę'go yaa héeshjéé' .
PRED:	But Jeroboam set up his army in wait for him , and some of the men of Judah stood in wait at the presence of Judah , and they stood in wait .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jeroboam had secretly sent part of his army around behind the men of Judah to ambush them .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá' kǫ' dideeshtłił biniyé níyá , áko t'áá íídą́ą́' diiltłah le' nisin !
PRED:	You have come to the earth , so that it may be darkness .
GOLD:	“ I have come to set the world on fire , and I wish it were already burning !

ID:	1431
INPUT:	Hólan binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił , Dííber binaagóó dahootsooígíí t' áá bił ,
PRED:	with its pasture lands and its pasture lands ,
GOLD:	Holon , Debir ,

ID:	1432
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo ; nihí áádóó nihiye'ké áádóó nihitsi'ké áádóó diné nihá nidaal'a'í áádóó asdzání nihá nidaal'a'í índa Líívai dine'é nihitahgi kééhat'ínígíí éí nihíí' dadooleełii doo bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz daígíí ałdó' bił nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	And ye shall rejoice in the sight of the Lord your God , and thy sons , and thy sons , and thy daughters , and thy servants , and the Levites that dwell among you .
GOLD:	“ You must celebrate there in the presence of the Lord your God with your sons and daughters and all your servants . And remember to include the Levites who live in your towns , for they will receive no allotment of land among you .

ID:	1433
INPUT:	Nihishchíinii áádóó bił hadashoojée'ii áádóó danihik'éí índa danihik'isóó nidi ninádanihididoo'ááł , áko nihí ła' nidanihidoołtsił ;
PRED:	He will give you some of your brothers , your brothers , your brothers , and your brothers , and you will kill you .
GOLD:	Even those closest to you — your parents , brothers , relatives , and friends — will betray you . They will even kill some of you .

ID:	1434
INPUT:	Jerúsalem bił yah ada'iiztiindę́ę́' Ízrel dine'é yik'ijį' nilíinii áádóó bi'ana'í nilíinii yah adahidoonéłígíí éí nihokáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii índa nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso ákóhodooníiłgo ts'ídá doo dayoodlą́ą da nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they did not believe in the gate of Jerusalem , against the princes of Israel , and all the peoples of the earth , and all the earth .
GOLD:	Not a king in all the earth — no one in all the world — would have believed that an enemycould march through the gates of Jerusalem .

ID:	1435
INPUT:	Atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii
PRED:	The Passover
GOLD:	The Second Passover

ID:	1436
INPUT:	Pérgamasgi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii bich'į' hane' ályaa
PRED:	The Church of the church
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Pergamum

ID:	1437
INPUT:	áhodííniid , Nik'ídaha'áahii ałdó' yíkaigo índa , níídéests'įįł . Áko , Hérad nant'á bił haz'ą́ągi haa áháyą́ą doo , níigo yee hooł'a' .
PRED:	He said to him , “ I will hear , and I will listen to you . ” And Herod commanded him to keep him in the kingdom .
GOLD:	“ I will hear your case myself when your accusers arrive , ” the governor told him . Then the governor ordered him kept in the prison at Herod 's headquarters .

ID:	1438
INPUT:	Áádóó Jéíkab éí Diyin God hach'į' haadzí'ígi tsé ajíítsigo bik'ijį' yanáadzi'go nááhániihii yajiiziid , índa ak'ah ałdó' yajiiziid .
PRED:	And Jacob went up against the rock , and poured out the blood upon the rock , and anointed it with oil .
GOLD:	Jacob set up a stone pillar to mark the place where God had spoken to him . Then he poured wine over it as an offering to God and anointed the pillar with olive oil .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , t'áá ałtsojį' shéédaałniih áádóó bee nanihinétą́'ígíí t'áá bee nihił hweeshne'ígi át'éego deínóhtą'ígíí bee nihaa hashniih .
PRED:	Remember me , brothers and sisters , and remember me , as I have told you .
GOLD:	I am so glad that you always keep me in your thoughts , and that you are following the teachings I passed on to you .

ID:	1440
INPUT:	nidi t'áá háiida tó baa níką́ągo yoodlą́'ígíí éí doo dibáá' náádoodleeł da , áko tó haa deeshkáłígíí éí hayi'di tó t'áá bíni'dii háálíinii dooleeł , áko háálį́įgo iiná doo ninít'i'ii biih yílį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	But whoever does not drink the water of water , so that I will send water into the water , and the water will come into eternal life .
GOLD:	But those who drink the water I give will never be thirsty again . It becomes a fresh , bubbling spring within them , giving them eternal life . ”

ID:	1441
INPUT:	Bá'deeshxehii nílíinii , yáníłti'go nidaa' bąąhdę́ę́' tsés'ná bitł'izh nahidilch'ą́ą́ł nahalin . Tsés'ná bitł'izh índa abe' nitsoo' biyaagi hólǫ́ . Ni'éé' éí Dził Lébanandóó gad áhálchinígi áhálchin .
PRED:	My sister , your mouth is like honey ; your mouth is like honey and honey . Your tongue is like the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Your lips are as sweet as nectar , my bride.Honey and milk are under your tongue.Your clothes are scentedlike the cedars of Lebanon .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haadzíí' . Sáanii t'óó ahayóí dahalne'go kódaaní ,
PRED:	The Lord has spoken many women , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord gives the word , and a great army brings the good news .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	Diyin God biYe' Jesus Christ baa hane' yá'át'éehii bee deezt'i'ii .
PRED:	The Good News of God Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	This is the Good News about Jesus the Messiah , the Son of God . It began

ID:	1444
INPUT:	Áko tsintahgi diné neheeskaigo , jó , tsés'ná bitł'izh nidahidilch'ą́ą́ł , nidi diné t'áadoo ła' yił ázadoolchid da , háálá hóyée'go áha'oodzíi'ii bik'ee hoł daayéé' .
PRED:	And the people came to the midst of the forest , behold , there was not a man with honey , for they were afraid of the curse .
GOLD:	They did n't dare touch the honey because they all feared the oath they had taken .

ID:	1445
INPUT:	Áádóó náánáła' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yee hoł nááhoolne' , Yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí asdzání ła' bááh bee niilyółí néidii'ą́ągo ak'áán táadi haaką́ągo yił tayooznii'go niilyółígíí éí nahalin .
PRED:	And he told them another parable , saying , The Kingdom of heaven has taken some bread , and have forgotten it three days .
GOLD:	Jesus also used this illustration : “ The Kingdom of Heaven is like the yeast a woman used in making bread . Even though she put only a little yeast in three measures of flour , it permeated every part of the dough . ”

ID:	1446
INPUT:	Nihikin bii' sohodizin diyingo áádóó ayóó ánoolningo si'ą́ yę́ęgi danihizhé'é yę́ę naa dahaniih nít'éé' yę́ęgi ałtso dadíílid índa t'áadoo le'é nihił dahóshóonii ałtso t'áá ádzaaí daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the evil of your fathers were destroyed , as the glory of our fathers had done , and all the evil things that our fathers had done in the midst of us .
GOLD:	The holy and beautiful Templewhere our ancestors praised youhas been burned down , and all the things of beauty are destroyed .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	Nidi Ízrel nílíinii , Jéíkab nándiiltínígíí , Éíbraham shik'is nilíinii bits'ą́ą́dóó ni'dizhchíinii shinaal'a'í nílį́ .
PRED:	But you , Israel , are my servant , my brother Jacob , my brother 's family .
GOLD:	“ But as for you , Israel my servant , Jacob my chosen one , descended from Abraham my friend ,

ID:	1448
INPUT:	Bee ił nishłíinii t'áá áłahjį' ániidí náádleeł , áádóó she'ałtį́į́' ałdó' áłahjį' ániidí náádleeł .
PRED:	My glory is always continually , and my bow also continually .
GOLD:	New honors are constantly bestowed on me , and my strength is continually renewed . '

ID:	1449
INPUT:	Símiyan dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Ísakar dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	And the border of Simeon shall be from the east side to the west side , and from the west side , one portion .
GOLD:	Next is the territory of Issachar with the same eastern and western boundaries .

ID:	1450
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii díí baa hidit'aah doo : éí béégashii , doodaii' dibé náádayiiłniihígíí bigaan áádóó biyaats'iin índa bibid , éí náá'iiłniihii yaa dayiiníił doo .
PRED:	The priest shall give it to the priest : the ox , the sheep , the head , the head , and the head , and the priest shall give it to him .
GOLD:	“ These are the parts the priests may claim as their share from the cattle , sheep , and goats that the people bring as offerings : the shoulder , the cheeks , and the stomach .

ID:	1451
INPUT:	Awééchí'í doo t'áá díkwíí biidoołkáał da índa diné haastihii są́ bidiyoołhéłígíí t'áá bich'į'dóó doo dadootsaał da , háálá neeznádiin binááhaígíí áłchínígo baa nitsáhákees doo índa bąąhági ááníiłii neeznádiin binááhaigo daaztsą́ągo hóyée'go bá ha'oodzíi'go baa nitsáhákees doo .
PRED:	No one of you will die in a few days , and no one will die , for you will know that you are a hundred years old when you have died .
GOLD:	“ No longer will babies die when only a few days old.No longer will adults die before they have lived a full life.No longer will people be considered old at one hundred ! Only the cursed will die that young !

ID:	1452
INPUT:	Jó , tsásk'eh áłts'ísígo diné yikáá' dínóotéłígíí bi'oh áníłtso áádóó bee antéhí áłts'ózígo ák'ízhdidoodisígíí doo bíighah da .
PRED:	For if thou hast cut off the bed of a man , and hast not found a bed , that he may cast it down .
GOLD:	The bed you have made is too short to lie on.The blankets are too narrow to cover you .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	T'áá nináháhááh bik'eh aláahgo náá'iiłniihii éí hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' doo t'áá bí bidił néidiyoołnih biniyé yah anádáah da nít'éé' , nidi Christ éí doo łą́ądi náá'ádiisnii' da .
PRED:	In the first year the high priest came into the sanctuary to offer his own blood , but Christ did not offer sacrifices .
GOLD:	And he did not enter heaven to offer himself again and again , like the high priest here on earth who enters the Most Holy Place year after year with the blood of an animal .

ID:	1454
INPUT:	Áko díí hoł béédahózin doo : Bóhólníihii haDiyin God nishłį́įgo hatah kééhasht'į́į doo biniyé Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íhoní'eezhígíí ásht'į́ ni ; Bóhólníihii haDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	You shall know that I am the Lord God who brought them out of Egypt to dwell there . I am the Lord God .
GOLD:	and they will know that I am the Lord their God . I am the one who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I could live among them . I am the Lord their God .

ID:	1455
INPUT:	Shíí' dooleełii atídaohłaaígíí danohłíinii , baa nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo áádóó baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫhgo biniinaa índa béégashii yáázh hootsogóó naalgeedígíí índa łį́į́'chogi áníinii nidahonohłingo biniinaa
PRED:	My people , be glad , and rejoice , and rejoice , because you are like a wild ox , as a wild ox in the field .
GOLD:	“ You rejoice and are glad , you who plundered my chosen people.You frisk about like a calf in a meadowand neigh like a stallion .

ID:	1456
INPUT:	Áko éí nínáánááhaigo baa náádziiskaigo ádabizhdííniid , Nihinanit'a'í , nihibéeso bik'é ida'diilnahgo ałtso ádasiildįįdígíí nihinanit'a'í doo bits'ąą nanóol'į́į́' át'ée da ; danihilį́į́' t'áá ałtso nihinanit'a'í bíí' silį́į́' ; nihinanit'a'í yoo'į́įgo t'áadoo yiila'í da ; t'áá hazhó'ó danihits'íís índa danihikédaayah t'éiyá daadziih .
PRED:	And when they came to him , they said unto him , We have not hid the money of our master 's money from us ; we have become our master , and all our cattle , and all the flesh of our lord , but the rest of the land .
GOLD:	But that year ended , and the next year they came again and said , “ We can not hide the truth from you , my lord . Our money is gone , and all our livestock and cattle are yours . We have nothing left to give but our bodies and our land .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	Nihidáda'ak'eh áádóó nihich'il na'atł'o'ii k'éédadilyéehjį' hadoh bił ních'igo áádóó dá'áchaan bik'ijį' áshłaa índa nahachagiitsoh éí nihitsin fig naazkaadii deíl'áá nít'éé' yę́ę índa áliv naazkaadii deíl'áá nít'éé' yę́ę ałtso nihits'ą́ą́' yaa nahodeeskai , ákondi t'áadoo shich'į' nináhisoohkai da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will bring your fields and your vine to your vine , and the locusts , and the locusts , and the locusts , and all your olive trees , and all your olive trees , but you have not come to me , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ I struck your farms and vineyards with blight and mildew.Locusts devoured all your fig and olive trees.But still you would not return to me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	Nidi ał'ąą dine'é bitahdę́ę́' t'áá háiida hodísin áádóó t'áá ákogi ááníłígíí t'éiyá ádeidiit'aah .
PRED:	But whoever lives among the nations shall fear him , and judge righteousness .
GOLD:	In every nation he accepts those who fear him and do what is right .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí Ámalek índa bidine'é ałdó' diltłish bee bik'eh jideesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	So Joshua struck the Amalekites and the Amalekites with the sword .
GOLD:	As a result , Joshua overwhelmed the army of Amalek in battle .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áadoo biniyéhígóó nihił ádaadzaii baa nidahosoołne' índa doo t'áá aaníinii nabídanooł<unk> go daołtsą́ ; éí bąą nihik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold , ye have seen what ye have done , and have seen the truth ; therefore I am against you , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because what you say is false and your visions are a lie , I will stand against you , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	1461
INPUT:	Nidi hahojoobá'ígo bą́ą́h aníłínígíí bi<unk> neel'ą́ągo éí náá'iiłniihii baazhdoogáałgo hą́ą́h ílį́į́ góne' há niididoo'ááł ; éí bízhneel'ánígíí bik'ehgo bee ádee hadzoodzíi'ii nizh'doolééł .
PRED:	But if he is poor , he shall give it to the priest , and he shall give it to the priest according to his oath .
GOLD:	If you desire to make such a vow but can not afford to pay the required amount , take the person to the priest . He will determine the amount for you to pay based on what you can afford .

ID:	1462
INPUT:	Ákóne' James bich'į' yit'íní ízh'diilyaa , náá'ákóne' daal'aadii t'áá ałtso bich'į' yit'íní ínáázh'diilyaa .
PRED:	He appeared to James , saying , “ This is the same way to all the apostles . ”
GOLD:	Then he was seen by James and later by all the apostles .

ID:	1463
INPUT:	Áko nidaal'a'í yah aakai , nít'éé' jó , e'elyaii léi' tsásk'eh yii' sitį́įgo tł'ízí bighaa' bitsii'áál lá .
PRED:	And the servants went in , and behold , there was a man sitting on his head , and put his head on his head .
GOLD:	But when they came to carry David out , they discovered that it was only an idol in the bed with a cushion of goat 's hair at its head .

ID:	1464
INPUT:	Áko Saul díí yaa ákonízin áádóó bił bééhózin : Bóhólníihii éí David yił hólǫ́ , áádóó Saul bitsi' Máíkal éí David ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	And Saul knew that the Lord was with David , and the daughter of Saul loved David .
GOLD:	When Saul realized that the Lord was with David and how much his daughter Michal loved him ,

ID:	1465
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bigaan nish'náájí yee ayóó át'éii í'dólzin ; Bóhólníihii bigaan nish'náájí yee doo nánílyéésgóó áánííł !
PRED:	The right hand of the Lord is great , and the arm of the Lord is strong .
GOLD:	The strong right arm of the Lord is raised in triumph.The strong right arm of the Lord has done glorious things !

ID:	1466
INPUT:	Áko Manówah nídii'na'go t'áá áko be'asdzą́ą́ yikéé' dah diiyáago diné yaa níyáago áyidííniid , Da' niísh díí asdzání bich'į' yáníłti' nít'éé' . Áko ání , Éí lá shí ásht'į́ ni .
PRED:	Then Manoah rose up and followed his wife , and went to the man , and said to the man , “ Are you the woman ? ” And he said , “ I am . ”
GOLD:	Manoah ran back with his wife and asked , “ Are you the man who spoke to my wife the other day ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied , “ I am . ”

ID:	1467
INPUT:	Ákohgo kéyah bikáá' aneest'ą' hááhinoot'į́įł doo , áko hwiih danohłį́įgo hasihgo kéédahoht'į́į doo .
PRED:	And the land shall be full of fruit , and ye shall eat , and dwell in it .
GOLD:	Then the land will yield large crops , and you will eat your fill and live securely in it .

ID:	1468
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego , e'asdzą́ą́ danohłíinii , nihadahastiin bídahwíínółnííh . Ła' Diyin God bizaad doo yik'eh dahół'į́į da nidi be'asdzą́ą́ yá'át'éehgo dahinánígíí binahjį' da'iidoodląął . Azhą́ ts'ídá doo ha'át'íhída dabidohníi da nidi ,
PRED:	In the same way , you wives , listen to their husbands . They do not believe the word of God , but they do not believe it , but you do not believe it .
GOLD:	In the same way , you wives must accept the authority of your husbands . Then , even if some refuse to obey the Good News , your godly lives will speak to them without any words . They will be won over

ID:	1469
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání nidilt'éego ałjiłnii nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii yaa ní'áazhgo yidááhdóó yiizį' .
PRED:	And the two women came and stood before the king .
GOLD:	Some time later two prostitutes came to the king to have an argument settled .

ID:	1470
INPUT:	Índa łeezh yá'át'éehii biyi'jį' ahineezdee'ígíí , éí saad jidiits'a'go bik'izhdi'yiitįįhígíí ájít'į́ ; éí t'áá aaníí honeest'ą' haleehgo , ła' neeznádiindi , ła' hastą́diindi , ła' tádiindi bilááh ninádahadleeh .
PRED:	And he that hath fallen on the ground , is the one who hears the words of the good seed ; yea , there is a hundred and thirty and thirty .
GOLD:	The seed that fell on good soil represents those who truly hear and understand God 's word and produce a harvest of thirty , sixty , or even a hundred times as much as had been planted ! ”

ID:	1471
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Sísera bił ałk'eh hólǫ́ǫgo áyiilaa ; bitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí índa bisiláo t'áá át'é t'óó bił dahóóląądgo Bérak éí diltłish ałtso yee áhásdįįd , áko Sísera bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yikáá'dę́ę́' hadah <unk> táalgo yóó'eelwod lá .
PRED:	And the Lord made Sisera with Sisera , and he struck Sisera with his chariots and all his army with the sword ; and Sisera fled from the chariot .
GOLD:	When Barak attacked , the Lord threw Sisera and all his chariots and warriors into a panic . Sisera leaped down from his chariot and escaped on foot .

ID:	1472
INPUT:	Éí bąą tsin bee ída'dilzoołí dadiits'a' nahalingo Mó'ab dine'é bąą shijéí yicha ; tsin bee ída'dilzoołí dadiits'a' nahalingo <unk> dine'é bąą shijéí yicha , háálá jit'íinii nishójiyoost'e'ii ásdįįd .
PRED:	So Moab 's heart is like the sound of the sound of the sound of the trumpet , because his heart has gone away , because he has taken away .
GOLD:	My heart moans like a flute for Moab and Kir-hareseth , for all their wealth has disappeared .

ID:	1473
INPUT:	Áádóó Néíthan éí aláahgo naat'áanii áyidííniid , Nílááh , baa nitsíníkeesígíí t'áá át'é ánílééh ; jó , Bóhólníihii nił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Then Nathan said to the king , “ Go and do all that you have done . The Lord is with you . ”
GOLD:	Nathan replied to the king , “ Go ahead and do whatever you have in mind , for the Lord is with you . ”

ID:	1474
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph , hahastiin dooleełígíí , diné t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo , t'áá nahonit'inee nahjį' nihodideesh'áałgo doo haa yáhodoosįįł da niizį́į́' .
PRED:	Joseph wanted to give you the right man , but he would not be ashamed to give you the truth .
GOLD:	Joseph , to whom she was engaged , was a righteous man and did not want to disgrace her publicly , so he decided to break the engagement quietly .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	Táá' góne' tooh nílínígíí Hídikel woosye' ; éí Asíriya bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjígo ch'ínílį́ . Dį́į́' góne' tooh nílínígíí Yufréítiiz woosye' .
PRED:	And the third is the name of the river , by the east side of the river ; and the fourth is the name of the river .
GOLD:	The third branch , called the Tigris , flowed east of the land of Asshur . The fourth branch is called the Euphrates .

ID:	1476
INPUT:	Ákódzaago diné bitahgóó Diyin God bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii índa bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóigo ádahooníiłii t'óó ahayóí daal'aadii yaa nidaaskai . Áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi Sálaman bichaha'oh hoolyéhígi aheełt'éego nitsídaakeesgo áłah nádleeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the midst of the people , that there were many wonders and wonders in the midst of the people . And Solomon gathered together in the house of the temple .
GOLD:	The apostles were performing many miraculous signs and wonders among the people . And all the believers were meeting regularly at the Temple in the area known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	Ákohgo náá'iiłniihii há yidínóoł'įįłgo , jó , hatsiits'iin béét'ódígi , doodaii' hatsiit'áád i'íít'ódígi bąąh hadzííyáhígíí dinilchíi'go binídzísgaigo éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii ąąh dahoyooł'aałígi át'éii át'é .
PRED:	And the priest shall look upon him , and behold , he shall look upon his head , or upon his head , or upon his head , as the plague of leprosy .
GOLD:	The priest must examine him , and if he finds swelling around the reddish white sore anywhere on the man 's head and it looks like a skin disease ,

ID:	1478
INPUT:	Dashíísółts'ą́ą́' , t'áá ákogi át'éii nihił béédahózinii , shibee haz'áanii nihijéí bii' dahólóonii , diné ándahodoołt'ihii t'áadoo bik'ee nihił daayé'í índa danihódziihii t'áadoo béédaałdzidí .
PRED:	Listen to me , you righteous , and do n't be afraid of the law , who are in your heart , and do n't be afraid of them .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you who know right from wrong , you who cherish my law in your hearts.Do not be afraid of people 's scorn , nor fear their insults .

ID:	1479
INPUT:	Áádóó nízhdii'na'go ajííyą́ą́' áádóó tó joodlą́ą'go Diyin God biDził Hórebgóó dízdiin jį́ áádóó dízdiin tł'éé' éí ch'iyánígíí bee hadziilgo jiníyá .
PRED:	And he rose up and ate , and ate , and drank forty days and forty nights , and forty nights .
GOLD:	So he got up and ate and drank , and the food gave him enough strength to travel forty days and forty nights to Mount Sinai , the mountain of God .

ID:	1480
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God ayóó ánóodziilgo yisdáshiyíłteehii nílíinii , anaa' náhádleehgo shitsiits'iin shá bik'íná'ííłtihgo shaa áhólyą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	O Lord my God , my strength , and my head hath broken my head in battle .
GOLD:	O Sovereign Lord , the strong one who rescued me , you protected me on the day of battle .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	nikin wódahdi ts'ídá aláahdi haz'ánígíí bitsé siláii táłkáá'dóó dah sínílá ; k'os deílzhoodii éí nitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí ádanile' ; níyol bit'a' bikáá' naniná .
PRED:	And thou shalt sit on the high places of the high places , and covered the clouds with the wings of the sky : and the wind covered it with its wings .
GOLD:	you lay out the rafters of your home in the rain clouds.You make the clouds your chariot ; you ride upon the wings of the wind .

ID:	1482
INPUT:	<unk> . 2 : 1-4
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	's Future Reign

ID:	1483
INPUT:	Biiskání kin haal'áhígíí t'áá áyídídę́ę́' bich'į' jookahgo , k'adę́ę ałné'é'aahgo Peter sodidoolzįįł biniyé kin bighą́ą'jį' haayá .
PRED:	On the next day they went out to the city , and Peter went down on the east side of the temple to pray .
GOLD:	The next day as Cornelius 's messengers were nearing the town , Peter went up on the flat roof to pray . It was about noon ,

ID:	1484
INPUT:	Áko k'os bikáa'gi dah sidáhígíí habee iigéshí nahasdzáán bikáá'góó bee iijíígizhgo nahasdzáán bikáá'góó neest'áanii jiizhgizh .
PRED:	And in the cloud he cut his hand upon the earth , and cut the fruit of the earth .
GOLD:	So the one sitting on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth , and the whole earth was harvested .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	Áko nihijéí bił nidahoozhǫǫh , háálá bízhi' diyinii baa dadzííníidlí .
PRED:	And we rejoice in your heart , because we trust in your name .
GOLD:	In him our hearts rejoice , for we trust in his holy name .

ID:	1486
INPUT:	Ak'eezhdiniihgo nazhnił'inígíí éí biyooch'íidii jílį́ , áádóó t'áá ádzaagóó hojilne'ii éí doo áhojilyą́ą da .
PRED:	A false witness is a false witness , and a false witness does not be wise .
GOLD:	Hiding hatred makes you a liar ; slandering others makes you a fool .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ání , Ha'a'aahjigo tsésǫ' ąą ánílééh . Áko ąą ájiilaa . Nít'éé' Iiláísha ání , Adzíłt'óóh . Áko iijííłt'oh . Áádóó ání , Bóhólníihii bik'aa' bee hodínóonééł ; t'áá éí Síriya dine'é bee baa hodínóonééł ; jó , Éífekdi Síriya dine'é ałtso ásíníłdįįdjį' nidííłtsił .
PRED:	And he said , Take the stars of the east , and opened it . And Elisha said unto him , The arrows of the Lord shall fall upon it . And Elisha said , Behold , the arrows of Aram shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then he commanded , “ Open that eastern window , ” and he opened it . Then he said , “ Shoot ! ” So he shot an arrow . Elisha proclaimed , “ This is the Lord 's arrow , an arrow of victory over Aram , for you will completely conquer the Arameans at Aphek . ”

ID:	1488
INPUT:	Akée'diígíí t'ah doo ákónílééhgóó éí t'áá díkwíí yee' bits'ádííłjołgo yaago ni'é'ígíí biyi'dę́ę'go bídííłtł'óół .
PRED:	You will make the end of the end of the end of the end , and you will put a net on it .
GOLD:	Keep just a bit of the hair and tie it up in your robe .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	Éí t'áá áłahjį' Bóhólníihii bidáahgi hólǫ́ǫ le' ! Áko nahasdzáán bikáá'dóó doo hwéédahaniih da doo biniyé doo hwéédahaniihgóó áyósin doo !
PRED:	Let them always stand before the Lord , and let them know him , that they may not know him from the earth .
GOLD:	May the Lord always remember these sins , and may his name disappear from human memory .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	Éíbram éí kéyah Kéínan hoolyéhígi kééhojit'į́ ; Lat éí honíteelgi kin hadaas'áágóó tázhdínééh , áádóó Sádam kin haal'áagi haníbaal nizhní'ą́ .
PRED:	Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan , and Lot went up to the hill country of Canaan , and he set his tent in the hill country of Sodom .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	Jó nidi , atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániih baa náhwiil<unk> go t'áá nihi'é'él'į' bik'ehgo diné ła' nihá bééhidishchííd , áko daats'í Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í nilíinii nihich'į' béézhdidoochił dashíínóhní ?
PRED:	But I command you the Passover , that no man may go to you according to the commandment of the Jews , that he may deliver you to the king of the Jews ?
GOLD:	But you have a custom of asking me to release one prisoner each year at Passover . Would you like me to release this ‘ King of the Jews ' ? ”

ID:	1492
INPUT:	Áko óola jaatł'óół nízhdiinil áádóó jidííłhį́į'go nijik'ęęhgo béégashii yáázh béé'jiidlaa , áko ádadííniid , Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , díí nihidiyin át'éii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezh !
PRED:	And they took the gold , and put it on it , and made a calf , and said , O house of Israel , I brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then Aaron took the gold , melted it down , and molded it into the shape of a calf . When the people saw it , they exclaimed , “ O Israel , these are the gods who brought you out of the land of Egypt ! ”

ID:	1493
INPUT:	Mózes éí áłah ílínígíí yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Díí ádoolníiłgo Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	Moses said to the assembly , “ This is what the Lord has commanded . ”
GOLD:	Moses announced to them , “ This is what the Lord has commanded us to do ! ”

ID:	1494
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éego hináanii yiniyé ałhínéikah , índa diné doo ádihodiilt'i'ii dadootsaałgo bidił doonahjį' yá nídahwii'aah .
PRED:	The righteous will return to the living , and the blood of death will die .
GOLD:	They gang up against the righteousand condemn the innocent to death .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	Háálá doo t'óó Christ deidoohdląął t'éí biniyé nihik'idahodzisdli' da , nidi Christ bá ti'dahwiidoohnih ałdó' biniyé nihik'idahodzisdli' .
PRED:	For he has blessed you , that you may not believe in Christ , but that you may believe in Christ .
GOLD:	For you have been given not only the privilege of trusting in Christ but also the privilege of suffering for him .

ID:	1496
INPUT:	Azhą́ t'áadoo bee ádąąh dahosist'ání da nidi , ádíshnínígíí t'áá shí shik'éidoot'ih ; a<unk> t'áadoo bee shik'íhót'ahí da nidi , doo ákwii ánísht'éhígíí bee shééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	But I have not been guilty , but my counsel shall not be hid from me ; but my iniquity shall know me .
GOLD:	Though I am innocent , my own mouth would pronounce me guilty.Though I am blameless , it would prove me wicked .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	Asdzání t'áá íiyisí hóyáanii éí hahastiin bił jílį́įgo ájósin , nidi asdzání baa yáhásinii áyoolíłígíí éí bahastiin bits'in biyi'di hodiłdzid nahalingo áyósin .
PRED:	The wise woman makes her husband a husband , but the one who makes her afraid like a woman .
GOLD:	A worthy wife is a crown for her husband , but a disgraceful woman is like cancer in his bones .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	Da' shizhé'é yę́ę ał'ąą dine'é bidiyin danilíinii ádeisdįįdígíí , éí Gózan áádóó Héíran índa Ríízef kin hadaas'áhígíí áádóó Ííden dine'é éí <unk> léísergi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'ée'ii bidiyin danilíiniísh yisdádahwiiznil ?
PRED:	Have they saved the gods of my father , who had destroyed the gods of the nations ? Are they the gods of the nations who lived there ?
GOLD:	Have the gods of other nations rescued them — such nations as Gozan , Haran , Rezeph , and the people of Eden who were in Tel-assar ? My predecessors destroyed them all !

ID:	1499
INPUT:	Biiskání t'ah ni' halzhingo nízhdii'na'go doo naagháhígóó ajííyá , ákwe'é sozdoolzin .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that he rose up , and went up to a place where he prayed .
GOLD:	Before daybreak the next morning , Jesus got up and went out to an isolated place to pray .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í nootínígo t'áá da'níł'ąą Diyin God nihaa jooba'go nihaidiní'áanii nizhónígo bá chodaoł'į́įgo bee ahíłká anídaahjah le' .
PRED:	Let every one of you be kind to the grace of God , which he has given you .
GOLD:	God has given each of you a gift from his great variety of spiritual gifts . Use them well to serve one another .

ID:	1501
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá íiyisí nídzooskango índa haghan góne' hoł yah íí'áázh , áko bá áda'jíísįįd índa díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaaígíí bá ájiilaago yiyííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	But he cried out to him , and brought him into his house , and he prepared a feast for them , and ate unleavened bread .
GOLD:	But Lot insisted , so at last they went home with him . Lot prepared a feast for them , complete with fresh bread made without yeast , and they ate .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	Asdzání naal'a'í nishłíinii doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįdígíí shá yóó'adí'aah , baa nánooshkąąh . Jó , Bóhólníihii éí shinanit'a'í ba'áłchíní ahii' háá'ahiyoołchíiłii t'áádóo nídí nidant'áa doogo íidoolííł , háálá bóhonishníihii éí Bóhólníihii bá ana'ał'į́ . Áko díí bee bééhózin : doo yá'áshóonii doo ła' nii' hólǫ́ǫ́góó níiníłką́ .
PRED:	Please forgive my servant 's sin , and I pray thee , for the Lord will give thee over the house of my master 's house , because he knows that there is no evil .
GOLD:	Please forgive me if I have offended you in any way . The Lord will surely reward you with a lasting dynasty , for you are fighting the Lord 's battles . And you have not done wrong throughout your entire life .

ID:	1503
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ałtsoní kót'éego ádooldįįłgo , k'ad haash yit'éego da'íínółdįįh ? Jó , diyin k'ehgo dahinohnáa doo , áádóó Diyin God dadíínóhsin .
PRED:	And all things shall be destroyed , and now , why shall ye die ? For ye shall live , and fear God .
GOLD:	Since everything around us is going to be destroyed like this , what holy and godly lives you should live ,

ID:	1504
INPUT:	Éí aníchį́į́dę́ę́' ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso t'áá bí danízinígi ádaat'į́į doogo ya'di'ní'ą́ ,
PRED:	From the beginning to the end of all the nations , and gave them food for their own food .
GOLD:	In the past he permitted all the nations to go their own ways ,

ID:	1505
INPUT:	Ákohgo asdzání bizhé'é éí hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii áyididooniił , Díí shitsi' éí diné ye'asdzą́ą́ dooleeł biniyé baa níłtį́į́ nít'éé' , áko doo yiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	Then the woman said to the elders of her father , “ This is my daughter 's daughter , whom I have taken her to take her . ”
GOLD:	Her father must say to them , ‘ I gave my daughter to this man to be his wife , and now he has turned against her .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	Mt . 11 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Good Samaritan

ID:	1507
INPUT:	Tsés'ná haanánísą́ nahalingo shináshzhiizh ; ch'il dadeeníinii kǫ' bi ł hadíínóodgo tsį́įłgo adíídeezígíí nahalingo , Bóhólníihii bízhi' baa jííníshłíigo áhodeeshdįįł !
PRED:	I have become like honey , and a fire came down like a tree , and I will trust in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	They swarmed around me like bees ; they blazed against me like a crackling fire.But I destroyed them all with the authority of the Lord .

ID:	1508
INPUT:	Nidi díí dashijoołáhígíí , bá hweesh'áał dooleełgo doo deinízin daígíí , kwe'é nidahoh'éeshgo shinááł nidaałtseed .
PRED:	But if you do not want to do these things , bring them to me , and kill them there .
GOLD:	And as for these enemies of mine who did n't want me to be their king — bring them in and execute them right here in front of me . ' ”

ID:	1509
INPUT:	Nidi Féro ání , Háishą' Bóhólníihii nilį́įgo bizaak'eh honish'į́įgo Ízrel dine'é béé'deeshnih . Bóhólníihii bidinínígíí doo bééhasin da , índa doo t'áá k'ad Ízrel béé'níłnii' da .
PRED:	But Pharaoh said , Who shall keep the voice of the Lord , that I may let Israel go , that they may not know the Lord 's holy name , and let Israel go .
GOLD:	“ Is that so ? ” retorted Pharaoh . “ And who is the Lord ? Why should I listen to him and let Israel go ? I do n't know the Lord , and I will not let Israel go . ”

ID:	1510
INPUT:	Ánas éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii , Kéíyafas wolyéii , bich'į' Jesus t'áá be'astł'ǫ́ǫgo aho'doodlóóz .
PRED:	who was the high priest , who was led by Jesus , led him away with Jesus .
GOLD:	Then Annas bound Jesus and sent him to Caiaphas , the high priest .

ID:	1511
INPUT:	Áko Jótham yóó'ajoolwodgo yóó'azhnííchą́ą́' áádóó Bíyer haz'ánígi jiníyáago ákwii kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' , háálá hak'is Abímelek bik'ee hoł yéé' .
PRED:	And Jotham fled and fled , and dwelt in the place , and dwelt there ; for Abimelech was afraid of his brother Abimelech .
GOLD:	Then Jotham escaped and lived in Beer because he was afraid of his brother Abimelech .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Náhookǫs áádóó sǫ' dah naazhjaa'ígíí <unk> yan wol<unk> dóó Dilyéhé índa shádi'ááhjígo sǫ' eel'áhígíí áyiilaa .
PRED:	God sent the stars from the north side of the north , and the stars of the south .
GOLD:	He made all the stars — the Bear and Orion , the Pleiades and the constellations of the southern sky .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' ałk'idą́ą́' diné kódabidi'níí nít'ée'go dasidoots'ą́ą́' , T'áadoo t'óó ádíníigo ádee hahídziihí , nidi bee ádee hahídziihii éí Bóhólníihii binááł bi'díílííł .
PRED:	Moreover , when you heard this , you shall not swear , but you shall swear in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ You have also heard that our ancestors were told , ‘ You must not break your vows ; you must carry out the vows you make to the . '

ID:	1514
INPUT:	Áko sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́dóó Jesus ch'ízhníyáago joogááł , nít'éé' hódahooł'aahii , Díí sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi kin naaznilígíí níníł'į́ , dahałníigo haa yíkai .
PRED:	When Jesus went out of the temple , his disciples came to him , saying , “ This is the temple . ”
GOLD:	As Jesus was leaving the Temple grounds , his disciples pointed out to him the various Temple buildings .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	Diné ła' honisą́ nízingo ádaa nitsíkeesígíísh yíní'į́ ? Hó haláahgo doo áhályáanii bá chohoo'į́ .
PRED:	Do you look at a wise man ? Do you look for him than a fool ?
GOLD:	There is more hope for foolsthan for people who think they are wise .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bá nidaał'a'ígi át'éego bídanohdlį́įgo nihinanit'a'í bá nidaałnish , diné bá na'anishígi át'éego éí dooda .
PRED:	Do not serve the Lord as his servants , but do not serve him as a man 's work .
GOLD:	Work with enthusiasm , as though you were working for the Lord rather than for people .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God t'áá átséedi bił bééhózingo náyiizláa'ii biYe' yidanóolnin dooleełgo yinahaz'ą́ , éí alą́ąjį' biYe' nilį́įgo bik'isóó danilíinii lą'í dooleeł biniyé .
PRED:	For he was able to know that God was before him , that he should be the Son of his Son , that he might be the Son of his brethren .
GOLD:	For God knew his people in advance , and he chose them to become like his Son , so that his Son would be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters .

ID:	1518
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díí baa nánooshkąąh : ná naal'a'í nishłíinii áádóó ná naal'a'í danilíinii , nízhi' baa nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dadíníilzinii hazhó'ó nihisodizin nihá diits'į́į́h áádóó índa ná naal'a'í nishłíinii díí jį́ díí hastiin shaa a'áhí dínóozįįłgo shá yá'át'éehgo ádíílíłígíí biniyé nich'į' sodeeszin . Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii bibee adlání bee baná'áshkááh nít'éé' .
PRED:	O Lord , I pray thee , I pray thee , O servant , and thy servant , and thy servant , that thou mayest pray unto me this day , and that thy husband may pray unto me this day , that I may pray unto the king .
GOLD:	O Lord , please hear my prayer ! Listen to the prayers of those of us who delight in honoring you . Please grant me success today by making the king favorable to me . Put it into his heart to be kind to me. ” In those days I was the king 's cup-bearer .

ID:	1519
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , díí ááhyiłnínígíí Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii yee haadzíi'ii nik'i hwiidooleeł , shinanit'a'í aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii :
PRED:	O king , these things shall come upon thee , and my lord the Most High :
GOLD:	“ ‘ This is what the dream means , Your Majesty , and what the Most High has declared will happen to my lord the king .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	Ákohgo David éí tsiidétáán áádóó tóshjeeh Saul bits'iiyah sinil yę́ę nízhdiinilgo dah nízhdiit'áázh . Diné t'áadoo ła' hoołtsą́ą da , t'áadoo ła' hóónii' da , índa t'áadoo ła' ch'énádzidí da , háálá Bóhólníihii bíniik'ehgo t'áá íiyisí da'jiiłhaazh lá .
PRED:	So David took the spear and the vessels of Saul , and took no one to see him , nor had any face to see him , because he was very old .
GOLD:	So David took the spear and jug of water that were near Saul 's head . Then he and Abishai got away without anyone seeing them or even waking up , because the Lord had put Saul 's men into a deep sleep .

ID:	1521
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodííniid , Diné Silį́į'ii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ałdó' bee bóhólnííh .
PRED:	He said to them , “ The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus added , “ The Son of Man is Lord , even over the Sabbath . ”

ID:	1522
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	1523
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áii t'óó yáádaa'áago índa mą'ii ba'áán áhodeeshłííł , áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó doo naagháhígóó t'óó dahodeeshzhahgo áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	And I will make Jerusalem desolate , and I will make them desolate in the cities of Judah .
GOLD:	“ I will make Jerusalem into a heap of ruins , ” says the Lord. “ It will be a place haunted by jackals.The towns of Judah will be ghost towns , with no one living in them . ”

ID:	1524
INPUT:	Ana'í akée'di ádooldįįłii éí aniné .
PRED:	The end of the beginning , the end of the enemy .
GOLD:	And the last enemy to be destroyed is death .

ID:	1525
INPUT:	Naal'a'í ła' Jííhu yaa níyáago yił hoolne'go ání , Aláahgo naat'áanii yę́ę biye'kéhę́ę dabitsiits'iin deizhjaa' lá . Áko ííłní , Hoos'įįdjį' yah a'atiingi naakigo ał'ąą ałk'i yanáa'áago ádaohłééh .
PRED:	And a servant came to Jehu , and told him , The head of the king 's sons are given to the head of the king . And he said , “ Bring all the nations at the entrance of the gate . ”
GOLD:	A messenger went to Jehu and said , “ They have brought the heads of the king 's sons. ” So Jehu ordered , “ Pile them in two heaps at the entrance of the city gate , and leave them there until morning . ”

ID:	1526
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii hach'į' báhóóchįįdgo dah náhodiidle' .
PRED:	And the anger of the Lord was angry with him .
GOLD:	The Lord was very angry with them , and he departed .

ID:	1527
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii biinéé' éí kǫ' ałts'áidiyiił<unk> .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) has broken the fire .
GOLD:	The voice of the Lord strikeswith bolts of lightning .

ID:	1528
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní , Ayóó'áda'ííníi'ní , dadii'níigo t'áadoo t'óó ádadii'níní doo , nidi t'áá aaníinii bee ayóó'áda'ahííníi'níigo ałk'i nideiildzil doo .
PRED:	My children , we do n't say , “ We will not say , but we will be able to love one another . ”
GOLD:	Dear children , let 's not merely say that we love each other ; let us show the truth by our actions .

ID:	1529
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Zímrai éí kin haal'á yisnáago yaa ákoniizį́į'go aláahgo naat'áanii bighan náwóne'é níléí ałníi'di haz'ání góne' yah ajííyáago ádík'ijį' bohozhdíínilgo dadziztsą́ ,
PRED:	When Athaliah saw that it was done , he died at the entrance of the palace of the king 's palace .
GOLD:	When Zimri saw that the city had been taken , he went into the citadel of the palace and burned it down over himself and died in the flames .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	Manáseh biye' Jéíyer wolyéii Árgab kéyah t'áá át'é t'áá Gíísher dine'é índa Méíyakah dine'é bihoodzojį' nidi náhodii'ą́ , áádóó bik'ijį' t'áá bí bízhi' yee dayíízhi' . Díí jį́į́góó <unk> yer yee dayózhí .
PRED:	And all the land of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , and the border of the tribe of Asher , and the border of the sons of Manasseh ; and they set a name to this day .
GOLD:	Jair , a leader from the tribe of Manasseh , conquered the whole Argob region in Bashan , all the way to the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites . Jair renamed this region after himself , calling it the Towns of Jair , as it is still known today . )

ID:	1531
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , chahałheeł nidi doo nits'ąą náshididooł'į́įł da . Tł'éé' éí jį́įgo hool'inígíí nahalin , háálá chahałheeł éí adinídíín t'áá bił aheełt'éego níníł'į́ .
PRED:	Yes , you will not hide darkness , but you will not listen to me ; for the light is light in darkness .
GOLD:	but even in darkness I can not hide from you.To you the night shines as bright as day.Darkness and light are the same to you .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii bá nidaal'a'í aláahgo naat'áanii ádeidííniid , Shoo , ná naal'a'í daniidlíinii , bídahwííníilníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , t'áá ánihidiníígóó ádeiit'į́į doogo hasht'e'ádadíníilzin .
PRED:	Then the king 's servants said to the king , “ We are your servant , our lord , king , we want to do what is right . ”
GOLD:	“ We are with you , ” his advisers replied . “ Do what you think is best . ”

ID:	1533
INPUT:	Áádóó tsé dilkǫǫhgo ályaaígíí éí Diyin God binaanish át'é , áádóó bik'i na'ashk'aazhgo Diyin God t'áá bí ak'e'ashchį́įgo bikáá' .
PRED:	And the stone were made of stone , and it was written on it , and it is written on it .
GOLD:	These tablets were God 's work ; the words on them were written by God himself .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	Damį́įgo azlį́į́' góne' bááh ninádahiitihgo biniyé áłah siidlį́į'go Paul yiską́ągo dah diigháahgo bił ałch'į' hadadzisdzíí' , áko t'áá yáłti'go tł'é'ííłníí' .
PRED:	On the first day of the first month , when they had gathered together , Paul went up and spoke to them , and he spoke to them in the morning .
GOLD:	On the first day of the week , we gathered with the local believers to share in the Lord 's Supper . Paul was preaching to them , and since he was leaving the next day , he kept talking until midnight .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́ Ízrel dine'é t'áá íiyisí niseekai , háálá Saul łahgo haz'ą́ yee hooł'a'go diné yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , T'áadoo e'e'aahí diné ajííyą́ą'ii éí hóyée'go há hadoodzih , áko shi'ana'í dajílínígíí ts'ídá t'áá k'éédahodideeshdlíłí . Áko diné t'áadoo da'ayání i'íí'ą́ .
PRED:	And the children of Israel was very very great . And Saul sent a word to the people , saying , “ Cursed be the man who eats the night , that he may be cursed by the night , and the people of my enemies are vanity . ”
GOLD:	Now the men of Israel were pressed to exhaustion that day , because Saul had placed them under an oath , saying , “ Let a curse fall on anyone who eats before evening — before I have full revenge on my enemies. ” So no one ate anything all day ,

ID:	1536
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá shǫǫdí , k'ad nibee na'azheehí éí nik'aayééł índa ne'ełtį́į́' bił dah diijáahgo halgaigóó dínááh ; áádę́ę́' bįįh bitsį' shá niníyeeh ,
PRED:	Now therefore , I pray thee , I pray thee , and take thy sword and thy bow in the field ; and thou shalt sit down in the field ;
GOLD:	Take your bow and a quiver full of arrows , and go out into the open country to hunt some wild game for me .

ID:	1537
INPUT:	Áádóó ahidiníłnáago ałch'į' ádaaníigo kódaaní , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii éí diyin , diyin , diyin nilį́ ; nihokáá'góó t'áá át'é yee ayóó át'éii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	They said to one another , “ The Lord of hosts is holy , and he is great . ”
GOLD:	They were calling out to each other , “ Holy , holy , holy is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ! The whole earth is filled with his glory ! ”

ID:	1538
INPUT:	Bikéyah hootsoígíí bik'ehgo hwiih daazlį́į́' áádóó bijéí yee ayóó át'éego ádaa dadzoosdli' ; éí bąą t'óó shaa dayooznah .
PRED:	They were filled with the land , and they were filled with great heart ; therefore they forgotten me .
GOLD:	But when you had eaten and were satisfied , you became proud and forgot me .

ID:	1539
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'é'étiingi dáádiníbaalígíí éí yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii biyi'jį' yistł'ǫ́ǫgo naashch'ąą'go áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the entrance of the tent of meeting , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	Then he made another curtain for the entrance to the sacred tent . He made it of finely woven linen and embroidered it with exquisite designs using blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	1540
INPUT:	Áádóó diné bąąh háálínígíí t'áá háiida éí bíhizhdéé'náa'go éí ha'éé' jidoogis índa nizhdoobeełgo i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didéeh da doo .
PRED:	And whoever touches a man who touches his clothes shall wash his clothes , and bathe himself in water , and be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If you touch the man with the discharge , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	1541
INPUT:	Zófar éí doo yá'ádaashóonii ádabidi'doolníłígíí yaa halne'
PRED:	The People of the wicked
GOLD:	Zophar 's Second Response to Job

ID:	1542
INPUT:	Áko Hérad bizaad k'ehgo John bínaaí James diltłish bee seesyį́ .
PRED:	Herod 's brother John was killed by the sword .
GOLD:	He had the apostle James ( John 's brother ) killed with a sword .

ID:	1543
INPUT:	Áko ná nidaal'a'í daniidlíinii ánihidííníniid , <unk> deestsééł biniyé bił shaa nohkááh .
PRED:	Then I said to your servants , “ Bring me to see me . ”
GOLD:	“ And you said to us , ‘ Bring him here so I can see him with my own eyes . '

ID:	1544
INPUT:	Dawók'ą́ą́góó k'ídahoneezláágóó bee doo níldinii índa adilyé bee tsi'nisíníyáii áádóó łį́į́' ání nahalingo ádínínígíí t'óó baa yáhásinígi át'éego <unk> jił yę́ę yiiłtsą́ , áko Jerúsalem yinílyéii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Hahgoshą' índa doo yá'át'éehii nąąh ádingo ánándi'doolnííł ?
PRED:	How long will you look on the mountains , like the hills , and you have seen your sins like a horse , and how long will it be done for you , O Jerusalem ?
GOLD:	I have seen your adultery and lust , and your disgusting idol worship out in the fields and on the hills.What sorrow awaits you , Jerusalem ! How long before you are pure ? ”

ID:	1545
INPUT:	áko áyidííniid , Nihizhé'é t'ah nahdę́ę́' shich'į' át'éé nít'éé' yę́ę doo shich'į' ákót'éégóó baa ákoniizį́į́' , nidi shizhé'é biDiyin God shił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I know that my father has not been with me , but God is with me . ”
GOLD:	He said to them , “ I have noticed that your father 's attitude toward me has changed . But the God of my father has been with me .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	Nidi saad bee yáti'ii doo shił bééhózin dago , yáłti'ígíí bich'į' náánáła' dine'é nishłį́į doo , áádóó yáłti'ígíí shich'į' náánáła' dine'é nilį́į doo .
PRED:	But I do not know the words of words , and I will be one nation , and one who speaks to me will be a nation .
GOLD:	But if I do n't understand a language , I will be a foreigner to someone who speaks it , and the one who speaks it will be a foreigner to me .

ID:	1547
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é bits'ą́ą́' yóó'eekaii yídin nilį́
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	The

ID:	1548
INPUT:	Háni'dii Bóhólníihii deidísinii ádaaní , Aa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	Let them say to the Lord , “ Your love endures forever . ”
GOLD:	Let all who fear the Lord repeat : “ His faithful love endures forever . ”

ID:	1549
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí danihizhé'é yę́ę kéyah daabí nít'éé' yę́ę yiih nánihidoo'ishgo danihíí' dooleeł , áádóó yá'át'éhígi ánihoolíił doo , índa danihizhé'é yę́ę biláahgo k'ee'ąą nooht'į́įł doo .
PRED:	And the Lord your God will bring you into the land which he gave to your fathers , and he will give you good , and he will multiply you more than your fathers .
GOLD:	The Lord your God will return you to the land that belonged to your ancestors , and you will possess that land again . Then he will make you even more prosperous and numerous than your ancestors !

ID:	1550
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́įdi ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí Bóhólníihii yidahididookah áádóó shidine'é danilį́ dadooleeł . Áko nihitahgóó kééhasht'į́į doo áádóó t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nihaa shiníł'a'go nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	In that day many nations will come to the Lord , and they will be my people . Then you will know that the Lord Almighty has sent me .
GOLD:	Many nations will join themselves to the Lord on that day , and they , too , will be my people . I will live among you , and you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me to you .

ID:	1551
INPUT:	náánáła' Diyin God bibee adziilii bee éédahózinii álílee k'ehgo ázhdoolíłígíí haidiyii'aah , náánáła' Diyin God bá hojilne' doogo haidiyii'aah , náánáła' éí níłch'i danilíinii nijiłkaah bízhneel'ą́ą doogo haidiyii'aah , náánáła' éí álílee k'ehgo saad bee yájíłti' doogo haidiyii'aah , náánáła' éí saadígíí bee ata' hojilne'go haidiyii'aah ,
PRED:	And he gave a sign to another sign , and gave it to another man , that he may give to another man , and he shall give it to another man , and he shall give to him another tongue , and he shall teach him a word .
GOLD:	He gives one person the power to perform miracles , and another the ability to prophesy . He gives someone else the ability to discern whether a message is from the Spirit of God or from another spirit . Still another person is given the ability to speak in unknown languages , while another is given the ability to interpret what is being said .

ID:	1552
INPUT:	Áko ádadííniid , Ííjip dine'é léi' éí nida'niłkaadii nihá yich'ą́ą́h naagháago tó nihá hayiiz'ą́ , áko dibé da'oodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	And they said , The Egyptians took our flocks for us , and gave them water for us , and the sheep drank .
GOLD:	“ An Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds , ” they answered . “ And then he drew water for us and watered our flocks . ”

ID:	1553
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooii ch'ééh naashzhee'go t'óó dichin bidiyoołhééłáádóó náshdóítsa'ii bitsiijį' ditł'ooii biyázhí t'óó taidoolwoł .
PRED:	The lion has gone out , and the lion has gone away , and the lion has gone .
GOLD:	The fierce lion will starve for lack of prey , and the cubs of the lioness will be scattered .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	Haash yit'éego Paul éí Jesus yá naal'a'í silį́į́'
PRED:	Paul 's servant
GOLD:	Paul 's Message Comes from Christ

ID:	1555
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii daazgan ; tsin fig naazkaadii daniiłna' . Tsin pámgrenit wolyéii áádóó tsin páam wolyéii índa bilasáana bitsiin daazgan ; tsin t'áá ałtso dá'ák'ehgóó yíl'áii daazgan . Éí bąą diné biye'ké danilíinii yaa bił dahózhóonii ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	And the fig tree came forth , and the fig tree ; and the fig tree , and upon every tree , and upon every tree ; therefore the sons of men were glad .
GOLD:	The grapevines have dried up , and the fig trees have withered.The pomegranate trees , palm trees , and apple trees — all the fruit trees — have dried up.And the people 's joy has dried up with them .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	Áko baadaaní jílíní , éí ch'ikę́ę́h bizhé'é t'áá ákwii dzizdáa doo hó'níigo bił dzizkéego táá' hwiiską́ ; t'óó ajiyą́ągo áádóó doodlį́įłii jidlą́ągo bighangi hwiiłkááh nít'éé' .
PRED:	And she said , The young woman sat with her father , and sat there three days ; and she ate and drink .
GOLD:	Her father urged him to stay awhile , so he stayed three days , eating , drinking , and sleeping there .

ID:	1557
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Ízrel dine'é yóó'íínánígíí bee hoł hóone' , áko Féro índa há nidaal'a'í dabijéí yee diné yik'ijį' daazlį́į'go tsídadeezkéezgo ádadííniid , Díishą' haa deiit'įįd ; Ízrel dine'é nihá nidaal'a' yę́ę bééda'siilnii' lá .
PRED:	And the king of Egypt told him that the king of Israel had loved him . And they thought , “ What have we done to the people of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	When word reached the king of Egypt that the Israelites had fled , Pharaoh and his officials changed their minds . “ What have we done , letting all those Israelite slaves get away ? ” they asked .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání : Asdzání , na'áłchíní t'áadoo hazlį́į'ii , nił hózhǫ́ǫ le' , doo i'niiltsąąhii awéé' doo bídii'néehii , nił hózhǫ́ǫgo dílwosh , háálá asdzání doo ałchíi daígíí asdzání bahastiin yee ba'áłchíní hólóonii biláahgo ha'áłchíní hodooleeł .
PRED:	For it is written in the Scriptures : “ You are children , children of children , be glad , for you are not a child , for the child is greater than a child . ”
GOLD:	As Isaiah said , “ Rejoice , O childless woman , you who have never given birth ! Break into a joyful shout , you who have never been in labor ! For the desolate woman now has more childrenthan the woman who lives with her husband ! ”

ID:	1559
INPUT:	Háíram éí kin bii' sohodizin góne' binaanish
PRED:	Hiram and the Temple
GOLD:	Furnishings for the Temple

ID:	1560
INPUT:	Jesus aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ayóó át'éii nilį́
PRED:	Jesus is the high priest
GOLD:	Promised Rest for God 's People

ID:	1561
INPUT:	Nidi t'óó kónígháníjį' ti'dahwiisoonii'dóó bik'ijį' Diyin God , t'áá ałtsojį' jooba'ii , hool'áágóó yee ayóó át'éii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz doo biniyé Christ Jesus yee nihíká ádííniid , t'áá bí t'áá ákogi ádanoht'éego , áádóó danołdzilgo , áádóó danihidziilgo índa nihee dahółdzilgo ánihidoolííł .
PRED:	But after these things , God called you in all things , that you may have the glory of Jesus Christ , in the glory of his glory , and in the glory of his glory , and in the power of his glory .
GOLD:	In his kindness God called you to share in his eternal glory by means of Christ Jesus . So after you have suffered a little while , he will restore , support , and strengthen you , and he will place you on a firm foundation .

ID:	1562
INPUT:	Áko bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso bíighah ch'ídahaazná . Áádóó Kéreth dine'é t'áá ałtso , Pííleth dine'é t'áá ał tso índa Gathdóó dine'é t'áá ałtso éí diné hastą́ądi neeznádiingo Gath kin haal'áádóó hakéé' naakaígíí aláahgo naat'áanii yilą́ąjį' niníná .
PRED:	And all his servants passed by , and all the men of Gath went out before the king of Gath , and all the men of Gath .
GOLD:	to let all the king 's men move past to lead the way . There were 600 men from Gath who had come with David , along with the king 's bodyguard .

ID:	1563
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God , ałk'idą́ą́' nihokáá' dine'é doo dabidísingóó biniinaa doo yaa hą́ą́h niizį́į́'góó tó yee íísdįįd . Nidi Nóah éí ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é yaa halne'ii áádóó t'áá tsosts'id jilt'éhégo bił yisdájookai .
PRED:	And Noah did not turn away from the beginning of the world because he did not fear the world , but Noah saved him seven times .
GOLD:	And God did not spare the ancient world — except for Noah and the seven others in his family . Noah warned the world of God 's righteous judgment . So God protected Noah when he destroyed the world of ungodly people with a vast flood .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	Éí diné doo ła' shighaidoolyéeł da , nidi t'áá shíniik'eh ninádinish'aah . Bee óhólnííh shee hólǫ́ǫgo ninádinish'aah , áádóó bee óhólnííh shee hólǫ́ǫgo náádideeshdlééł ; díí bi'deeshłíiłgo shiTaa' bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii át'é .
PRED:	No one can save me , but I will give you authority , and I will give you power , and I will give it . This is my Father 's commandment .
GOLD:	No one can take my life from me . I sacrifice it voluntarily . For I have the authority to lay it down when I want to and also to take it up again . For this is what my Father has commanded . ”

ID:	1565
INPUT:	kót'éego doo ákwii áhóót'įįdígíí ałdó' át'éego ándahwii'aahii yaa nídadóot'įįłgo atídeidoolííł nít'éé' ; kósdzaago éí , Diyin God yót'áahdi hólóonii doo shídéét'i' da , dííniid doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	In this way , they would judge the judges of the judges , so that God would not let them judge them .
GOLD:	If so , I should be punished by the judges , for it would mean I had denied the God of heaven .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	Abínídóó níléí e'e'áahjį' áho'dooldįįł ; ła'da doo haa ákonízingóó hool'áágóó ájoodįįł .
PRED:	In the morning , no one will be cut off from morning , and no one will perish forever .
GOLD:	They are alive in the morning but dead by evening , gone forever without a trace .

ID:	1567
INPUT:	Áko ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígi nááda'iiłniihii niinínilgo <unk> i bida'iiníziinii áádóó béégashii yáázh be'elyaii áyiilaii yaa yisįįd .
PRED:	He put them on the high places of the high places , and gave them a calf and a calf .
GOLD:	Jeroboam appointed his own priests to serve at the pagan shrines , where they worshiped the goat and calf idols he had made .

ID:	1568
INPUT:	Diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo índa asdzání bił naazhtéezhii t'ááłá'í nítínígo ałtso nidadoołtsił .
PRED:	Each man shall kill every man with his wife and woman .
GOLD:	“ This is what you are to do , ” they said . “ Completely destroy all the males and every woman who is not a virgin . ”

ID:	1569
INPUT:	Áko náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí shijé'ígíí bit'áahjį' nizhníyáago Daniel bich' į' yéego chayi' hazhdoolghaazhgo ájíní , Daniel , Diyin God Hináanii yá naal'a'í nílíinii , niDiyin God t'áá áłahjį' bá nanil'a'ígíísh náshdóítsoh bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánííłtį́įgo yínéés'ąąd ?
PRED:	When the lions came near to him , Daniel cried out to him in a loud voice , “ Daniel , the living God , you are the living God 's servant always able to save you . ”
GOLD:	When he got there , he called out in anguish , “ Daniel , servant of the living God ! Was your God , whom you serve so faithfully , able to rescue you from the lions ? ”

ID:	1570
INPUT:	Háálá ánihidishní , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii índa aláahgo nidant'áii lą'í yilt'éego daah'ínígíí k'adę́ę dayiiłtsééh , nidi t'áadoo dayiiłtsą́ą da , áádóó dadoohts'a'ígíí k'adę́ę deidiits'į́į́h , nidi t'áadoo deidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	For I tell you , you see the prophets , and many kings , but you do not see , but hear , but hear not .
GOLD:	I tell you , many prophets and kings longed to see what you see , but they did n't see it . And they longed to hear what you hear , but they did n't hear it . ”

ID:	1571
INPUT:	áádóó David ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bee óhólníihii bighadinisht'ą́ągo naa diní'ą́ , nidi shá naal'a'í David yę́ę shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yik'eh hół'į́į́ nít'éé' áádóó bijéí t'áá át'é yee shikéé' yigááł nít'éé' , índa t'áá ákwii ádaat'éii shinááł áyoolííł nít'éé' , nidi ni éí t'áadoo ákwíinidzaa da ,
PRED:	I have taken the kingdom from David 's house , but my servant David obeyed my commandments , and walked in my heart , and walked in all my heart , but you did not do what is right .
GOLD:	I ripped the kingdom away from the family of David and gave it to you . But you have not been like my servant David , who obeyed my commands and followed me with all his heart and always did whatever I wanted .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	Hilkáíyah bits'ą́ą́dóó Hashabáíyah , Jedéíyah bits'ą́ą́dóó Niithániyel .
PRED:	From the family of Hilkiah , Hananiah ; from the family of Hilkiah .
GOLD:	Hashabiah was leader of the family of Hilkiah.Nethanel was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	nidi ákódadooníiłgi doo bá ashja da'aléeh da , háálá diné t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí dahwíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But he did not make a time for a time , because all the people heard him .
GOLD:	But they could think of nothing , because all the people hung on every word he said .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	Nidi Hérad daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' , jó'akon , Ííjipgi Jóseph nayiiyeełgo Bóhólníhii bidiyingo naal'a'í bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago
PRED:	But after Herod died , behold , a vision appeared to the angel of the Lord appeared to him .
GOLD:	When Herod died , an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt .

ID:	1575
INPUT:	Bináá' éí wáin biláahgo dinilzhin doo , Índa biwoo' éí abe' biláahgo łigai doo .
PRED:	Their eyes will be better than wine , and their teeth will be better than milk .
GOLD:	His eyes are darker than wine , and his teeth are whiter than milk .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá k'é hólǫ́ǫ doo , nízingo yee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii yee bidziilígíí t'áá át'é yił doonééł ; éí ákódoonííł . Ííjip dine'é binanit'a'í yił náhodooshǫǫł biniyé bitsi' ła' yeidoołtééł , nidi doo háká adoolwoł da , doo nidi hadziilgo áhodoolíił da .
PRED:	He will make peace with all his kingdom . He will make him king of Egypt . He will give him his daughter , but he will not help him .
GOLD:	He will make plans to come with the might of his entire kingdom and will form an alliance with the king of the south . He will give him a daughter in marriage in order to overthrow the kingdom from within , but his plan will fail .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' nijigháhígíí éí hayáázh jishchį́ , áko bízhi' Mó'ab bee jíízhi' ; t'áá éí Mó'ab dine'é díí jį́į́góó dahinánígíí bizhé'é jílį́ .
PRED:	And the firstborn gave birth to a son , and he named his name , and he is the father of Moab to this day .
GOLD:	When the older daughter gave birth to a son , she named him Moab . He became the ancestor of the nation now known as the Moabites .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	Áko nídzídzáago Dził Íífreiyimdi deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí bee ázhdííniidgo Ízrel dine'é dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hoł adah deíjeehgo bilą́ąjį' joolwołgo
PRED:	And when he came , he called the trumpet in the hill country of Ephraim , and cried out to the mountain of Israel , and fled before him .
GOLD:	When he arrived in the hill country of Ephraim , Ehud sounded a call to arms . Then he led a band of Israelites down from the hills .

ID:	1579
INPUT:	Nidi nááda'iiłniihii t'óó ahayóí áádóó Líívai dine'é índa azhé'é danilíinii bindanit'a'í t'áá éí bizhé'é yę́ę danilíinii éí áłtséedi kin yę́ę yéédaalniihgo díí atł'ááh nástł'inii ałtso ályaago dayiiłtsą́ągo ayóó íits'a'go dadilwoshgo daachxa , nidi t'óó ahayóí éí bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo ayóó íits'a'go dadilwosh .
PRED:	And when the priests saw a great voice , and the princes of Levi , and the princes of their fathers , and the princes of the house of their fathers , they cried out , and cried out with loud voice .
GOLD:	But many of the older priests , Levites , and other leaders who had seen the first Temple wept aloud when they saw the new Temple 's foundation . The others , however , were shouting for joy .

ID:	1580
INPUT:	índa éí jį́ áádóó tł'éé' yee bóhólníih doo ; adinídínígíí chahałheeł yił ałts'ánéí'nił doo ałdó' biniyé . Áko Diyin God éí yinééł'į́į'go bił yá'íít'ééh .
PRED:	And it shall be that same day , that he may rule over the night and night ; and God saw that it was good .
GOLD:	to govern the day and night , and to separate the light from the darkness . And God saw that it was good .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	Áádóó nihí hodínóotahjį' nihi'óółnííh lágo , nidi bąąhági át'éii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánihiyínííł . [ Háálá ahóyéel'áágóó ni t'éí nóhólnííh áádóó t'áadoo bee nóodziilí da , índa ayóó ánít'é . T'áá ákót'ée doo . ]
PRED:	Do n't let us go into the world , but you will be saved from your sins forever and ever . Amen .
GOLD:	And do n't let us yield to temptation , but rescue us from the evil one .

ID:	1582
INPUT:	Áko éí nínéidii'ą́ągo dabik'isóó índa yił kéédahat'íinii áyididooniił , Shaa hohkááh , shił nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' . Jó , béésh łigaii yóó'ííłne'ígíí náádii'ą́ .
PRED:	And he took it , and said unto his brethren and to his brethren , Come with me , and rejoice with me ; for I have taken away the silver .
GOLD:	And when she finds it , she will call in her friends and neighbors and say , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost coin . '

ID:	1583
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehígíí bitahgi ła' niinínil , átséhé góne' daal'aadii , naakií góne' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii , táá' góne' nida'nitinii , áádóó Diyin God bibee adziilii bee éédahózinii álílee k'ehgo yaa nidaakaii , índa hadaałt'é ánída'oodlíiłii , áádóó áká anídaajahii , áádóó ándaha'áii , índa álílee k'ehgo yáti' yee yádaałti'ii .
PRED:	And God appointed some of the church among the church , in the first , there were two prophets , three prophets , and three signs , and language .
GOLD:	Here are some of the parts God has appointed for the church : first are apostles , second are prophets , third are teachers , then those who do miracles , those who have the gift of healing , those who can help others , those who have the gift of leadership , those who speak in unknown languages .

ID:	1584
INPUT:	Nidi náá'iiłniihii éí łóód hak'i niníkę́zígíí yiníł'į́įgo doo t'áá íiyisí haní'íígháázhgóogo áádóó tsiighá doo ła' łizhingóó náá'iiłniihii éí t'áá sahdii tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' hadádi'doołkał .
PRED:	But the priest shall examine the skin in the skin , and the priest shall not spread in the skin , and the priest shall deliver him seven days .
GOLD:	If the priest examines the scabby sore and finds that it is only skin-deep but there is no black hair on it , he must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	1585
INPUT:	Tsin tł'óół neeznáá bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii áádóó tsin tł'óół naakits'áadah bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii índa béésh dilní bee í'dílzoołí yee nidaanéego Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizinjį' nákai .
PRED:	And they came to the house of the Lord , and upon the harp , and upon the harp , and upon the harp , and upon the harp , and upon the sound of the Lord , in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	They marched into Jerusalem to the music of harps , lyres , and trumpets , and they proceeded to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é shits'áhaaskai yę́ędą́ą́' Líívai dine'é nízaadgóó shits'ákaígíí éí ha'eda'alyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáago doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdii biniinaa atídaho'dil'į́į doo .
PRED:	And the Levites who are far away from me shall be punished , because they have turned away from me , they shall worship their idols .
GOLD:	And the men of the tribe of Levi who abandoned me when Israel strayed away from me to worship idols must bear the consequences of their unfaithfulness .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí adahwiis'a'go aa nihizhdookahgóó ajookai ; éí Béthel kin shijaa'ígíí áádóó Éí'ai kin haal'áhígíí bita'gi Éí'ai e'e'aahjígo aa nijiyeekai . Nidi t'áá éí bitł'éé' Jáshowa éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdi biiską́ .
PRED:	So Joshua sent messengers to meet them , and they went up to Ai and Ai , between Ai and Ai . But Joshua stayed among the Israelites that night .
GOLD:	So they left and went to the place of ambush between Bethel and the west side of Ai . But Joshua remained among the people in the camp that night .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	1589
INPUT:	Ámon dine'é bit'áahjį' oonáago bich'į' dahodiyółnááł lágo , áádóó t'áadoo bił na'ahíyádaałti'í ; jó , Ámon dine'é bikéyah doo t'áá k'ad nihíí' íishłaa da , háálá éí Lat ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bíí' dadooleełgo baa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	And thou shalt not go unto the children of Ammon , and do not speak with them ; for I have not given thee the land of the children of Ammon , because I have given unto Lot .
GOLD:	and enter the land of the Ammonites , the descendants of Lot . But do not bother them or start a war with them . I have given the land of Ammon to them as their property , and I will not give you any of their land . ' ”

ID:	1590
INPUT:	Nidi ábijiní , Diyin God bizaad deidiits'a' áádóó yik'eh dahół'íinii éí shimá índa shik'isóó danilį́ .
PRED:	But he said to them , “ The words of God is my mother and my brothers . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My mother and my brothers are all those who hear God 's word and obey it . ”

ID:	1591
INPUT:	Diyin God bíká dibáá' jílíinii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Book Two

ID:	1592
INPUT:	Nidashinitinii t'áá ałtso biláahgo shił ééhózin , háálá bee hahíínídzíi'ii éí nabik'ítséskeesii ádaat'é .
PRED:	I know more than all my words , for my statutes are my thoughts .
GOLD:	Yes , I have more insight than my teachers , for I am always thinking of your laws .

ID:	1593
INPUT:	Éí néidiiką́ągo kintahgóó anáádzá ; nihizdeesnilígíí bizháá'áád jílį́į́ nít'é'ígíí bich'į' ííshją́ą́ ájiilaa áádóó ch'iyáán bi'oh ajííyą́'ígíí baazhnínil .
PRED:	And he took it , and went into the city , and gave it to her daughter-in-law , and gave it to her that she had eaten .
GOLD:	She carried it back into town and showed it to her mother-in-law . Ruth also gave her the roasted grain that was left over from her meal .

ID:	1594
INPUT:	Ákohgo Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah éí áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Hananáíyah áyidííniid , Ge' , Hananáíyah yinílyéii , Bóhólníihii doo nííł'aad da , áko diné nííní'aa'ígíí éí yaa dadzólíigo íinilaa .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah the prophet said to Jeremiah , “ Listen to what the prophet says : ‘ I have not sent you . The Lord has not sent you . He has made the people trust in him .
GOLD:	Then Jeremiah the prophet said to Hananiah , “ Listen , Hananiah ! The Lord has not sent you , but the people believe your lies .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	<unk> dánii éí ayęęzhii yik'i sidáago t'áadoo hayiyííłjé'ígi át'éego diné na'adlo' bee yit'íinii nishóiyoołt'eehii ákót'é ; éí hastóí dooleełígíí bich'į' bíídíiską́ągo yit'íinii bits'ą́ą́' háájí shį́į́ silį́į'go doo áhojilyą́ą́góó dazdootsaał .
PRED:	This is the man who lies with lies , like a false prophet who lies with lies , and he will die in the days of the days of his days .
GOLD:	Like a partridge that hatches eggs she has not laid , so are those who get their wealth by unjust means.At midlife they will lose their riches ; in the end , they will become poor old fools .

ID:	1596
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' doo nąąh hólónígóó ándeesh łííł , índa nikin hadaas'áágóó doo nidaagháhí da doo , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	And thou shalt know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will make you desolate forever . Your cities will never be rebuilt . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1597
INPUT:	Ándahwii'aahii nidahaas'nil
PRED:	The People of Antioch
GOLD:	Jethro 's Wise Advice

ID:	1598
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é doo bada'ahódlíii bił ííshją́ą́ ádahóle'
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Blessings Promised for Obedience

ID:	1599
INPUT:	Eihazáíyah éí Júdah dine'é yinant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	King Ahaziah of Judah
GOLD:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah

ID:	1600
INPUT:	Béégashii naatseedjį' béégashii eedlózígíí nahalingo , éí doodaléi' diné doo áhályáanii akétsíín niná'niłí biih bi'doodlózígi ádziidzaa ;
PRED:	They have been like a calf to a calf , or a fool who has been put into the hands of a fool .
GOLD:	He followed her at once , like an ox going to the slaughter.He was like a stag caught in a trap ,

ID:	1601
INPUT:	Ákohgo honoojíígóó ch'íkaigo Íídam kéyah áádóó Mó'ab kéyah yik'ee'ąą ahéná'ná . Áádóó Mó'ab kéyah ha'a'aahjígo Árnan tooh nílíní wónaaníjígo niníná , nidi Mó'ab kéyah t'áadoo biih jíínáa da , háálá Árnan tooh nílíní éí Mó'ab kéyah bee ałts'áhoodzo .
PRED:	So they passed through the wilderness , and spread out the land of Edom , and the border of Moab , which is on the east side of the Arnon , but he did not live in the border of Moab , for the border of Moab .
GOLD:	“ Finally , they went around Edom and Moab through the wilderness . They traveled along Moab 's eastern border and camped on the other side of the Arnon River . But they never once crossed the Arnon River into Moab , for the Arnon was the border of Moab .

ID:	1602
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shisodizin shá diits'į́į́h ; chánahgo nánooshkąąhígíí baa ákonínízin .
PRED:	Lord , hear my prayer , and hear my cry , and hear my cry .
GOLD:	Listen closely to my prayer , O Lord ; hear my urgent cry .

ID:	1603
INPUT:	Diné kódaolyéhígíí éí kéyah hadeidoosił biniyé Mózes abiis'a' . Áko Mózes éí Nan biye' Hoshíya wolyéii Jáshowa bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	These are the names of the names of the names of the people , that Moses called the son of Nun , the son of Nun , the son of Nun , the son of Nun .
GOLD:	These are the names of the men Moses sent out to explore the land . ( Moses called Hoshea son of Nun by the name Joshua . )

ID:	1604
INPUT:	nidi t'áá bí bindahagha' bídadéét'i'ii biniinaa , índa Paul éí ła' Jesus yolyéii daaztsą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí t'ahdii hiná níigo ałdó' biniinaa hoł ałgha'da'dit'ááh lá .
PRED:	But because of their hearts , Paul and Paul was still alive with them because of the body of Jesus , who was dead .
GOLD:	Instead , it was something about their religion and a dead man named Jesus , who Paul insists is alive .

ID:	1605
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Ádam yi'iiłhaazh , áko ajiiłhaazhgo hátsą́ą́' ła' hayíítą́ągo hatsį' ałch'į' ánáyiidlaa .
PRED:	And the Lord God slept with Adam , and he put it in the midst of the flesh .
GOLD:	So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep . While the man slept , the Lord God took out one of the man 's ribs and closed up the opening .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	Háálá kin bitł'ááh nída'astł'ingo haal'áii t'áá éí Diyin God yinahaz'ą́ągo áyiilaii nijólíí nít'éé' .
PRED:	For we found him in the cities of God , which he built , which he had built .
GOLD:	Abraham was confidently looking forward to a city with eternal foundations , a city designed and built by God .

ID:	1607
INPUT:	Béégashii , doodaii' dóola bikee' áádóó bidee' hólóonii nááhániihii biláahgo Bóhólníihii díí yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	The ox and his feet shall rejoice above the horns of the altar , and the horns of the altar , and the horns of the Lord .
GOLD:	For this will please the Lord more than sacrificing cattle , more than presenting a bull with its horns and hooves .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	Diyin God éí eda'alyaii yich'į' nidahałáhígíí yich'į' báhóóchįįd
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Judah 's Persistent Idolatry

ID:	1609
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Átséédą́ą́' tsé dilkǫǫhgo naaki naa nínil yę́ęgi át'éego ła' hasht'e'nibí'dííłniił , áádóó tsé dilkǫǫhii síníłts'ilígíí saad bikáá' sinil nít'éé' yę́ęgi át'éego bikáa'gi bee ak'enáá'deeshchííł .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Take two stone stone like the first , and I will write them on the top of the two stone , and I will write them on the words of the tablets . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told Moses , “ Chisel out two stone tablets like the first ones . I will write on them the same words that were on the tablets you smashed .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , k'ad shéénílniih , nánooshkąąh , ninááł t'áá aaníígóó áádóó t'áá ákogi ánísht'éego níyá , áádóó ninááł yá'ádaat'éehii baa niséyá . Áko Heziikáíyah t'áá íiyisí jíícha .
PRED:	Remember me , O Lord , I pray thee , I have come before thee , and have done good in thy sight , and have done good in thy sight . And Hezekiah wept .
GOLD:	“ Remember , O Lord , how I have always been faithful to you and have served you single-mindedly , always doing what pleases you. ” Then he broke down and wept bitterly .

ID:	1611
INPUT:	Doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii ba'áłchíní doo dahodooleeł da , áádóó bee nahodi'yoonihii hoł yá'ádaat'éhígíí dahaníbaal adadidook'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	The children of the wicked shall not be destroyed ; and they shall burn their tents with fire .
GOLD:	For the godless are barren.Their homes , enriched through bribery , will burn .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	Bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yee hahaasdzíi'ii t'áadoo bits'áníyáa da ; t'áá ákónéehee shich'i<unk> 'ígíí biláahgo saad yee shich'į' haadzí'ígíí t'áá íiyisí ílį́įgo ádííníshtą' nít'éé' .
PRED:	I did not turn away from the commandment of his commandments ; and I kept the words that he commanded me .
GOLD:	I have not departed from his commands , but have treasured his words more than daily food .

ID:	1613
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é béésh łigaii áádóó óola deíjáahgo ch'íiní'eezh ; hatahdóó t'áá ałtso dabidziilgo ch'íníná .
PRED:	And the children of Israel brought them out of the midst of silver and gold , and all of them went out of the midst of them .
GOLD:	The Lord brought his people out of Egypt , loaded with silver and gold ; and not one among the tribes of Israel even stumbled .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehgo ájooníłígíí bąą ti'hodi'yoolnííh
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	Husbands

ID:	1615
INPUT:	Shizaad t'áá ałtso éí kéyah bik'ijį' haasdzíi'ii bohodoolnííł . Jeremáíyah éí ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso yee yik'ijį' haadzíi'ii díí naaltsoos biyi' bik'inídaháasdzooígíí bohodoolnííł .
PRED:	All my words will come to pass , and it will be written in the book of Jeremiah , in the book of all the nations .
GOLD:	I will bring upon them all the terrors I have promised in this book — all the penalties announced by Jeremiah against the nations .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	Ch'il t'óó bik'i nisoohkaii shidibé deiłchozh , áádóó tó tááchxąą'go ádaohłaii shidibé deidlą́ .
PRED:	You will eat my sheep , and you will eat my sheep .
GOLD:	Why must my flock eat what you have trampled down and drink water you have fouled ?

ID:	1617
INPUT:	Áko jį́į́dą́ą́' tó hahadleehgi níyá , áádóó ádíshní , Éíbraham shinanit'a'í biDiyin God Bóhólníihii nílíinii , biniyé yisháłígíí bee shíká anilyeed .
PRED:	On that day I came to the well , and I said , “ Lord , my master Abraham , help me to help me . ”
GOLD:	“ So today when I came to the spring , I prayed this prayer : ‘ O Lord , God of my master , Abraham , please give me success on this mission .

ID:	1618
INPUT:	Éí bąą bił áda'azįįdgo bee dahazlį́'ígíí áádóó hasht'edayósinii ałtso <unk> Tó Ch'ínílíní hoolyéégóó ha'naa yił ahineezdaa' .
PRED:	Therefore the lips of those who are at peace , and the tongue of those who rise up with their lips .
GOLD:	The people grab their possessionsand carry them across the Ravine of Willows .

ID:	1619
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Líívai dine'é nohłíinii , dashíínółts'ą́ą́' , ádadołdéehgo danihizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hodiyingo haz'ą́ągo áńdaahdlééh áádóó t'óó badaa'ihii hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'ídahohjááh .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Listen to me , Levites , and bring them out of the temple of the Lord , the God of their ancestors , and bring them out of the holy place .
GOLD:	He said to them , “ Listen to me , you Levites ! Purify yourselves , and purify the Temple of the Lord , the God of your ancestors . Remove all the defiled things from the sanctuary .

ID:	1620
INPUT:	shí bii' honishłǫ́ índa ni shii' honílǫ́ , áko ts'ídá t'ááłá'í danilį́į dooleeł , áko shííníł'a'ígíí índa ayóó'áshííní'nínígi át'éego ayóó'ííní'nínígíí nihokáá' dine'é bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I am in them , and they will be one ; and they will know that you have sent me , and they will know that you have sent me .
GOLD:	I am in them and you are in me . May they experience such perfect unity that the world will know that you sent me and that you love them as much as you love me .

ID:	1621
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Clears the Temple

ID:	1622
INPUT:	Díí dabizhé'é yę́ę dabighandóó alą́ąjį' nidaakaii : Ízrel bá alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí Rúben wolyéii biye'ké éí Héínak áádóó Pállu áádóó Hézran índa <unk> daolyé . Díí Rúben ba'áłchíní ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	These are the names of their fathers : the firstborn of the firstborn , the sons of Reuben , the sons of Reuben , the sons of Reuben : these are the families of Reuben .
GOLD:	These are the ancestors of some of the clans of Israel : The sons of Reuben , Israel 's oldest son , were Hanoch , Pallu , Hezron , and Carmi . Their descendants became the clans of Reuben .

ID:	1623
INPUT:	Bįįh , jádítsoh , bįįh łitsoii , tł'ízí ałchinii , tsétah tł'ízí , jádí índa tsétah dibé daahsą́ .
PRED:	You shall eat grass , goats , goats , goats , goats , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	the deer , the gazelle , the roe deer , the wild goat , the addax , the antelope , and the mountain sheep .

ID:	1624
INPUT:	Binaalye'é índa yódí éí bighan góne' hólǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó bit'áá ákogi é'ét'éii ahóyéel'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	His wealth and his wealth shall dwell in his house , and his righteousness shall be forever .
GOLD:	They themselves will be wealthy , and their good deeds will last forever .

ID:	1625
INPUT:	Naaltsoos ałch'į' yisdisii yit'ahgo ił ádzaa
PRED:	The Death of the letter
GOLD:	A Flying Scroll

ID:	1626
INPUT:	Áko diné da<unk> ts'ą́'ígíí ałtso bich'į' niyázh'níłti'go Kapérniyamgi jiníyá .
PRED:	When the people heard this , Jesus went to Capernaum .
GOLD:	When Jesus had finished saying all this to the people , he returned to Capernaum .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	Iiláísha éí Damáskas kin haal'áajį' níyá , áko Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Ben-héídad daatsaah lá , áko , Diyin God yá naal'a'í kwe'é níyá , ha'níigo bił hóóne' .
PRED:	Elisha came to Damascus , and King Hazael of Aram was sick , and he was sick , and he told the man of God .
GOLD:	Elisha went to Damascus , the capital of Aram , where King Ben-hadad lay sick . When someone told the king that the man of God had come ,

ID:	1628
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné éí Mózes nayíyádaałti'go kódaaní , Tó dadiidlį́łígíí nihaa diní'aah . Áko Mózes áhodííniid , Ha'át'íí biniinaa nashíyádaałti' ? Ha'át'íí biniyé Bóhólníihii nibídanohtaah ?
PRED:	So the people spoke to Moses , saying , “ Give us water to drink . ” Moses said to them , “ Why do you speak against the Lord ? Why do you speak against me ? ”
GOLD:	So once more the people complained against Moses . “ Give us water to drink ! ” they demanded. “ Quiet ! ” Moses replied . “ Why are you complaining against me ? And why are you testing the Lord ? ”

ID:	1629
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bich'į' ádił ni'iidzííh éí aniné niyiilé , nidi Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii bee Diyin God éí iiná doo ninít'i'ii t'áá jíík'e nihainílá .
PRED:	For God does sin , but the eternal life of our Lord Jesus Christ has given us eternal life .
GOLD:	For the wages of sin is death , but the free gift of God is eternal life through Christ Jesus our Lord .

ID:	1630
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádzaagóó ni<unk> nitinígíí éí t'óó ádahozhdil'į́įgo daal'aadii dajílį́ , naalnishí binda'adlo'ii dajílį́ , éí Christ yá daal'aadii t'óó béé'ádahozhdil'į́ .
PRED:	For they are the apostles , and they are the apostles , and they are the apostles of Christ .
GOLD:	These people are false apostles . They are deceitful workers who disguise themselves as apostles of Christ .

ID:	1631
INPUT:	1Chr . 1 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of David
GOLD:	Rulers of Edom

ID:	1632
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego ałdó' diné éí asdzání bá ádabi'diilyaii yóó'adeideez'ą́ągo , jó , t'áá bída ahaa nináldeehgo adáhonooní bi'niighą́ą́' , diné t'óó baa yáhásinígi át'éego ahaa nináldeeh , áko t'áá bí nida'iisíhígíí yee até'él'į́ yą́ą́h danilį́įgo ádá dayókeed .
PRED:	In the same way , they have forsaken the women , because they have been killed in the wilderness , because they have been filled with shame , and they have asked for their sins .
GOLD:	And the men , instead of having normal sexual relations with women , burned with lust for each other . Men did shameful things with other men , and as a result of this sin , they suffered within themselves the penalty they deserved .

ID:	1633
INPUT:	Nich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádzaa ládą́ą́' , éí doodaléi' bąąh háínítsi ládą́ą́' éí shígo shik'ijį' naaltsoos bik'i díízoh .
PRED:	If you do not sin against me , I write it to me , or if you have done many times ,
GOLD:	If he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything , charge it to me .

ID:	1634
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí dadzitsaah nít'éé' , áádóó k'asdą́ą́' dadziztsą́ , nidi Diyin God haa joozba' , nidi doo t'áá hó t'éiyá da , shí ałdó' doo yínííł shide ádooníił da biniyé shaa joozba' .
PRED:	Yes , he was sick , and he died , but God has mercy on me , but not only to me .
GOLD:	And he certainly was ill ; in fact , he almost died . But God had mercy on him — and also on me , so that I would not have one sorrow after another .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	Jó , shí ałdó' shizhé'é biye' nishłį́įgo , t'ah dinisht'ódígo t'áá shí t'éí shimá ayóó'áshó'níí nít'ée'go ,
PRED:	If I was my father , my mother loved me ,
GOLD:	For I , too , was once my father 's son , tenderly loved as my mother 's only child .

ID:	1636
INPUT:	Áko badahojoobá'íii éí béésh łigaii bee nidahidiilnih áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii éí ké bee nidahidiilnih índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' bizhool nihaa nidahidoonih .
PRED:	And the poor shall give us the silver , and the poor shall give us the field , and the poor shall bring us to you .
GOLD:	And you mix the grain you sellwith chaff swept from the floor.Then you enslave poor peoplefor one piece of silver or a pair of sandals .

ID:	1637
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Abner Joins Forces with David

ID:	1638
INPUT:	Danizhé'é naazį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi niye'ké naazį́į dooleeł ; nahasdzáán t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' bikáá'góó naat'áanii danilį́įgo ádadííliił .
PRED:	The sons of your fathers shall stand in the midst of the earth ; and they shall be the princes of the earth .
GOLD:	Your sons will become kings like their father.You will make them rulers over many lands .

ID:	1639
INPUT:	Dé'éyóní éí ínáóltą'í biniyé béeso bada'ayohníiłgo t'áá áko , nidi nihikwá'ásiní éí ínáóltą'í t'áágééd béeso bada'ayohníił doo ; ákót'éego Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí baa nidaahkaii t'áá ałtso yik'ijidlíigo kéyah biih wohnéehgo ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	You shall not pay money to him , but you shall not pay any money in your brother 's hand , but you shall do all that the Lord your God is giving you to possess it .
GOLD:	You may charge interest to foreigners , but you may not charge interest to Israelites , so that the Lord your God may bless you in everything you do in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	1640
INPUT:	Áko ánáádahodoo'niid , T'áá bąąhági ánít'éego ni'dizhchį́ , da' ákoósh nanihinítin ? Áko Jew dine'é áłah nádleehdóó yits'ádahast'e' .
PRED:	And they said to him , “ Are you born of sin ? Are you going to us ? ” And the Jews delivered him out of the synagogue .
GOLD:	“ You were born a total sinner ! ” they answered . “ Are you trying to teach us ? ” And they threw him out of the synagogue .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	Éí bąą bits'ąą ádaa áhólyą́ą dooleełii baa nánooshkąąh ; wáin , doodaii' tó tsi'na'iiłáii t'áadoo nidlání , índa doo daadą́ą́góó bee nihá haz'áanii doo ła' dííyį́įł da ,
PRED:	Therefore I pray thee , I pray thee , neither drink wine nor drink , nor drink any law ,
GOLD:	So be careful ; you must not drink wine or any other alcoholic drink nor eat any forbidden food .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	Áko t'áá bí bee Ízrel dine'é nayídeintaahgo bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii dayíists'ą́ą'go daats'í bił béédahodoozįįł ; éí dabizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' Mózes yiniit'aa yee haadzíí' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they shall know that they have not obeyed the commandments of Israel , and have spoken to their fathers .
GOLD:	These people were left to test the Israelites — to see whether they would obey the commands the Lord had given to their ancestors through Moses .

ID:	1643
INPUT:	Áko ha'asídí ání , Baa nitsískeesgo alą́ąjį' yilwołígíí éí Zéídak biye' Ahímeiyaz nidzit'i'ígi át'éego yilwoł . Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Éí lá éí diné yá'át'éehii át'į́ ni . Áko hane' yá'át'éehii yoo'áałgo át'į́ .
PRED:	Then he said , “ The first is like Zadok the son of Zadok , the son of Zadok . ” And the king said , “ This man is good . ”
GOLD:	“ The first man runs like Ahimaaz son of Zadok , ” the watchman said. “ He is a good man and comes with good news , ” the king replied .

ID:	1644
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó sohodizingo t'áá aaníí Diyin God doo yidiits'a' da , índa Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii doo yik'ítsídíłkees da .
PRED:	He does not listen to the prayer of God , and does not find the Almighty .
GOLD:	But it is wrong to say God does n't listen , to say the Almighty is n't concerned .

ID:	1645
INPUT:	Lébanah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Héígabah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Shálmai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	The children of Lebanon , the sons of Pharaoh , the children of Pharaoh ,
GOLD:	Lebanah , Hagabah , Shalmai ,

ID:	1646
INPUT:	Ákohgo neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii yiih yiyíínil , áádóó éí tsits'aa' tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí t'áá ałch'ijí ní'áago áyiilaa , áádóó aa a'ááh hasinii bił haz'áanii bidadinítą́ągo áyiilaa ,
PRED:	Then he put the ark into the ark of the covenant , and put it on each side of the ark ; and he made the ark of the covenant ;
GOLD:	He took the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant and placed them inside the Ark . Then he attached the carrying poles to the Ark , and he set the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on top of it .

ID:	1647
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso hazaad deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'óó bił adahayóigo ádadííniid , Jerúsalemdi díí yízhí dayózhíigo sodadilzinígíí ádooldįįł nízingo atííł'į́į́ nít'é'ígíí da' doósh éí át'į́į da ? Índa ła' bidazh'dootł'óołgo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii baazhdoo'ishísh doo biniyé jiníyáa da ?
PRED:	When all these words were amazed , they said to him , “ Is it not the one who has given this name to destroy the name of Jerusalem ? Did he not come to the high priest ? ”
GOLD:	All who heard him were amazed . “ Is n't this the same man who caused such devastation among Jesus ' followers in Jerusalem ? ” they asked . “ And did n't he come here to arrest them and take them in chains to the leading priests ? ”

ID:	1648
INPUT:	Áko Josáíyah łahjį' ádzaii éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Josiah , are recorded in the book of the Kings of Judah ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Josiah 's reign and all his deeds are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	Áko áháłní , K'ad shizaad doohts'į́į́h ; shá halne'ii nihitahgi hólǫ́ǫgo shí , Bóhólníihii nishłíinii , t'áá shí ił áhát'į́ bii'dóó bich'į' ádééhodeesdzįįł , na'iigeeł bii'dóó bich'į' hadeesdzih .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Listen to my words . I , the Lord , have a prophet among you , and I will speak to them in dreams .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to them , “ Now listen to what I say : “ If there were prophets among you , I , the Lord , would reveal myself in visions.I would speak to them in dreams .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	Bíni'dii náshiits'ǫs , háálá ne'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' éí wáin biláahgo łikan .
PRED:	Let him kissed me , because his love is better than wine .
GOLD:	Kiss me and kiss me again , for your love is sweeter than wine .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	Nidi Peter áháłní , Ha'át'éegoshą' Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i bídínóohtahgo ahadi'nooht'ą́ ? Jó'akon , nahastiin yę́ę yóó'ádayiilaaígíí tł'óó'dę́ę́' bikédil dadiits'a' , áko ni ałdó' ch'ídandoołtééł .
PRED:	But Peter said to him , “ Why are you talking with the Spirit of the Lord ? Behold , you will hear the door of the husband , and you will hear you . ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	1652
INPUT:	áko nik'ihojidlíi dooleeł , háálá éí t'áadoo yee k'éédadó'ne'í da . Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii náábi'diiljée'di índa k'ééndi'doolnííł .
PRED:	so that you will be blessed , because you do n't live in peace . You will be able to live in the righteous , and you will be punished .
GOLD:	Then at the resurrection of the righteous , God will reward you for inviting those who could not repay you . ”

ID:	1653
INPUT:	Áko hoos'įįdgo diné áádóó dabitélii bił bééda'iisnii' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that the people and the donkeys and the donkeys ,
GOLD:	The brothers were up at dawn and were sent on their journey with their loaded donkeys .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	Hwe'ana'í danilíinii yáhásin bee hadadideeshłííł , nidi naat'á ch'ah hak'i dí'ánígíí bee bééhózingo hóhólníhígíí náás yit'ih doo .
PRED:	And I will make them ashamed , but his crown shall be established in his head .
GOLD:	I will clothe his enemies with shame , but he will be a glorious king . ”

ID:	1655
INPUT:	Tel-míílah , <unk> sha , Kíírab , Ádan índa Ímer kin hadaas'áádóó díí ninádahaasná , nidi dabizhé'é yę́ę dabik'éí áádóó ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii éí Ízrel dine'é daats'í danilį́įgo éí naaltsoos bee hwéédahózinígíí hwee ádaadin .
PRED:	When we saw that there was not written in the book of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Another group returned at this time from the towns of Tel-melah , Tel-harsha , Kerub , Addan , and Immer . However , they could not prove that they or their families were descendants of Israel .

ID:	1656
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é yaa hodiní'ą́ , áko hak'ee dadiniihígíí hondant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	I gave them over to the nations , and those who hate him were afraid .
GOLD:	He handed them over to pagan nations , and they were ruled by those who hated them .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	Dabizlohiísh yee áda'doosįįłgo dabidoolghał ? Baa nida'iiniihii bich'į' nidahidoonihiísh biniyé ałtaidoolgish ?
PRED:	Can he make you eat ? Can he give you a rod to eat ?
GOLD:	Will merchants try to buy itto sell it in their shops ?

ID:	1658
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída bee hoséł'áanii baa naahkaigo , shik'isóó danohłį́ .
PRED:	If you do what I command you , my brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	You are my friends if you do what I command .

ID:	1659
INPUT:	Da'joodláanii ahił dajídlį́įgo kééhojit'į́
PRED:	The People of the Law
GOLD:	The Believers Form a Community

ID:	1660
INPUT:	Nihaa dadeest'áanii t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó Bóhólníihii bich'į' bił dah nídi'diilnihgo náádahaniihii náádahołniih doo ; éí dadílyinii agháadi yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	And you shall offer all your princes to the Lord ; you shall offer an offering unto the Lord ; it shall be most holy .
GOLD:	Be sure to give to the Lord the best portions of the gifts given to you .

ID:	1661
INPUT:	Díí kót'éego dazdootsaałígíí bee Diyin God baa hozhdoonih biniyé yee hach'į' haadzíí' . Áádóó kóhodííniid , Shikéé' yínááł .
PRED:	And he spake unto him this death , that he should speak unto God . And he said , follow me .
GOLD:	Jesus said this to let him know by what kind of death he would glorify God . Then Jesus told him , “ Follow me . ”

ID:	1662
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é binanit'a'í jílį́ .
PRED:	King Solomon was king of Israel . He was king over all Israel .
GOLD:	King Solomon now ruled over all Israel ,

ID:	1663
INPUT:	Shoo , dasoolįhgo Bóhólníihii yá'át'éehii jílį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł ! Bóhólníihii beijólíii éí hak'ihojidlí !
PRED:	Behold , you shall know that the Lord is good . Blessed is the Lord who believes in him .
GOLD:	Taste and see that the Lord is good.Oh , the joys of those who take refuge in him !

ID:	1664
INPUT:	Háadishą' shá chohoo'į́ ? Jó , shá chohoo'į́įgo háishą' yoo'į́į doo ?
PRED:	Where is my hope for me ? Who can see my hope ?
GOLD:	Where then is my hope ? Can anyone find it ?

ID:	1665
INPUT:	Áádóó náábikéédę́ę'go shoo , tł'oh naadą́ą́' bineest'ą' tsosts'id daniiłna'go áádóó áłts'óózí daazlį́į'go índa ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyol dabíí<unk> go diigaigo bąąh náádahasdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And , behold , there came seven heads of wheat , and came out of the east , and the east wind appeared to them .
GOLD:	Then seven more heads of grain appeared , but these were blighted , shriveled , and withered by the east wind .

ID:	1666
INPUT:	Éí bąą shiye' nílíinii , ajooba' Christ Jesus bii' hólónígíí bee nidziil doo .
PRED:	Therefore , my son , the grace of Jesus Christ will be strong in you .
GOLD:	Timothy , my dear son , be strong through the grace that God gives you in Christ Jesus .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'áádóó diné t'áá ałtso ch'íheezhjée'go Jesus bidááh náznísą́ . Áko dajiiłtsą́ągo nídajookąąhgo ádajiní , Nihikéyahdóó nówehjį' haninááh .
PRED:	And all the people of the city went out to meet Jesus . And when they saw him , they cried out to him , saying , “ Go away from our land . ”
GOLD:	Then the entire town came out to meet Jesus , but they begged him to go away and leave them alone .

ID:	1668
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádadííniid , Baa nídahidii'nił , áádóó doo yik'é nihich'į' nida'dooléeł da ; t'áá ádííníniidígi ádadii'nííł . Áko nááda'iiłniihii hágo bidííniidgo binááł ádee hadahoyééłdzíí' , Díí bee nihoot'áanii bik'ehgo ádadii'nííł .
PRED:	Then they said , “ We will not give us money , and we will do as you have commanded us . ” So the priests called and made a vow before the priests .
GOLD:	They replied , “ We will give back everything and demand nothing more from the people . We will do as you say. ” Then I called the priests and made the nobles and officials swear to do what they had promised .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	Ísakar dine'é bitahdóó éí Ázan biye' naat'áanii nilíinii Páltiyel niiltį́ .
PRED:	And from the tribe of Issachar he made him prince of the tribe of Issachar ; and let him pass over the tribe of Issachar .
GOLD:	IssacharPaltiel son of Azzan

ID:	1670
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí diné áyidííniid , T'áadoo ádił dahonołyé'í ; ts'ídá doo yá'áshónígi ánáádaaht'į́įgo t'áadoo yee' t'ą́ąjį' dahohjahí ; Bóhólníihii bikéé' dayínóhkááh , ákót'éego nihijéí t'áá át'é bee Bóhólníihii bá nidaał'a' .
PRED:	Samuel said to the people , “ Do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid of the evil things that is evil , but follow the Lord with all your heart .
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” Samuel reassured them . “ You have certainly done wrong , but make sure now that you worship the Lord with all your heart , and do n't turn your back on him .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Líbna dine'é áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í Ízrel dine'é yílák'eidíí'ą́ągo atídayiilaa áádóó diltłish yee nideistseed , áko diné t'áá át'é ałtso nideistseedgo t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' áádeisįįd da ; t'áá Jériko kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa yę́ęgi át'éego díí aláahgo naat'áanii ałdó' ákódayiilaa .
PRED:	and the Lord gave them into the hand of the king of Israel , and struck them with the edge of the sword ; and all the people killed them , and they killed none of them ; and they did so unto the king of Jericho .
GOLD:	There , too , the Lord gave them the town and its king . He killed everyone in it , leaving no survivors . Then Joshua killed the king of Libnah as he had killed the king of Jericho .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	Áádóó Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' tsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí nidahaaznii'ígíí éí t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo hastą́ądi neeznádiin béésh łigaii shékel wolyéii bą́ą́h nida'iizlį́į́' áádóó łį́į́' ałdó' t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin bą́ą́h nida'iizlį́į́' ; kót'éego Het dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii índa Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso yich'į' nináádayiis'nii' .
PRED:	And the chariots of Egypt was six hundred shekels of silver , and six hundred shekels of silver , and every man offered to the king of Syria , and to all the kings of Syria .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	1673
INPUT:	Áádóó náádadi'yoołnihgo nááhidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniihgo t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	And ye shall offer an offering of peace offerings unto the Lord , and ye shall offer an offering unto the Lord .
GOLD:	“ When you sacrifice a peace offering to the Lord , offer it properly so you will be accepted by God .

ID:	1674
INPUT:	Jó , nijéí hodooyąął , áádóó ił ééhózin éí nii' sizíinii yił hodooshǫǫł ;
PRED:	Behold , the heart of the heart is made known , and the soul of knowledge makes his soul known .
GOLD:	For wisdom will enter your heart , and knowledge will fill you with joy .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	Jesus ánáázhdoo'niid , Da' doósh bee nił hweeshne' da , iinídlą́ągo Diyin God yee ayóó át'éii yidííłtsééł ?
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ Do n't I tell you , you will see the glory of God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	1676
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ááłáhídi mííl nááhaigo Séítan be'estł'ónígíí béédidoochił ,
PRED:	And when Satan was a thousand years old , Satan would free from the chains .
GOLD:	When the thousand years come to an end , Satan will be let out of his prison .

ID:	1677
INPUT:	nidi t'áá ałtsojį' Diyin God yá naal'a'í niidlį́įgo ádééhoniilzinii , yéego ha'ííníilníigo ti'danihiyoołnííh , nihich'į' naho'diilná , nihich'į' nahwii'ná ,
PRED:	But if we see the man of God in all things , we are in trouble ,
GOLD:	In everything we do , we show that we are true ministers of God . We patiently endure troubles and hardships and calamities of every kind .

ID:	1678
INPUT:	Niísh áłtsé ni'dizhchį́ ? Deílk'idígíí t'ah doo ádaalnééhdą́ą́'ásh ándiilyaa ?
PRED:	Do you have a little child ? Have you been filled with water ?
GOLD:	“ Were you the first person ever born ? Were you born before the hills were made ?

ID:	1679
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné éí Jesus yaa ádahalyánígíí Jesus yá nidahast'i' áádóó niyí'da<unk> xas ,
PRED:	Then the prophets put Jesus on the ground and put it on the ground .
GOLD:	The guards in charge of Jesus began mocking and beating him .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah t'áadoo deísółts'ą́'í , háálá Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í kóní , Aa doolyéełii bee shił lą́ da'ohłeehgo wóshdę́ę́' shich'į' ch'ínóhkááh , áádóó t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihich'il na'atł'o'ii áádóó nihifig sikaadii bąąhdóó da'ohsą́ą doo áádóó t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihito' bá na'az'ą́ą́dóó da'ohdlą́ą doo ;
PRED:	Do not listen to Hezekiah , because the king of Assyria says , “ Come out to me , and eat from me , every man 's vine , and drink his own fruit from his own vine , and drink his own fruit .
GOLD:	“ Do n't listen to Hezekiah ! These are the terms the king of Assyria is offering : Make peace with me — open the gates and come out . Then each of you can continue eating from your own grapevine and fig tree and drinking from your own well .

ID:	1681
INPUT:	Áádóó Jeremáíyah éí naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso , índa diné t'áá ałtso yich'į' haadzíi'go kóní , Díí saad dasidoots'ą́'ígíí t'áá ałtso díí kin si'ánígíí áádóó díí kin haal'áhígíí bee bik'ijį' hadíídzih , shiłníigo Bóhólníihii shiníł'a' .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah said to all the princes and to all the people , “ This is what the Lord has sent me to say to this city and to this city . ”
GOLD:	Then Jeremiah spoke to the officials and the people in his own defense . “ The Lord sent me to prophesy against this Temple and this city , ” he said . “ The Lord gave me every word that I have spoken .

ID:	1682
INPUT:	Nidi t'ah aláhídi át'éego Saul bidziil yileełgo Damáskasgi Jew dine'é kéédahat'ínígíí , Díí t'áá aaníí Christ nilį́ , yiłníigo t'áadoo yee hadaodziihígóó áyiilaa .
PRED:	But if Saul was strong , the Jews who lived in Damascus were in Damascus , he was the Messiah .
GOLD:	Saul 's preaching became more and more powerful , and the Jews in Damascus could n't refute his proofs that Jesus was indeed the Messiah .

ID:	1683
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Da' nihíísh ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego doo ak'ida'doohtįįh da ? Da' díísh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Ha'át'íhída t'áá bikáá'dę́ę́' diné biih hwiileehgo doo <unk> xǫǫh át'ée da ,
PRED:	He said to them , “ Do n't you understand this ? Do n't you know that there is no one to enter into his throne ? ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't you understand either ? ” he asked . “ Ca n't you see that the food you put into your body can not defile you ?

ID:	1684
INPUT:	Áko Férisii danilíinii ánáádahodoo'niid , Da' nihíísh ałdó' t'áá ádzaagóó ádanihi'di'niist'aa' ?
PRED:	The Pharisees said to him , “ Are you also going to bring you into the way ? ”
GOLD:	“ Have you been led astray , too ? ” the Pharisees mocked .

ID:	1685
INPUT:	Iiláíhu éí Job yich'ahóóshkeed
PRED:	Job and Job
GOLD:	Elihu Presents His Case against Job

ID:	1686
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íní'eezh yę́ędą́ą́' éí didlidgo náádahaniihii , doodaii' náádahaniihii t'áadoo bee bich'į' yéíłti' da índa t'áadoo bee bich'į' hahásdzíi' da ,
PRED:	When I brought your ancestors out of Egypt , I did not speak to them burnt offerings or sacrifices ,
GOLD:	When I led your ancestors out of Egypt , it was not burnt offerings and sacrifices I wanted from them .

ID:	1687
INPUT:	Nidi hoł oo'ołgo diné dahoołtsą́ągo lą'í hwéédahoosįįdgo , da'níłts'ą́ą́dę́ę́' kin hadaas'áádę́ę́' t'áá ni' dayíjeehgo t'áá hó áłtsé áadi neheezhjéé' .
PRED:	But when they saw him , many people saw him , and they came out of the cities , and came out of their cities , and came first to their own place .
GOLD:	But many people recognized them and saw them leaving , and people from many towns ran ahead along the shore and got there ahead of them .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad , bee hólóonii t'áá ałtso bidinílchíidgo tídílééh , áko t'áá ninii'jį' níídóodzih .
PRED:	But now , take your hand away all that you have , and let your hand be healed . ”
GOLD:	But reach out and take away everything he has , and he will surely curse you to your face ! ”

ID:	1689
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi t'áadoo ákóde yah adahisoonáa da ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God yee haadzíi'ii bich'į' nídadoołtee' .
PRED:	But you have not gone in , but you have rebelled against the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ But you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God and refused to go in .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	Ádam jiináago neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin honááhaigo haye' nááhásdlį́į́' ; t'áá honáłt'éego índa t'áá ájít'éhígi át'éego há náánázhchį́ ; éí Seth bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	And Adam was a hundred and thirty years old when he became a son , and he became a son ; and he named his name .
GOLD:	When Adam was 130 years old , he became the father of a son who was just like him — in his very image . He named his son Seth .

ID:	1691
INPUT:	T'áá shí kódíshníigo ádee hadeesdzíí' , ní Bóhólníihii , háálá díí baa nisíníyá : t'ááłá'í niye'ígíí doo shąąh síní'įįdgóó bąą
PRED:	I swear by myself , saying , “ This is what the Lord says : You have done to me , because you have not obeyed me .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord says : Because you have obeyed me and have not withheld even your son , your only son , I swear by my own name that

ID:	1692
INPUT:	Áádóó ashdla'ígi daats'í oolkiłgo ch'ínáánádzá , nít'éé' náánáła' t'óó nináádaazį'go yik'ínáánádzá , áko ííłní , Ha' át'íishą' biniyé kwe'é shá bíighah t'áadoo baa nidaahkaígóó t'óó nidaahsį' ?
PRED:	He went out on the fifth day of the fifth hour , and others stood up and said to him , “ Why do you want to work here all day long ? ”
GOLD:	“ At five o'clock that afternoon he was in town again and saw some more people standing around . He asked them , ‘ Why have n't you been working today ? '

ID:	1693
INPUT:	Áko áshidííniid , Naakidi mííldóó ba'aan táadi neeznádiin i'íí'ą́ąjį' áádóó hoos'įįdjį' índa hodiyingo haz'áanii hasht'ééhodoolnííł .
PRED:	And he said unto me , There shall be a thousand three hundred and three hundred and the morning , until the morning , and the law shall be established .
GOLD:	The other replied , “ It will take 2,300 evenings and mornings ; then the Temple will be made right again . ”

ID:	1694
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é éí Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii nídeidii'ą́ągo Ében-íízer kin shijaa'dóó Áshdad kin haal' áajį' deiz'ą́ ,
PRED:	The Philistines set up the ark of God , and set up camp from Ekron .
GOLD:	After the Philistines captured the Ark of God , they took it from the battleground at Ebenezer to the town of Ashdod .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	K'éé'dídléehii léi' álástsii' k'iididoolééłgóó ch'íníyá , áko álástsii' ła' nihiyiiłkaad , nít'éé' ła' atiinjį' ahineezdee'go bik'i na'asdee' , áko tsídii nidahaast'a'go ałtso yaa nahodeeskai .
PRED:	And there came some seed in the field , and some seed fell on the road , and the birds came down to the ground .
GOLD:	“ A farmer went out to plant his seed . As he scattered it across his field , some seed fell on a footpath , where it was stepped on , and the birds ate it .

ID:	1696
INPUT:	Áko deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá ła' bizhi'ee Diyin God yich'į' hadaasdzíí' , Ni t'éí Bóhólníihii [ Diyin <unk> nílíinii , yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán áádóó tónteel índa biyi'di dahólóonii t'áá ałtso íinilaa ,
PRED:	And when they heard it , they said unto God , O Lord God , Thou hast made heaven and earth , and all that is in the sea ,
GOLD:	When they heard the report , all the believers lifted their voices together in prayer to God : “ O Sovereign Lord , Creator of heaven and earth , the sea , and everything in them —

ID:	1697
INPUT:	K'ad k'éé'dídléehii baa hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii ááhyiłníinii dadoohts'į́į́h .
PRED:	Now hear the parable of the parable .
GOLD:	“ Now listen to the explanation of the parable about the farmer planting seeds :

ID:	1698
INPUT:	Doodaii' éí diné jiisxínígíí dił bąąh háálį́ ájiilaii biniinaa bik'éí k'ééhodidoodlíłígíí bił hodoochxih áádóó hódoolwoł ; jó , yisdázhdínóochéłígóó há doo deeghání dago biniinaa hodiyoołhééł , azhą́ biniinaa hodi'yoolyéłígíí doo bą́ą́h ílį́į da nidi , áádóó doo bik'eezhdiniihgóó hoolzhiizh da nít'éé' nidi hodiyoołhééł .
PRED:	Or the blood of a man shall fall by the hand of the sword ; for he shall be cut off , and he shall be put to death ; for he shall be put to death , and he shall not be put to death , but he shall not kill him .
GOLD:	“ If the distance to the nearest city of refuge is too far , an enraged avenger might be able to chase down and kill the person who caused the death . Then the slayer would die unfairly , since he had never shown hostility toward the person who died .

ID:	1699
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , éí yoołkáałdi doo ałtso ánihideeshdįįł da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But in that day I will not destroy you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Yet even in those days I will not blot you out completely , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1700
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii ła' ákwii nidaháaztą́ągo t'áá dabiyi'ídi t'óó bił daahaadago nitsídaakees ,
PRED:	Some of the teachers of the Law were sitting at them , and they were afraid .
GOLD:	But some of the teachers of religious law who were sitting there thought to themselves ,

ID:	1701
INPUT:	Áko déédíljahdóó łeeshch'iih nízhdiijaa'go Féro bidááhdę́ę́' nizhní' <unk> , áádóó Mózes éí yá bich'į'go łeeshch'iih yááyiighazgo diné áádóó naaldlooshii bitahgóó ch'ozh łóód hááłnii' .
PRED:	And he took the ashes and put them before Pharaoh , and cast it down to the ashes , and Moses cast it down to the dust , and the ashes among the beasts .
GOLD:	So they took soot from a brick kiln and went and stood before Pharaoh . As Pharaoh watched , Moses threw the soot into the air , and boils broke out on people and animals alike .

ID:	1702
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é naanish baa dadeest'ą́
PRED:	The Levites and the Levites
GOLD:	Duties of the Kohathite Clan

ID:	1703
INPUT:	Íísíníłts'ą́ą'go honíyą́ , shiye' , áádóó yínááłgóó nijéí baa áhólyą́ .
PRED:	Listen , my son , and keep your heart in your heart .
GOLD:	My child , listen and be wise : Keep your heart on the right course .

ID:	1704
INPUT:	Peter áádóó John hwéédoochidgo , diné bił dah jookahígíí baa níjít'áázh , áko aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii ádahodííniidii baa hojoolne' .
PRED:	When Peter and John had touched him , he returned to the crowd , and told the chief priests and the elders .
GOLD:	As soon as they were freed , Peter and John returned to the other believers and told them what the leading priests and elders had said .

ID:	1705
INPUT:	Sodizin yidiits'a'ii nílíinii , diné t'áá ałtso naa hakááh .
PRED:	O daughter of man , all men come out to thee , all men .
GOLD:	for you answer our prayers.All of us must come to you .

ID:	1706
INPUT:	Shinaagóó neeznáadi mííl diné shik'iidoojah biniyé nidahaaznánígíí doo binásdzid da dooleeł .
PRED:	I will not be afraid of ten thousand men , that they may fight against me .
GOLD:	I am not afraid of ten thousand enemieswho surround me on every side .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	Ha'a'aahjígo hoodzooígíí éí Jórdan tooh bee hodeesdzo . Díí Bénjamin dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo kéyah bíí' dadooleełii bináhásdzo .
PRED:	This is the border of the Jordan . This is the inheritance of the tribe of Benjamin according to their families .
GOLD:	The eastern boundary was the Jordan River.These were the boundaries of the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	1708
INPUT:	Éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Heziikáíyah dadootsaałgo bitah doo hóóts'íid da . Áádóó Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah Diyin God yá halne'ii haa níyáago áhodííniid , Bóhólníihii kóní , Na'áłchíní bá t'áá ałtso hasht'edíílííł , háálá dadíítsaał , doo náádidíídáał da .
PRED:	In those days Hezekiah was sick , and Isaiah the prophet came to him and said to him , “ Thus says the Lord , ‘ You shall not die . '
GOLD:	About that time Hezekiah became deathly ill , and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz went to visit him . He gave the king this message : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ Set your affairs in order , for you are going to die . You will not recover from this illness . ' ”

ID:	1709
INPUT:	Abínídóó e'e'áahjį' diné nidoolnish yiniyé nídahidii'néehgo dah hidilníísh .
PRED:	And we rose up from morning to the people in the morning to do the work of the people .
GOLD:	Then people go off to their work , where they labor until evening .

ID:	1710
INPUT:	Ákondi ákódzaa , háálá áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii índa nááda'iiłniihii éí hatahgóó t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii nideistseedgo bidił dadeezna'go éí yee ádił nida'iisíí' áádóó doo ákwii ádáát'įįd da .
PRED:	But it came to pass , because the prophets and the priests have sinned against the righteous , and have sinned against them .
GOLD:	Yet it happened because of the sins of her prophetsand the sins of her priests , who defiled the cityby shedding innocent blood .

ID:	1711
INPUT:	Asdzání nił danilíinii bitahgi aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii dabitsi'ké ła' naazį́ : asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh éí Ófer kéyahdę́ę́' óola bee éé' disǫsii ályaaígíí yee hadít'éego ninish'náájí sizį́ .
PRED:	And there stood among the princes of women : and the women stood at the right hand of the stars , and they stood at the right hand of the stars .
GOLD:	Kings ' daughters are among your noble women.At your right side stands the queen , wearing jewelry of finest gold from Ophir !

ID:	1712
INPUT:	Áádóó shinááł chérabim dabit'a' deideesbaalgo bąąs t'áá bíighahgóó deílyeedgo nídadiit'a' áádóó náás dadeest'a' ; nít'éé' Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí ha'a'aahjígo dáń'dítį́hígíí ch'é'étiingi nidahaastłahgo Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God bibi'oh adidilyéehii bik'ijį' eeldoh .
PRED:	And they lifted up their wings before me , and covered their wings , and their wings , and the wings of the house of the Lord , toward the east side of the house of the God of Israel .
GOLD:	And as I watched , the cherubim flew with their wheels to the east gate of the Lord 's Temple . And the glory of the God of Israel hovered above them .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	Mt . 26 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Peter 's First Denial

ID:	1714
INPUT:	Áádóó hak'ijį' Éínath biye' Shámgar éí béégashii binahaalyéii bee Filístiya dine'é hastą́ądi neeznádiin neistseed , índa Ízrel dine'é yisdáyíínil .
PRED:	After these things , Sisera the son of Zerah killed six hundred bulls , and he saved Israel .
GOLD:	After Ehud , Shamgar son of Anath rescued Israel . He once killed 600 Philistines with an ox goad .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ádííniid , Bíni'dii t'áá bí bighangóó nídídááh , áko doo bił ahiideestséeł da . Áko Ábsalam éí t'áá bí bighangóó dah nídiidzá , índa aláahgo naat'áanii t'áadoo yił ahiiltsą́ą da .
PRED:	And the king said , Let him return to his own house , and I will not see him . And Absalom went to his own house , and he did not see the king .
GOLD:	But the king gave this order : “ Absalom may go to his own house , but he must never come into my presence. ” So Absalom did not see the king .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	Nóah éí ashdladi neeznádiin honááhai . Áko Shem áádóó Ham índa Jéífeth há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	Noah was thirty years old when he became the father of Shem , Shem , Shem , and Shem .
GOLD:	After Noah was 500 years old , he became the father of Shem , Ham , and Japheth .

ID:	1717
INPUT:	Jáshowa éí aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii yik'eh deesdlį́į́'
PRED:	Joshua and King of Israel
GOLD:	Kings Defeated West of the Jordan

ID:	1718
INPUT:	Eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadlá yóweh ho'doo'niid
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	There Is Only One God

ID:	1719
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí bidine'é yił hólǫ́ǫ doogo yee nihoní'ą́
PRED:	The Lord 's People
GOLD:	's Glory

ID:	1720
INPUT:	Áko Íísa biye'ké kódaolyéé nít'éé' : Íísa be'asdzą́ą́ Éídah biyáázh Élifaz wolyéii áádóó Íísa be'asdzą́ą́ Báshiimath biyáázh Rúwel wolyéii .
PRED:	And these are the names of Esau 's sons : Esau 's wife Esau 's son Esau 's wife Esau , Esau 's wife .
GOLD:	These are the names of Esau 's sons : Eliphaz , the son of Esau 's wife Adah ; and Reuel , the son of Esau 's wife Basemath .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	Dził danohłíinii áádóó nihí bidziilgo nahasdzáán bee niłdzilii danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii agha'dit'áahgo deísółts'ą́ą́' , háálá Bóhólníihii bidine'é yił ałghada'dit'ááh índa Ízrel dine'é yik'i hodidoo'ááł .
PRED:	Hear the word of the Lord , you mountains and earth ; for the Lord is against his people , and against Israel .
GOLD:	And now , O mountains , listen to the Lord 's complaint ! He has a case against his people.He will bring charges against Israel .

ID:	1722
INPUT:	T'óó áhodiilgisii yee ááníłígíí ałdó' doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ da ; azhą́ jooba' nahas'áanii t'áá ákogi át'éego yádaałti' nidi , badahojoobá'íii wooch'ííd yee íidoołdįįłgo yinaha'á .
PRED:	It is not good to do evil , but the poor speak evil , but the poor will destroy them .
GOLD:	The smooth tricks of scoundrels are evil.They plot crooked schemes.They lie to convict the poor , even when the cause of the poor is just .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	Dooyéí haa a'áhí dadínóohsįįł da ; iiná hąąh yiz'įįdii iiná bąąh nídoot'įįł , bináá' atíjiilaago hanáá' atínídoolnííł , biwoo' atíjiilaago hawoo' atínídoolnííł , bíla' atíjiilaago hála' atínídoolnííł , bikee' atíjiilaago hakee' atínídoolnííł .
PRED:	I will not give you food for the ground , but you will have the eye of life . He will punish the eye of the eye , and he will punish his hands , and he will punish his feet .
GOLD:	You must show no pity for the guilty ! Your rule should be life for life , eye for eye , tooth for tooth , hand for hand , foot for foot .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	Áko oodlą́ áádóó ił chohoo'į́ índa ayóó'ó'ó'ní , díí táa'go dahólǫ́ , nidi aláahdi át'éii éí ayóó'ó'ó'ní .
PRED:	And there are faith and love , but love is greater than love .
GOLD:	Three things will last forever — faith , hope , and love — and the greatest of these is love .

ID:	1725
INPUT:	áádóó yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' adinídíin doo , áko nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' adinídíin doo ; éí t'áá ákót'é silį́į́' .
PRED:	and the light of heaven shall be light , and the light of the earth shall be light ; and it was so .
GOLD:	Let these lights in the sky shine down on the earth. ” And that is what happened .

ID:	1726
INPUT:	Badahojoobá'íii áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii yik'édí nilį́ , áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii bida'iina' yisdáyiinííł .
PRED:	He is the poor and needy , and he saves the needy .
GOLD:	He feels pity for the weak and the needy , and he will rescue them .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ash łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáii éí t'áá át'é índa yee ayóó át'éii bee Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Amazáíyah yik'ijį' naazbaa'ígíí éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	And the rest of the acts of Joash , and all that he did , are they not written in the book of the Kings of Judah ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoash 's reign and everything he did , including the extent of his power and his war with King Amaziah of Judah , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	1728
INPUT:	Áko shibąąhági át'éii índa shidine'é Ízrel bibąąhági ádaat'éii bá bee ádaa hashne'go sodeeszingo Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God bidził diyinii bá ná'ooshkąąhgo
PRED:	Then I prayed to the Lord my God , my God , and my people Israel .
GOLD:	I went on praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my people , pleading with the Lord my God for Jerusalem , his holy mountain .

ID:	1729
INPUT:	tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' yídííłtahgo t'ááłá'í nítínígo nidadool'aał biniyé yah ahekáhígíí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' nidaalnish doo .
PRED:	And from twenty years old and twenty years old , every one that enter into the tent of meeting , to work in the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	List all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who are eligible to serve in the Tabernacle .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Jew dine'é ła' Shúshan kin haal'áagi bighan ; éí Mórdiikai wolyé , Jéíyer biye' nilį́ áádóó Shímiyai yę́ę hanálí nít'éé' índa naakidi náhánálí Kish éí Bénjamin dine'é nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	At that time there was a Jew in the house of Mordecai , the son of Mordecai , the son of Joseph , the son of Shimei , and the two sons of Benjamin .
GOLD:	At that time there was a Jewish man in the fortress of Susa whose name was Mordecai son of Jair . He was from the tribe of Benjamin and was a descendant of Kish and Shimei .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	Áko nihits'íís dadínóonéełii bąąhági át'éii t'áadoo yee ádíhólníihgo ádeínóhsiní , adáhonooní t'áadoo bida'íínóhsiní .
PRED:	So do n't let your body be put to death . Do n't be afraid of the dead body .
GOLD:	Do not let sin control the way you live ; do not give in to sinful desires .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	Diné t'áá jíl'áá nít'éé' Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó díí nááhidoonihii naat'áanii baa dahizhdi'aah doo .
PRED:	This is the gift of all the tribes of Israel to give to the princes of Israel .
GOLD:	All the people of Israel must join in bringing these offerings to the prince .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	nidi áshíłní , She'ajooba' doo bee ni'oh neesh'ą́ą da , háálá doo adziil hólǫ́ǫgi shidziil bee hada'íłt'é . Éí bąą ha'át'íhída doo bich'į' shidziilii t'óó yówehda bee ádaa hash'niihgo baa shił hózhǫ́ǫ doo , áko Christ bibee adziilii yee shii' kééhat'į́į doo .
PRED:	But he said to me , “ I am not able to be strong , because you are strong in my strength . Therefore I will rejoice in the power of Christ , so that I may dwell in me . ”
GOLD:	Each time he said , “ My grace is all you need . My power works best in weakness. ” So now I am glad to boast about my weaknesses , so that the power of Christ can work through me .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	Háálá éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' t'ah doo tó yiląąhgóó Nóah tsinaa'eeł yiih yíyáajį' diné da'ayą́ áádóó da'adlą́ áádóó nida'ayeh índa ahaa daha'nííł nít'éé' ,
PRED:	For in those days , when Noah had not gone into the boat , they ate , eating , and drinking , and covenant ,
GOLD:	In those days before the flood , the people were enjoying banquets and parties and weddings right up to the time Noah entered his boat .

ID:	1735
INPUT:	Áko éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go bił dahóózhǫǫdgo , Béeso naa dadii'nił , dahodííniid . Áádóó ha'át'éegoda ashja'iilaago nináhozhdidoo'áałgi baa nitsídzíkeesgo hodideeshzhiizh .
PRED:	When they heard it , we said to him , “ We will give you money . ” So they asked him , “ I will give him the right time to give him . ”
GOLD:	They were delighted when they heard why he had come , and they promised to give him money . So he began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii binahjį' Bóhólníihii hahaasdzíi'ii ałtso bohodoolnííł biniyé ádzaa :
PRED:	And it came to pass , that it may be done , that the word of the Lord might be spoken through the prophet .
GOLD:	All of this occurred to fulfill the Lord 's message through his prophet :

ID:	1737
INPUT:	Háálá nich'į' nahwiiłnánígíí beidiyíínah ; tó íína'ígíí nahalingo doo béénílniih da doo .
PRED:	For thou shalt not remember the day of his wrath ; thou shalt not remember them like waters .
GOLD:	You will forget your misery ; it will be like water flowing away .

ID:	1738
INPUT:	áko kót'éego naaltsoos bił adadzis'a' : Daal'aadii índa da'oodlání bá aląąjį' nisiidzíinii , nihik'is daniidlį́įgo , Ántiyakgóó áádóó Síriyagóó índa Silíshiyagóó doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahdóó nihik'is danohłíinii , k'é danihidii'ní .
PRED:	So he sent a letter to the apostles and the elders , and to Antioch , and to Antioch , and to Antioch , and to Antioch ,
GOLD:	This is the letter they took with them : “ This letter is from the apostles and elders , your brothers in Jerusalem . It is written to the Gentile believers in Antioch , Syria , and Cilicia . Greetings !

ID:	1739
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ánínígi át'éego , Jéíkab ayóó'óósh'ní , nidi Íisa éí jiiséłxáá' .
PRED:	As it is written , “ I love Jacob , but I hate him . ”
GOLD:	In the words of the Scriptures , “ I loved Jacob , but I rejected Esau . ”

ID:	1740
INPUT:	Áko lá índa t'áá aaníí t'áadoo haada níínílniní de ádííníił ni , áádóó doo ách'į' na'íínídlíígóó doo nił yée' da doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt not speak to thee , and thou shalt not be afraid .
GOLD:	Then your face will brighten with innocence.You will be strong and free of fear .

ID:	1741
INPUT:	Áko ałdó' Éíhab bighandóó danilíinii dayíkaígi át'éego jiníyá , háálá bimá éí doo yá'ádaashóonii ádoolníiłgo yínabiniłtin nít'éé' .
PRED:	And he went to the house of Ahab as the house of Ahab : for his mother taught evil things to do .
GOLD:	Ahaziah also followed the evil example of King Ahab 's family , for his mother encouraged him in doing wrong .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áháłní , T'áadoo bahat'aadí diné t'áá ałtso bich'į' yáshti' ; t'áá áłahjį' kin bii' áłah nída'adleeh góne' índa kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' Jew dine'é t'áá ałtso áłah nídaadleehgi niná'níshtįįh nít'éé' ; t'áá nahont'inee ha'át'íida t'áadoo bee haasdzíi' da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I speak to all the people all the things that are in the synagogue and in the synagogue , and in the synagogue , I have not spoken anything . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Everyone knows what I teach . I have preached regularly in the synagogues and the Temple , where the people gather . I have not spoken in secret .

ID:	1743
INPUT:	Ner biye' Ábner bééhonísin ; bí éí nini'dooloh yiniyé naa níyá , áko dah hidiinááhgóó áádóó yah anáhídáahgi índa baa nanináhígíí t'áá ałtso bił bééhodoozįįł yiniyé át'į́ .
PRED:	Abner , son of Abner , came to take care of him , so that he would know that he would go out to meet him , and that he might know what he had done .
GOLD:	You know perfectly well that he came to spy on you and find out everything you 're doing ! ”

ID:	1744
INPUT:	Naal'a'í bik'ehgo da'agizhígíí ánáádoo'niid , Mó'ab dine'é ch'ikę́ę́h át'į́ , Mó'ab kéyahdę́ę́' Neiyómii yił nát'áázh .
PRED:	The servants answered , “ Moab is a virgin , and Naomi brought her back from Moab . ”
GOLD:	And the foreman replied , “ She is the young woman from Moab who came back with Naomi .

ID:	1745
INPUT:	Áádóó ázhdííniid , T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Díí asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii bahojoobá'í nidi t'áá ádzíłtso haláahgo i'íínilgo át'é ,
PRED:	And he said unto them , I say unto you , This widow is greater than all the poor .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , ” Jesus said , “ this poor widow has given more than all the rest of them .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	Áko Gíliyad kéyahdóó diné aląąjį' naazíinii éí Jéfthah ádeidííniid , K'ad nich'į' nináániikai ni : Áman dine'é bił da'ahidiigą́ą́ł biniyé bich'į' nihił dadííbah . Áko Gíliyad kéyahgi kééhwiit'íinii t'áá áníiltso nihinanít'áa doo .
PRED:	The elders of Gilead said to Jephthah , “ We have come to fight against us , and we will fight against the Ammonites . ” So all the inhabitants of Gilead will rule over us .
GOLD:	“ Because we need you , ” the elders replied . “ If you lead us in battle against the Ammonites , we will make you ruler over all the people of Gilead . ”

ID:	1747
INPUT:	Diné há naal'a'í t'áá áłchíní nilį́į́dą́ą́' baa <unk> jólnáago neeyą́ągo haye' ídidoolnííł .
PRED:	If a servant becomes a little child , then he will get a son for his son .
GOLD:	A servant pampered from childhoodwill become a rebel .

ID:	1748
INPUT:	Ákohgo dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' Mózes doo hah níjídááhgóó diné haa ákodaniizį́į'go Éran yaa áłah silį́į'go ádeidííniid , Haa'íshą' , diyin nihilą́ąjį' hoo'į́į dooleełígíí nihá ádíílííł , háálá díí diné éí Mózes joolyéii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezhígíí háájí shį́į́ dzizlį́į'go doo nihił béédahózin da .
PRED:	When the people saw that Moses was before the mountain , they gathered together and said to Aaron , “ Let us go before us , for we do not know that Moses brought us out of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	When the people saw how long it was taking Moses to come back down the mountain , they gathered around Aaron . “ Come on , ” they said , “ make us some gods who can lead us . We do n't know what happened to this fellow Moses , who brought us here from the land of Egypt . ”

ID:	1749
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ éí díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii nídaohdį́įh doo , áádóó tsosts'id jį́ aleeh góne' Bóhólníihii bich'į'go dahodíínóhsingo áłah náhdleeh doo .
PRED:	On the seventh day you shall eat unleavened bread , and on the seventh day you shall keep a feast to the Lord .
GOLD:	For seven days the bread you eat must be made without yeast . Then on the seventh day , celebrate a feast to the Lord .

ID:	1750
INPUT:	Áko diné áłah daazlį́į'ii , áhóót'įįdígíí dayiiłtsą́ągo , biyid nídeineests'ingo anáhaaskai .
PRED:	When the crowd saw what had happened , they were sitting at their feet .
GOLD:	And when all the crowd that came to see the crucifixion saw what had happened , they went home in deep sorrow .

ID:	1751
INPUT:	Háálá éí tsídii ahiyiileehii índa <unk> niidóóh ooghą́ąłii bits'ą́ą́dóó yisdándoołtééł .
PRED:	For thou shalt hide from the birds and the birds of the air .
GOLD:	For he will rescue you from every trapand protect you from deadly disease .

ID:	1752
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel t' ah abínídą́ą́' nízhdii'na'go Saul bidááh deeshááł jiniizį́į́' ; nít'éé' Sámuel hoł hóóne' , Kármel kin shijaa'gi Saul níyá , hodoo'niid , índa áadi tsé bee ééhániihii ádá áyiilaa , áádóó t'óó Gílgal haz'ání góyaa ííyá ni .
PRED:	And Samuel rose up early in the morning , and went to meet Saul , and told him , Saul came to Carmel , and he made a stone for him , and he went down to Gilgal .
GOLD:	Early the next morning Samuel went to find Saul . Someone told him , “ Saul went to the town of Carmel to set up a monument to himself ; then he went on to Gilgal . ”

ID:	1753
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad nílááh , ákǫ́ǫ́ dínááh ; nił honishłǫ́ǫgo yániishti' doo , áko bee hahidíídzihígíí bínaninishtin doo .
PRED:	Now therefore go , and speak with you ; and I will speak to you , and I will teach you what you say .
GOLD:	Now go ! I will be with you as you speak , and I will instruct you in what to say . ”

ID:	1754
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii yá halne'ii léi' áadi naagháá lá ; éí Óbed wolyéego Samériya kin haal'áajį' ooné łígíí yidááh níyáago áyidííniid , Jó , danihizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii éí Júdah dine'é yich'į' báhóóchįįdgo biniinaa nihílák'ehodíí'ą́ , nidi t'óó báhádzidgo nihá dahazhchįįdgo nidasoołtseedígíí yá'ąąsh góde aho<unk> ts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But there was a prophet there , who was in Samaria , and said to them , “ Behold , the Lord , the God of our fathers , has given you into the hand of Judah , because of the anger of the Lord , the God of Judah , and he has given you into heaven . ”
GOLD:	But a prophet of the Lord named Oded was there in Samaria when the army of Israel returned home . He went out to meet them and said , “ The Lord , the God of your ancestors , was angry with Judah and let you defeat them . But you have gone too far , killing them without mercy , and all heaven is disturbed .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	Háálá oodlą́ bee aa hodzódlí binahjį' Diyin God bibee ajooba' yee yisdánihíínil , áko díí doo t'áá nihí ádaahdzaa da , nidi Diyin God einíláii át'é .
PRED:	For the grace of God has saved us by faith , and you have not done this , but the gift of God is given to you .
GOLD:	God saved you by his grace when you believed . And you ca n't take credit for this ; it is a gift from God .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	Áko ahééh danízinii łahjį' bił ałts'áá'nilii yidááh doonééł biniyé łahjigo yinaashiijí dah diiná , áádóó łahjį' diné ał níí'dóó bił yishnéłígíí éí bii' déédadiljahgo bá ch'íláyi' yaa'áhígíí biláahdi áádóó tsé ahénátł'inígíí bikáá'góó hóteelgo tsé ahénátł'injį' bikéé' niikai ,
PRED:	And the rest of the people went out to meet them , and the half of the people went out of the midst of the city , and the middle of the city was above the wall , and the wall .
GOLD:	The second choir giving thanks went northward around the other way to meet them . I followed them , together with the other half of the people , along the top of the wall past the Tower of the Ovens to the Broad Wall ,

ID:	1757
INPUT:	Ákwii Kíbrath-hatéí'avah hoolyée doo , jidííniid , háálá ákwii diné a<unk> bida'niighą́ą́' yę́ę yóó'ádajiilaa .
PRED:	And he called the name of God , because they have buried the people there .
GOLD:	So that place was called Kibroth-hattaavah ( which means “ graves of gluttony ” ) because there they buried the people who had craved meat from Egypt .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'éii yíká dichin áádóó dibáá' danilíinii bik'idahojidlí , háálá éí yee hwiih dadooleeł .
PRED:	Blessed are those who are righteous and thirsty , for they will be filled with them .
GOLD:	God blesses those who hunger and thirst for justice , for they will be satisfied .

ID:	1759
INPUT:	Áko kwe'é t'áá shí baa nitséskeesígíí nihił ch'ínísh'aah ; jó , k'ad ła' nááhaídą́ą́' doo t'óó baa nidiikah danoozį́'í t'éiyá da , nidi bídanoohdlį́įgo baa nídoohkai yę́ę k'ad ła'daahłéhígíí nihá yá'át'ééh ,
PRED:	Now I want you to do what I want you to do . But now you have not been ashamed of the years , but now you want to do what you have done .
GOLD:	Here is my advice : It would be good for you to finish what you started a year ago . Last year you were the first who wanted to give , and you were the first to begin doing it .

ID:	1760
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' táá' nááhaijį' hodííchįįd . David éí Bóhólníihii nayídééłkid , áádóó Bóhólníihii hach'į' haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Saul yę́ę áádóó ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii bił dił nidaashchxii'go ída'iilaa ; jó , Gíbiyan dine'é nideistseed ; éí bąą áhát'į́ .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the third year of David , that David asked David , and the Lord said unto him , The blood of Saul , and the blood of the house of Saul , and the blood of the people of Gibeon .
GOLD:	There was a famine during David 's reign that lasted for three years , so David asked the Lord about it . And the Lord said , “ The famine has come because Saul and his family are guilty of murdering the Gibeonites . ”

ID:	1761
INPUT:	Hastą́ą́h góne' diyingo naal'a'í dilní dah yootį́łígíí kwííłní , Tooh ayóó át'éii , Yufréítiiz nílį́įdi dį́į'go diyingo nidaal'a'í bida'astł'ónígíí bidahidíchííd .
PRED:	And the sixth angel said to the angel , “ Thus says the great river , ‘ Take away four angels from the river . '
GOLD:	And the voice said to the sixth angel who held the trumpet , “ Release the four angels who are bound at the great Euphrates River . ”

ID:	1762
INPUT:	Diyin God ainíláii bá choo'į́įgo bee na'nitin
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	Living for God

ID:	1763
INPUT:	Tsé dantsaaígíí nídiiníiłgo Júdah dine'é danilíinii binááł Tahápaniizdi Féro bighan bich'į' yah e'etiinígi hashtł'ish <unk> nihígi hashtł'ish bii' nídíł'įįhgo
PRED:	Take the large stones , and set them in front of the house of Judah , at the entrance of the house of Pharaoh , at the entrance of the house of Pharaoh .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jó'ab ádííniid , T'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee' t'óó shiníníłtł'ahgo ádíní , áko tsiidétáán táa'go dah yidiijaa'go Ábsalam bijéí góne' yaa ayiisgeed ; chéch'il yiih dinoolne'go t'ahdii t'áá hináago dah naal<unk> nít'éé' lá .
PRED:	Joab said , “ Do n't be afraid ! ” So Joab said , “ There is a spear in the heart of Absalom 's spear , and he put a spear in the midst of the tree .
GOLD:	“ Enough of this nonsense , ” Joab said . Then he took three daggers and plunged them into Absalom 's heart as he dangled , still alive , in the great tree .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi diné ła' shizhé'é t'áadoo dabidohníní , háálá t'ááłá'í nihiTaa' nilį́ , éí yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Do n't say to my father on earth , because he is your Father in heaven .
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	Nihí nihizhé'é yaa naagháhígíí baa nidaahkai . Áko ádahodííniid , Nihí doo adilyé bee danihi'dizhchį́į da , áko nihiTaa' t'ááłá'í , éí Diyin God .
PRED:	And ye have done the works of your father . And they said unto them , Ye are not born , that your Father may be one God .
GOLD:	No , you are imitating your real father. ” They replied , “ We are n't illegitimate children ! God himself is our true Father . ”

ID:	1767
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ana'í doonéełgo nihikéyah yinídoot'ihgo bee nihidziilii nihits'ą́ą́' yaa kódeidoolííł , índa bidziilgo nihił nahaz'ánídóó ałtso nihighada'doolyééł .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : The enemy shall come up , and shall take away the strength of our enemies , and shall destroy us , and all the kingdoms of the earth shall be taken away .
GOLD:	Therefore , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ an enemy is coming ! He will surround them and shatter their defenses.Then he will plunder all their fortresses . ”

ID:	1768
INPUT:	Díí shił ádzaaígíí Jerúsalem atíidoolííł biniyé Diyin God honíle' yę́ędą́ą́' nahalin índa Kííbar tooh nílínígíí bibąąhdi shił ádzaa yę́ę nahalin áádóó ni'jį' níshjool .
PRED:	This is what God did to me when I had done to Jerusalem , and I fell on the face of the river , as I had done by the river .
GOLD:	This vision was just like the others I had seen , first by the Kebar River and then when he came to destroy Jerusalem . I fell face down on the ground .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	Áko Shííkem éí Jéíkab bitsi' Dáínah k'ad yidáahjį' bi'niitsą́ , áko ch'ikę́ę́h ayóó'áyó'níigo hazhóó'ógo łíídilchíigo yich'į' yáłti' .
PRED:	When Shechem saw Jacob 's daughter Shechem , she was dead before her , and the young woman loved him , and spoke to him a mighty man .
GOLD:	But then he fell in love with her , and he tried to win her affection with tender words .

ID:	1770
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' nidaho'diizhchínígíí t'áá ádzíłtso shíí' dajílį́ , índa danihilį́į'da , béégashii áádóó dibéda dabi<unk> go alą́ąjį' nidahachíhígíí t'áá ałtso daashí .
PRED:	All the firstborn were mine , and all the firstborn were mine , and the cattle , and the firstborn of the firstborn were mine .
GOLD:	“ The firstborn of every animal belongs to me , including the firstborn males from your herds of cattle and your flocks of sheep and goats .

ID:	1771
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ądi shiTaa' bii' honishłónígíí , áádóó shii' dahonohłónígíí , índa nihii' dahonishłónígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	On that day you will know that I am in my Father , and you will know that I am in you .
GOLD:	When I am raised to life again , you will know that I am in my Father , and you are in me , and I am in you .

ID:	1772
INPUT:	Nidi hazhé'é doo yits'íídgóó diné yich'į' nahwiisnáa'go áádóó bik'is t'áá na'níle'dii yigha'ídláago índa bidine'é yitahgóó doo yá'át'éehii yaa naayáago biniinaa doo ákwii áát'įįdii bąą dadootsaał , jó'akon .
PRED:	But his father was angry with him , and a brother who has committed evil in the midst of his brother , and among his people , behold , he will die because of his wickedness .
GOLD:	But the father will die for his many sins — for being cruel , robbing people , and doing what was clearly wrong among his people .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	T'áá Lat bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' áhoot'éé nít'é'ígi át'éego , da'jiyą́ áádóó da'jidlą́ , ahaa nida'jiilniih , haa nida'iiniih , k'éédazh'didlééh áádóó kin ádajile' ,
PRED:	As Lot was in those days , eat , and drink , and drink , and give thanks to us , and build a house .
GOLD:	“ And the world will be as it was in the days of Lot . People went about their daily business — eating and drinking , buying and selling , farming and building —

ID:	1774
INPUT:	Doósh nihił béédahózin da ? Doo ákogi ádaat'éii Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ts'ídá doo bíí' dadooleeł da . Éí bąą t'áadoo yóó'adanihinii'áhí : na'ageh bee tsi'dajíkáahii , e'elyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáii , dazhdiléii , hats'íís bee adádazhnoolníinii , diné t'óó baa yáhásingo t'áá hó ahaa ninájíldeehii ,
PRED:	Do you not know that the Kingdom of God is not of the righteous ? Therefore we do not love yourselves , who hate idols , false gods ,
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that those who do wrong will not inherit the Kingdom of God ? Do n't fool yourselves . Those who indulge in sexual sin , or who worship idols , or commit adultery , or are male prostitutes , or practice homosexuality ,

ID:	1775
INPUT:	Áádóó sin yee dahataałii áádóó dáń'daditį́hí yaa ádahalyáanii dabiDiyin God bich'į' nahaghá áádóó í'dídééh ałtso áńdaajiil'įįhgo nidajil'a' nít'éé' ; David yę́ę índa biye' Sálaman yę́ę éí t'áá yee haadzíi'ii bik'eh ádajít'éé nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when he had finished the singers and the prophets , they sent them to serve God , and to make all the commandment of David , and to the son of David .
GOLD:	They performed the service of their God and the service of purification , as commanded by David and his son Solomon , and so did the singers and the gatekeepers .

ID:	1776
INPUT:	Índa ani'įįhii yah ii'néehii habi'deel'į́į'go bił nidzílghaal ládą́ą́' bidiłígíí doo ła'da bee bohodidoot'ih da .
PRED:	The thief looked at him , and no one will be afraid .
GOLD:	“ If a thief is caught in the act of breaking into a house and is struck and killed in the process , the person who killed the thief is not guilty of murder .

ID:	1777
INPUT:	Mt . 8 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus and John the Baptist

ID:	1778
INPUT:	Kót'éego t'óó báhádzidgo shibee atí'él'íinii bee atíniishłaago hwiih deeshłeeł ; áadi índa doo łe'nisin da doo , áko hasht'edíínísht'éego ts'ídá doo shá nááhodoochįįł da .
PRED:	So I will pour out my wrath on them , and I will be filled with anger ; there I will not fear you , and I will not be angry .
GOLD:	“ Then at last my fury against you will be spent , and my jealous anger will subside . I will be calm and will not be angry with you anymore .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	áádóó níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaa haz'ą́ągi ahééníbaalígíí áádóó bá ííyah danii'áii índa bitł'ááh naaznilii t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí índa ch'é'étiingi dáádiníbaalígíí ; tł'óół índa anídaalkałígíí ; níbaal bii' hodílzinii bee bina'anishii t'áá ałtso ,
PRED:	and the pillars of the tabernacle , and the pillars , and the pillars , and the pillars , and the pillars , and the pillars ; and all the work of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	the curtains for the walls of the courtyard ; the posts and their bases ; the curtain for the entrance to the courtyard ; the ropes and tent pegs ; all the furnishings to be used in worship at the Tabernacle ;

ID:	1780
INPUT:	Áko asdzání na'ageh yee tsi'naagháhígíí łahgo át'éego yąąh tsíńdookosgi ch'ééh bee bá hooł'a' , nidi doo t'áá k'ad yi'iilaa da .
PRED:	And the woman would not turn away from her sins , but she did not turn away from her .
GOLD:	I gave her time to repent , but she does not want to turn away from her immorality .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	Nidi Paul éí doo íinízin da , háálá Pamfíliyadóó łah hats'ą́ą́' t'ą́ą́' hááyáago t'áadoo náásgóó hoł náádeeshnish da .
PRED:	But Paul did not know what he had said , because he had gone back and did not work with him .
GOLD:	But Paul disagreed strongly , since John Mark had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in their work .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	Áko ts'ísee k'ehgo dajiináanii Diyin God doo bił dahojíshǫ́ǫ le' át'ée da .
PRED:	And it is not good to be pure to God in the flesh .
GOLD:	That 's why those who are still under the control of their sinful nature can never please God .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	Áko ashdladi mííl diné nízhdiinilgo Béthel kin shijaa'ígíí áádóó Éí'ai kin haal'áhígíí bita'gi Éí'ai e'e'aahjígo aa héeshjée'go ájiilaa .
PRED:	And he took five thousand men , and set them on the east side of Ai , between Ai and Ai .
GOLD:	That night Joshua sent about 5,000 men to lie in ambush between Bethel and Ai , on the west side of the town .

ID:	1784
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran ííłní , Ízrel dine'é binááł doo shiinohdlą́ą́góó áádóó doo shidíínóhsingóó biniinaa díí áłah nilínígíí kéyah baa dinish'aahígíí doo biih dooh'ish da .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ If you do not believe me , you will not bring me into this land that I am giving you . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Because you did not trust me enough to demonstrate my holiness to the people of Israel , you will not lead them into the land I am giving them ! ”

ID:	1785
INPUT:	Nidabidiztseedii ch'íhidooltł'iłgo dabits'íís bits'ą́ą́dóó dííłdzid dah didooldoh , áádóó dabidiłę́ę éí dził bąąh danílį́į doo .
PRED:	And her body shall be cut off , and her flesh shall be afraid of her flesh ; and her mountains shall be covered with shame .
GOLD:	Their dead will be left unburied , and the stench of rotting bodies will fill the land.The mountains will flow with their blood .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	Éí bee ajooba' nitsiinázt'i' doo áádóó yoo' nizhóníii hayo' áhojiilaa nahonílin doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt make thy face , and shalt make thy head as a robe of a robe .
GOLD:	What you learn from them will crown you with graceand be a chain of honor around your neck .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	Saul éí Áman dine'é yik'eh deesdlį́į́'
PRED:	Saul and the Ammonites
GOLD:	Saul Defeats the Ammonites

ID:	1788
INPUT:	Shiníbaal si'ą́ą́dóó t'áá háiida , Hach'iyą' t'ah doo bee hwiih deidleeh da , doo niihí da ?
PRED:	If you eat my tent , you wo n't eat it .
GOLD:	“ My servants have never said , ‘ He let others go hungry . '

ID:	1789
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é ábidiní , Tł'ízíchǫǫh éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áádóó dóola yázhí índa dibé yázhí éí t'áá áłah ła' binááhaí hadaałt'éii didlidgo nááhániihii át'éego nídadidooh'ish .
PRED:	And he said to the children of Israel , “ You shall bring a sin offering , a young bull , a year old , a burnt offering without blemish .
GOLD:	Then tell the Israelites , ‘ Take a male goat for a sin offering , and take a calf and a lamb , both a year old and without defects , for a burnt offering .

ID:	1790
INPUT:	Nit'áá aaníinii bii'góó shił yí'ash , áádóó nashinítin , háálá Diyin God bee yisdááyáii nílį́ ; t'áá áłahjį' niba' ánísht'é .
PRED:	Tell me the truth , and teach me , because you are the God of my salvation always .
GOLD:	Lead me by your truth and teach me , for you are the God who saves me.All day long I put my hope in you .

ID:	1791
INPUT:	Áádóó bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ą́ą dooleełígíí neeznáá béésh łitsoii yee áyiilaa ; t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo éí hastą́ądi ké naazlá ádaníłnééz áádóó hastą́ądi ké naazlá ádaníłtéél índa dego dį́į́'dóó ná'áłníí' ké naazlá ádanízah .
PRED:	And he made four pillars of brass , twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits .
GOLD:	Huram also made ten bronze water carts , each 6 feet long , 6 feet wide , and 41/2 feet tall .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	Jesus ánáádoo'niid , Diné baa násht'į́į doo biniyé díí nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' níyá , éí doo da'oo'ínígíí da'oo'į́į dooleeł biniyé , da'oo'ínígíí doo da'oo'į́į da doo ałdó' biniyé .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I have come to see this world , so that they can not see . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ I entered this world to render judgment — to give sight to the blind and to show those who think they see that they are blind . ”

ID:	1793
INPUT:	Ákót'éego dahinohná , háálá Jesus nihíká níyáago yisdánihidooniłígíí k'ad koshídę́ę́' hoolzhishgo nihił béédahózin . Da'iisiidląąd yę́ędą́ą́' ánízah hadziih yę́ę k'ad t'áá bi'oh ánízah hadziih . Áko t'áá íídą́ą́' ch'éédadiidziłjį' ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	So you are still alive , because you know that Jesus came to you , and you know that the time is near . Now the time is near . And when we came , we came out to the mountain .
GOLD:	This is all the more urgent , for you know how late it is ; time is running out . Wake up , for our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed .

ID:	1794
INPUT:	Éí doo ninizį́į́'góogo nínízinígíísh bik'é nich'į' ni'doolééł ? Shí éí doo ná nidideesh'áał da ; ts'ídá yee' t'áá ni nididíí'ááł ; éí bąą nił bééhózinígíí baa hodíílnih .
PRED:	If you do not turn away from him , will I give you your reward ? I will not give you . You will know what you have done . ”
GOLD:	“ Must God tailor his justice to your demands ? But you have rejected him ! The choice is yours , not mine.Go ahead , share your wisdom with us .

ID:	1795
INPUT:	Áádóó nidahideest'áanii índa neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' bíighahgo ninádahidit'aahígíí áádóó diyingo ats'ádahideest'ánígíí bee hada'ahódlíigo nidajiijááh nít'éé' . Éí Konanáíyah , Líívai diné nilíinii bee bóhólnííh áádóó bik'is Shímiyai hakéé' góne' sizį́ .
PRED:	And they brought the tenth of your princes , and the tenth of the holy things , and the holy things , and the holy things , and the Levites stood before him .
GOLD:	the people faithfully brought all the gifts , tithes , and other items dedicated for use in the Temple . Conaniah the Levite was put in charge , assisted by his brother Shimei .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	áádóó díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii ts'iizis bee yíkánígíí , tł'oh naadą́ą́' ak'áán éí ak'ah bił ałtaa násdziidgo bááh dá'áka'í nahalinígíí ak'ah bik'i yadziidii , áádóó ak'áán nááhidoonihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii nááhizhdoołnih .
PRED:	and the basket of unleavened flour mixed with olive oil , and the oil of oil , and the grain offering , and the drink offering .
GOLD:	a basket of bread made without yeast — cakes of choice flour mixed with olive oil and wafers spread with olive oil — along with their prescribed grain offerings and liquid offerings .

ID:	1797
INPUT:	Áádóó dį́į́'ts'áadah náhááh góne' Kédorleiyómer índa ła' ananit'a'í danilíinii hoł daníbaa' , áko Ríífem dine'é éí Ásh<unk> yim hoolyéegi áádóó <unk> dine'é éí Ham hoolyéegi índa Íímim dine'é éí <unk> yathéíyim hoolyéegi
PRED:	And it came to pass in the fourteenth year , in the fourteenth year of his princes , and with his princes , and they went out with him , and the princes of Ham , and there was a place at Beersheba .
GOLD:	One year later Kedorlaomer and his allies arrived and defeated the Rephaites at Ashteroth-karnaim , the Zuzites at Ham , the Emites at Shaveh-kiriathaim ,

ID:	1798
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman áádóó áłah ílínígíí t'áá ałtso bił wók'ą́ądi Gíbiyan kin haal'áadi jíkai , háálá Diyin God biníbaal bii' dahozdísinii áadi si'ą́ ; éí Bóhólníihii bá naal'a'í Mózes honoojíidi áyiilaa .
PRED:	Solomon and all the assembly went to Gibeon , because the Lord 's servant Moses was there in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then he led the entire assembly to the place of worship in Gibeon , for God 's Tabernacle was located there . ( This was the Tabernacle that Moses , the Lord 's servant , had made in the wilderness . )

ID:	1799
INPUT:	Doo yá'ádaashóonii bits'ánínáahgo yá'át'éehgo áánííł , áko hool'áágóó hinínáa doo .
PRED:	Turn away from evil , and do good , and live forever .
GOLD:	Turn from evil and do good , and you will live in the land forever .

ID:	1800
INPUT:	áko Jerúsalemdi naashá yę́ędą́ą́' , aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa Jew dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii hwee shił dahoolne'go , Haa nídíít'įįłgo há nihodíí'ááł , dashidííniid .
PRED:	When I was in Jerusalem , the chief priests and the elders of the Jews told me , “ What do you say to me ? ”
GOLD:	When I was in Jerusalem , the leading priests and Jewish elders pressed charges against him and asked me to condemn him .

ID:	1801
INPUT:	Áko díí Shuthíílah biye'ké bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ : Shuthíílah biye' <unk> ba'áłchíní <unk> dine'é danilį́ .
PRED:	And these are the sons of Gershon : of whom the family of Jehovah is the family of the family of Jehovah .
GOLD:	This was the subclan descended from the Shuthelahites : The Eranites , named after their ancestor Eran .

ID:	1802
INPUT:	Ída'azįįd néit'aahgi shił ní'áázh áádóó bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' éí bidah na'at'a'í nahalingo shik'ijį' yideesbaal .
PRED:	His love is like the feast of the feast , and his love is against me like a prince of his master .
GOLD:	He escorts me to the banquet hall ; it 's obvious how much he loves me .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	Tó biyi'góó ch'íhínáahgo nił honishłǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó tooh danílíinii biyi'góó ch'íhínáahgo doo nik'i didoolkǫǫł da ; kǫ' biyi'góó ch'íhínáahgo doo nididoohłił da , doo nidi kǫ' dah nídíno'ii nídínaad da doo .
PRED:	I will go through the water , and I will be with you , and the rivers will be desolate , and you will burn the fire , and you will not burn up the fire , but the fire will not bow down .
GOLD:	When you go through deep waters , I will be with you.When you go through rivers of difficulty , you will not drown.When you walk through the fire of oppression , you will not be burned up ; the flames will not consume you .

ID:	1804
INPUT:	Nidi bee aa a'ááh nisinii doo t'áá k'ad bits'ą́ąjį' kwíishłaa da ; Saul yę́ę éí bits'ą́ąjį' kwíishłaago ninááł nahjį' kóhooshłaa yę́ęgi át'éego bí doo ákódeeshłíił da .
PRED:	But I will not turn away his mercy from him , as I have removed from Saul .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	t'áá háiida diné ła' , doodaii' nidine'é Ízrel t'áá át'é éí bijéí biyi'di bee bich'į' nidahwii'nánígíí bił béédahózingo áádóó díí haz'áníjį' dah dadéelníihgo sodadilzingo áádóó nída'ookąąhgo
PRED:	If any man or all the house of Israel know that they are in their heart , and pray upon this place ,
GOLD:	and if your people Israel pray about their troubles , raising their hands toward this Temple ,

ID:	1806
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , naanáshi'dee<unk> dóó bik'ijį' łahgo át'éego tsíńdíkééz . Nashinínítą́ą́'dóó bik'ijį' shitsosk'id nídííkaad . Ániid naasháádą́ą́' t'óó baa yáhásinígi áát'įįdii biniinaa shił hóóląąd áádóó yániizį́į́' .
PRED:	Surely , I have turned away my face , and have not turned my face against me ; and I have been ashamed of my youth , because of my wickedness , and because of my wickedness .
GOLD:	I turned away from God , but then I was sorry.I kicked myself for my stupidity ! I was thoroughly ashamed of all I did in my younger days . '

ID:	1807
INPUT:	Áko kéyah háá'áyį́į́h yee ná'áldįįhgo bił hóóchxǫ'go hoolzhish doo áádóó nihí éí nihi'ana'í bikéyahdi naałdeehgo kéyah háádoolyįhgo háá'áyį́į́h yee ná'áldįįh doo .
PRED:	And the land shall be destroyed , and the famine shall be destroyed , and the famine shall be destroyed in your enemies , and the land shall be desolate .
GOLD:	Then at last the land will enjoy its neglected Sabbath years as it lies desolate while you are in exile in the land of your enemies . Then the land will finally rest and enjoy the Sabbaths it missed .

ID:	1808
INPUT:	Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah yiyiisxį́į́dóó bik'ijį' diné nidaabaahii áádóó asdzánída áádóó áłchíní índa yúnak danilíinii yisnáago dah yidíníiłkaadii éí Karíyah biye' Johéínan índa siláo binanit'a'í danilíinii yił tádíkáahii Gíbiyandóó shónídayoost'e' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , after they had slain Ishmael the son of Ishmael , the son of Ishmael , and the men , and the children , and the princes of the guard , and the princes of the army that were with him , and the princes of the army that were with him .
GOLD:	Then Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders took all the people they had rescued in Gibeon — the soldiers , women , children , and court officials whom Ishmael had captured after he killed Gedaliah .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hazhé'é bitsi' , doodaii' hamá bich'é'é bił jineezhtéezhii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	Cursed be he that lies with his father or mother 's daughter , and all the people shall say , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with his sister , whether she is the daughter of his father or his mother . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	1810
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ayóó át'éegi át'éego sitį́ , áádóó náshdóítsoh át'éhígi át'éego háishą' nábididoołt'eeł ? T'áá háiida nik'ijidlíii bik'ihojidlíi doo , índa t'áá háiida hóyée'go ná haadzíi'ii hóyée'go bá ha'doodzih .
PRED:	He is like a lion , and like a lion , and who will give you blessing , and he who is blessed will bless you .
GOLD:	Like a lion , Israel crouches and lies down ; like a lioness , who dares to arouse her ? Blessed is everyone who blesses you , O Israel , and cursed is everyone who curses you . ”

ID:	1811
INPUT:	Bábilan nahós'a'gi diné yindant'áa doo biniyé Jew dine'é éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo níínínil ; aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , bee háínídzí'ígíí díí diné doo dayíists'ą́ą' da , nidiyin danilíinii doo yá nidaal'a' da índa óola e'elyaii biinisį'ii doo yich'į' nidahałáa da .
PRED:	And the Jews raised up against the Jews , O king of Babylon , and said , O king of Babylon , thou hast not listened to these words , and have not listened to the words of the people , and have not served the gods , and have not served them .
GOLD:	But there are some Jews — Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego — whom you have put in charge of the province of Babylon . They pay no attention to you , Your Majesty . They refuse to serve your gods and do not worship the gold statue you have set up . ”

ID:	1812
INPUT:	Áádóó náánáła' Diyin God bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii t'óó ahayóí Jesus hódahooł'aahii binááł t'áá aaníí baa nijiyáhígíí éí díí naaltsoos doo bik'inídaháasdzo da ,
PRED:	And there was a great sign in the sight of God , which is written in the book of the disciples ,
GOLD:	The disciples saw Jesus do many other miraculous signs in addition to the ones recorded in this book .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	Bíni' Bóhólníihii éí nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso biníłch'i yiDiyin God nilíinii diné ła' dah oonéłígíí yá sizį́įgo íidoolííł ;
PRED:	Let the Lord make the spirit of all the earth stand in the camp .
GOLD:	“ O Lord , you are the God who gives breath to all creatures . Please appoint a new man as leader for the community .

ID:	1814
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Samériya dine'é asdzání léi' tó háníyáá lá . Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Tó deeshdlį́łígíí ła' shaa níkaah .
PRED:	And a certain woman came to a well . And Jesus said unto him , Give me a water , that I may drink .
GOLD:	Soon a Samaritan woman came to draw water , and Jesus said to her , “ Please give me a drink . ”

ID:	1815
INPUT:	A'áán góyaa adanihidiyooł<unk> ł ; tónteel ałníi'di diné nidaaztseedígi át'éego dadínóohnééł .
PRED:	He will destroy you into the pit , but you will die like the slain .
GOLD:	They will bring you down to the pit , and you will die in the heart of the sea , pierced with many wounds .

ID:	1816
INPUT:	Mt . 15 : 1-9
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Deaf Man

ID:	1817
INPUT:	Nidi bee hódzáanii áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii hahoyiisdzí'ígíí doo yik'eh dadódle' át'ée da .
PRED:	But the wisdom and the Holy Spirit can not obey him .
GOLD:	None of them could stand against the wisdom and the Spirit with which Stephen spoke .

ID:	1818
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yik'ee ti'hooníihii t'óó ahayóí , nidi éí t'áá át'é yits'ąą Bóhólníihii yisdábiiłteeh .
PRED:	The righteous are many , but the Lord saved them from all .
GOLD:	The righteous person faces many troubles , but the Lord comes to the rescue each time .

ID:	1819
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizingi yindaal'a'ii Néthinim t'áá át'é áádóó Sálaman bá nidaal'a'í ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	All the servants of the temple , the sons of Solomon , and the sons of Solomon , three hundred and two .
GOLD:	In all , the Temple servants and the descendants of Solomon 's servants numbered 392 .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bí'ádadíínółtą' ; ákónóht'éego díí jį́į́góó hoolzhish .
PRED:	But you shall keep the Lord your God , and keep it until this day .
GOLD:	Rather , cling tightly to the Lord your God as you have done until now .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	Áádóó Léíban ání , Díí tsé ałk'i yanáa'áhígíí díí jį́ nihita'gi bee ééhózin doo . Éí biniinaa Galíid hoosye' .
PRED:	Laban said , “ This stone is a sign between you today . It is a sign between you today . ”
GOLD:	Then Laban declared , “ This pile of stones will stand as a witness to remind us of the covenant we have made today. ” This explains why it was called Galeed — “ Witness Pile . ”

ID:	1822
INPUT:	T'áadoo tsxį́įłgo bits'ą́ą́' hidínáhí ; ha'át'íhída doo yá'át'éehii t'ááká <unk> t'ééh lágo , háálá ha'át'íhída baa nideeshaał hiniizįįhgo t'áá bí nízingo yaa naaghá .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid . Do n't do anything good , because he does what he wants to do . ”
GOLD:	Do n't try to avoid doing your duty , and do n't stand with those who plot evil , for the king can do whatever he wants .

ID:	1823
INPUT:	Índa bá halne'ii Néíthan dah yidiił'a'go ání , Jedidáíyah joolyée doo ; Bóhólníihii biniit'aa ákóhozhdííniid .
PRED:	Then Nathan sent Nathan the prophet , saying , “ The Lord has blessed him . ”
GOLD:	and sent word through Nathan the prophet that they should name him Jedidiah ( which means “ beloved of the Lord ” ) , as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	Zíínas , bee haz'áanii yína'niłtinii , índa Apálas , t'áá ha'át'íhída doo yídin nilį́į́góó ádíílíiłgo dah náádidoot'ash .
PRED:	The teachers of the law , Silas , and Silas , and Silas , will not go back to you .
GOLD:	Do everything you can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos with their trip . See that they are given everything they need .

ID:	1825
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , yót'ááh hiníláii ąą áníléehgo nił hadaoldóóh ! Daadził bidinílníihgo daałid doo !
PRED:	O Lord , open the heavens , make the heavens ; let the mountains be burned .
GOLD:	Open the heavens , Lord , and come down.Touch the mountains so they billow smoke .

ID:	1826
INPUT:	Samériya kéyahgi kéédahat'ínígíí éí Beth-éíven kin shijaa'gi béégashii yáázh be'elyaii yaa nitsinákah doo . Diné índa nááda'iiłniihii éí yaa bił dahoneeni yę́ę yaa yínííł danilį́įgo daacha doo , háálá ayóó át'é dayó'ní yę́ę bił ahóóyáa doo .
PRED:	The inhabitants of Samaria shall go down to the image of the calf , and the priests shall mourn , for they shall mourn .
GOLD:	The people of Samaria tremble in fearfor their calf idol at Beth-aven , and they mourn for it.Though its priests rejoice over it , its glory will be stripped away .

ID:	1827
INPUT:	Héímath hoolyéii éí bik'ą́ąhgo éiyá e'e'aahjigo Ayóó'át'é Tónteel hoolyéhígíí bibąąhgóó bee hoodzo doo . Díí éí e'e'aahjígo hoodzo doo .
PRED:	And the border of Hamath shall be at the west side of the sea ; this shall be the border of the sea .
GOLD:	“ On the west side , the Mediterranean itself will be your border from the southern border to the point where the northern border begins , opposite Lebo-hamath .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	Índa Zedekáíyah ałdó' bináá' haa'nil , áádóó Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí béésh da'ahólzha'í yee dahwiistł'ǫ́ǫgo Bábilan kéyahgóó tsinaabąąs bee hoł aníbą́ą́z . Áko dajiztsą́ bijį́įjį' awáalyaa góne' ahóółt'e' .
PRED:	Zedekiah 's eyes were broken out of his eyes , and the king of Babylon went with him in chains , and they went to Babylon in prison until the day of the prison .
GOLD:	Then he gouged out Zedekiah 's eyes and bound him in bronze chains , and the king of Babylon led him away to Babylon . Zedekiah remained there in prison until the day of his death .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	T'óó badaa'ihígi ádajit'ínígíí áádóó bee haz'áanii dajiitíihii biniinaa haa nísíst'įįd áádóó doo honísh'į́į da sélį́į́' .
PRED:	Because of the evil things that are evil , and I have turned my face on them because of their sins .
GOLD:	I turned my face away and punished them because of their defilement and their sins .

ID:	1830
INPUT:	Habákak bisodizin
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	Habakkuk 's Prayer

ID:	1831
INPUT:	Alezáander béésh łichí'ii yitsidii lą'ígóó doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áshííł'įįd da ; baa nijiyáhígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii k'ééhodidoodlííł .
PRED:	He has done many other things to me , and he will repay me according to what he did .
GOLD:	Alexander the coppersmith did me much harm , but the Lord will judge him for what he has done .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	Ayóó át'é áda'azįįdii binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Parable of the Great Feast

ID:	1833
INPUT:	Éí bąą naanish bidziilii bee badahojoobá'ígo ájiilaa . Naa'azhníídee'go t'áadoo háká oolyeedí da nít'éé' .
PRED:	Therefore he made the poor in his work ; he did not help him .
GOLD:	That is why he broke them with hard labor ; they fell , and no one was there to help them .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	Háadiyee' Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í yizhchį́ ? Jó , ha'a'aahdi bisǫ' deiiltsą́ , áko bich'į' nidahodiidlaał biniyé niikai .
PRED:	Where is the father of the Jews ? Behold , we have seen the stars of the east , and we have done it .
GOLD:	“ Where is the newborn king of the Jews ? We saw his star as it rose , and we have come to worship him . ”

ID:	1835
INPUT:	Áko Mary Mágdaliin índa Mary ła'ígíí ałdó' éí tséní'ootsélígíí binaashiidę́ę́' siké .
PRED:	Mary was Mary Magdalene , and Mary , who was from the rock .
GOLD:	Both Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting across from the tomb and watching .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Doo yá'áshónígi ánihi'didoolnííł , dííniidii bohodoolníiłgo nihił béédahózin dooleeł biniyé kwe'é atínihideeshłíłígíí díí bee nihich'į' ééhózin doo :
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will send a sign to you , so that I will punish you there , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ ‘ And this is the proof I give you , ' says the Lord , ‘ that all I have threatened will happen to you and that I will punish you here . '

ID:	1837
INPUT:	T'áá éí bijį́ siláo dahayóii bitahdóó doo nídanilyéesii t'áá łichí'ígo yóó'adahidoojah , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	On that day they will turn away from the mighty men of war , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	On that day the most courageous of your fighting menwill drop their weapons and run for their lives , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1838
INPUT:	Nidine'é Ízrel nich'į' nida'iisíi'go biniinaa bi'ana'í bik'eh dadeesdlį́į'go áádóó nízhi' dayózhíigo nich'į' ninákaigo índa díí kin biyi' nída'ookąąhgo sodadilzingo
PRED:	The Israelites have sinned against you because of your enemies , and when they call out to your name , and pray in this house .
GOLD:	“ If your people Israel are defeated by their enemies because they have sinned against you , and if they turn back and acknowledge your name and pray to you here in this Temple ,

ID:	1839
INPUT:	Átsé nídízídígíí naadiin dį́į́'góó yoołkáałgo <unk> ayóó át'é tooh nílínígíí bibąąhgi sézį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And I stood on the fourteenth day of the first month , and stood by the river .
GOLD:	On April 23 , as I was standing on the bank of the great Tigris River ,

ID:	1840
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Bóhólníihii bik'ijidlíii nílíinii , yah aninááh . Ha'át'íishą' biniyé tł'óo'di sínízį́ ? Kin góne' ná hasht'ehooshłaa áádóó ghą́ą́'ask'idii ałdó' bá hasht'ehooshłaa .
PRED:	And he said unto them , O Lord , come into the house ; why do thou stand in the midst of the house ? I have prepared for thee , and for camels .
GOLD:	Laban said to him , “ Come and stay with us , you who are blessed by the Lord ! Why are you standing here outside the town when I have a room all ready for you and a place prepared for the camels ? ”

ID:	1841
INPUT:	háálá bee ak'e'ashchínígíí ałtso bohodoolnííł biniyé díí k'ééhodi'nééh yoołkááł át'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	For it shall be done to pass , that it may come to pass , that it may come to pass , that it may be done .
GOLD:	For those will be days of God 's vengeance , and the prophetic words of the Scriptures will be fulfilled .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	Kwe'é hool'áágóó hanáshyį́įh doo , kwe'é kééhasht'į́į doo , háálá éí bídin nishłį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	There I will dwell there forever , for I was no place .
GOLD:	“ This is my resting place forever , ” he said. “ I will live here , for this is the home I desired .

ID:	1843
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Bóhólníihii kóshíłníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1844
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Gíbiyan dine'é hágo yidííniidgo ííłní ; ( áko Gíbiyan dine'é éí doo Ízrel dine'é danilį́į da , nidi Ámor dine'é t'áá ayáhígo yidziihígíí danilį́ . Azhą́ Ízrel dine'é éí Gíbiyan dine'é bich'į' ádee hadazdeesdzíí' nidi Saul éí Ízrel áádóó Júdah dine'é yá yínéés<unk> go Gíbiyan dine'é ałtso nideestsił niizį́į́' : )
PRED:	So the king called for Gideon , and he said to the people of Israel , “ They are not the people of Israel , but the people of Israel made an oath to Gideon , but Saul and all Israel .
GOLD:	So the king summoned the Gibeonites . They were not part of Israel but were all that was left of the nation of the Amorites . The people of Israel had sworn not to kill them , but Saul , in his zeal for Israel and Judah , had tried to wipe them out .

ID:	1845
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Iiláíyashib bik'isóó náá'iiłniihii danilíinii yił dadeeshnishgo dibé bá dáń'dítį́hígíí ádayiilaago dílzingo nideideez'ą́ áádóó dáádílkał yąąh dah deiznilgo Míyah ya'iitł'iníjį' áádóó Hanániyel ya'iitł'iníjį' ałtso tsé deiztł'ingo dílzingo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	Then the high priest set up the gates of the priests , and set up the doors of the sheep , and set up the doors of Midian , and set up the doors of Midian .
GOLD:	Then Eliashib the high priest and the other priests started to rebuild at the Sheep Gate . They dedicated it and set up its doors , building the wall as far as the Tower of the Hundred , which they dedicated , and the Tower of Hananel .

ID:	1846
INPUT:	Áádóó Héshban kin haal'áádóó Réí<unk> kin haal'áajį' áádóó Bé<unk> nim kin haal'áajį' índa Meihanéíyim kin haal'áádóó Díí<unk> kin haal'áii bikéyahjį' ,
PRED:	And they set out from Heshbon , and from Heshbon , and from Gibeon , and from Gibeon ,
GOLD:	It extended from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim , and from Mahanaim to the territory of Lo-debar .

ID:	1847
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Éran yich'į' t'áá íiyisí báhóóchįįdgo áho'niiłdįįd nít'éé' ; t'áá éí bijį́ Éran ałdó' bá sodeeszin .
PRED:	And the anger of the Lord was very angry with Aaron , and he destroyed them , and he prayed on that day .
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bízhi' baa ch'íhwiish'aah doo ; nihí éí Diyin God ayóó át'éii nilį́įgo baa yádaałti' doo .
PRED:	For I will declare the name of the Lord , and they will speak to the great God .
GOLD:	I will proclaim the name of the Lord ; how glorious is our God !

ID:	1849
INPUT:	Bíni' á<unk> jidlo'ii éí t'áadoo biniyéhí daígíí t'áadoo beijólíhí doo ; jó , t'áadoo biniyéhí daígíí k'ééhodidoodlííł .
PRED:	Let him be an abomination in vain ; for he will repay him .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	1850
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Éíkish éí bá nidaal'a'í áyidííniid , Shoo , díí diné diigis nilį́į́ lá ! Áko ha'át'íísh biniyé bił shaa noohkai ?
PRED:	And Achish said unto his servants , Behold , this man is a man . And why do ye bring him with me ?
GOLD:	Finally , King Achish said to his men , “ Must you bring me a madman ?

ID:	1851
INPUT:	Díí ádajoolíłígíí t'áá éí nidahojílin ; t'áá aaníí , bi'eda'alyaii yaa dadzólíhígíí t'áá ałtso ałdó' t'áá ákódaat'é .
PRED:	These are those who trust in him ; yea , all those who trust in them are all those who trust in them .
GOLD:	And those who make idols are just like them , as are all who trust in them .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó Bóhólníihii baa dzíínílí , háálá Bóhólníihii Diyin God yee bidziilii hool'áágóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	trust in the Lord , for the power of the Lord God endures forever .
GOLD:	Trust in the Lord always , for the Lord God is the eternal Rock .

ID:	1853
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' bił nidahazt'i'ii bits'ąą dasinoonáago k'ad Christ bił Diyin God bii' nídanihidi'dees'į́į́' .
PRED:	For now we have been hid from the world , and now we have hid in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	For you died to this life , and your real life is hidden with Christ in God .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó shidine'é yóó'adajiizh'eezhgo bąą k'ad kwe'é ha'át'íí shee hólǫ́ ? ní Bóhólníihii . Bá nidajil'a'í hahóół'áago shízhi' t'áá ákwíí jį́ baa'ihgo bá yáti'go hoolzhish , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And now I have forsaken my people , saith the Lord , What is it here ? And now the servants of my servants speak evil in my name , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	What is this ? ” asks the Lord . “ Why are my people enslaved again ? Those who rule them shout in exultation . My name is blasphemed all day long .

ID:	1855
INPUT:	áko ła' nízhdiinilgo jiyą́ągo níjoodááł , áko hazhé'é áádóó hamá baa nídzídzáago ła' baazhnínilgo éí ałdó' ła' yiyííyą́ą́' . Nidi náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bits'íís bii'dóó tsés'ná bitł'izh nízhdiinilígíí éí t'áadoo bee bił hojoolne' da .
PRED:	And he took some of them , and went to his father , and gave them to his mother and to his mother , and ate one of them ; but he did not tell them the words of a lion .
GOLD:	He scooped some of the honey into his hands and ate it along the way . He also gave some to his father and mother , and they ate it . But he did n't tell them he had taken the honey from the carcass of the lion .

ID:	1856
INPUT:	T'áadoo dilyésí bíni' ábi'dildįįh ! Áádóó bíni' łoh néidees'į́į'ii t'áá bí yiih nídoodááł ; bíni' ábidoołdįįłii yiih yitłíísh !
PRED:	He will be destroyed , and he will take away his own net , and he will destroy them , and destroy them .
GOLD:	So let sudden ruin come upon them ! Let them be caught in the trap they set for me ! Let them be destroyed in the pit they dug for me .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	<unk> dóó dah náázhdii'náago Íílim hoolyéegi jiníná ; ákwii naakits'áadahgo tó hadaazlį́ índa páam tsosts'idiingo naazkaadgo ákwe'é nizhníná .
PRED:	And they set out from there , and encamped in the place of Baal , twelve palm trees , and palm trees .
GOLD:	They left Marah and camped at Elim , where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees .

ID:	1858
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Summary of Rehoboam 's Reign

ID:	1859
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí dine'é yik'ee dadidoogohii bidááhgóó nidahideeshnił , áko azhé'é índa aye' danilíinii t'áá ła' yik'ee dadidoogoh ; hánígóó dabighanii índa dabik'is ádadoodįįł .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord : I will bring you before this people , and they shall fall before you , and shall fall before your father , and a son , and a man , and a friend , and a friend .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ I will put obstacles in my people 's path.Fathers and sons will both fall over them.Neighbors and friends will die together . ”

ID:	1860
INPUT:	Dził Ííbal bighą́ą'di bee haz'áanii bee ak'e'doolchííł
PRED:	The Law of Mount Carmel
GOLD:	The Altar on Mount Ebal

ID:	1861
INPUT:	Na'adlo' baa na'aldeeh ałníi'gi kééhoht'į́ . Na'adlo' baa ooldahígíí biniinaa shéédahodoosįįł yę́ę doo dashinízin da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	You will dwell in the midst of lies , ” says the Lord . “ You will not know me because of your deeds .
GOLD:	They pile lie upon lieand utterly refuse to acknowledge me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1862
INPUT:	Áádóó diné dahóyáanii nidadootsił biniyé bee nihoot'áanii baa dahóóne' , áko Daniel áádóó bik'is danilíinii nideidoołtsił biniyé hadeineeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the words of the wise men were told to kill Daniel , and they sought to kill his brother .
GOLD:	And because of the king 's decree , men were sent to find and kill Daniel and his friends .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	t'áá ákwii nááhidííłnihígíí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bíighahgi nidíílééł , áádóó nik'is áłtsé bich'į' nídíídáałgo bił k'é ná'ahididíí' niił , áko índa nídíídáałgo náádi'yííłnih .
PRED:	And thou shalt take thy altar near to the altar , and thou shalt bring the first unto thy brother , and thou shalt take it , and thou shalt take it , and thou shalt offer it .
GOLD:	leave your sacrifice there at the altar . Go and be reconciled to that person . Then come and offer your sacrifice to God .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nidine'é bee bich'oni'nínígíí bee shéénílniihgo shí ałdó' yisdáshíłteeh .
PRED:	Remember me , O Lord , in thy sight , and deliver me also .
GOLD:	Remember me , Lord , when you show favor to your people ; come near and rescue me .

ID:	1865
INPUT:	Náánáła' Íílam kéyahdóó dine'é éí t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindóó ba'aan dį́į́' .
PRED:	The men of Elam , one thousand and two hundred and four .
GOLD:	The citizens of West Elam1,254

ID:	1866
INPUT:	Jeremáíyah awáalyaa dzizdá yę́ędą́ą́' Bóhólníihii hach' į' haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	In the days of Jeremiah , the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah in prison , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord had given the following message to Jeremiah while he was still in prison :

ID:	1867
INPUT:	áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah íí'eezhgo Diyin God yá naal'a'í <unk> daláíyah biye' Héínan biye'ké danilíinii bighan góne' yah íí'eezh . Éí dáádéesdáhí Shálam biye' Méíyasíyah bighanígíí bikáa'di naat' áanii danilíinii bighanígíí bíighahgóó hooghango ákóne' yah íí'eezh ,
PRED:	And he brought them into the house of the Lord , and brought them into the house of our God , the son of Shaphan , the son of Amoz , the son of Amoz , the son of Amoz , who was in charge of the house , and went into his house .
GOLD:	I took them to the Temple , and we went into the room assigned to the sons of Hanan son of Igdaliah , a man of God . This room was located next to the one used by the Temple officials , directly above the room of Maaseiah son of Shallum , the Temple gatekeeper .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	Háálá dił danílį́įgo áyiilaii bitahgi naashchii' ; tsé'éłkáa'gi doo siláhígi naashchii'go áyiilaa ; łeezh yik'iidooził biniyé t'áadoo łeeshtahjį' yayiinil da .
PRED:	For he made the blood of the blood of their blood upon the earth , and upon the dust ; he poured it upon the dust , and cast it not upon it .
GOLD:	For the blood of her murdersis splashed on the rocks.It is n't even spilled on the ground , where the dust could cover it !

ID:	1869
INPUT:	Kíídar kéyahdóó dibé t'áá ałtso naa áłah ádoolnííł ; Niibéíyath kéyahdóó deenásts'aa' ná chodeidoo'įįł ; shibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáá' náádahidoonihgo dínóodzįįł , índa shikin bii' sohodizin ayóó át'éii ayóó ánóolningo biyi'dóó ak'ijishdlíi doo .
PRED:	All the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered together ; and they shall offer an altar of me , and they shall offer an altar to me , and I will bless my temple .
GOLD:	The flocks of Kedar will be given to you , and the rams of Nebaioth will be brought for my altars.I will accept their offerings , and I will make my Temple glorious .

ID:	1870
INPUT:	áko na'ach'ąąh yindoolnishii yinaha'áa doo ; éí óola áádóó béésh łigaii índa béésh łitsoii bee ázhdoolííł ;
PRED:	to work in gold , silver , bronze , and bronze .
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	1871
INPUT:	Néíthan éí David yideezteh
PRED:	Nathan and Nathan
GOLD:	Nathan Rebukes David

ID:	1872
INPUT:	Nidi díí ch'íhoot'ánígíí t'áá aaníígóó ch'ikę́ę́h t'ah doo diné bee haleehii bee bééhózinii t'áadoo bééhoozingóó
PRED:	But when the woman saw that this was not a virgin , she knew that she was not known .
GOLD:	“ But suppose the man 's accusations are true , and he can show that she was not a virgin .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ła' háá'áazhgo t'ááłáhígóó kééhat'į́įgo , nít'éé' ła' daaztsą́ągo áádóó ba'áłchíní t'áadoo hazlį́į́'góó , hwe'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí doo hak'éí nilíinii doo yił ahaa doot'ash da , nidi bahastiin yę́ę bitsásk'ehgi bik'is be'asdzą́ą́ náájídlį́į doo biniyé baa nínááhodi'dooltééł índa ahastiin yę́ę bik'is hwee ádíhólníihgo ha'áłchíní hodooleeł .
PRED:	If a man is living in one place , he shall not take his brother 's wife , and his wife shall not take him to his brother 's wife , but he shall give him his wife to his brother 's wife .
GOLD:	“ If two brothers are living together on the same property and one of them dies without a son , his widow may not be married to anyone from outside the family . Instead , her husband 's brother should marry her and have intercourse with her to fulfill the duties of a brother-in-law .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	Áłah náhdleehgo daahsánígíí éí doo Bóhólníihii bidiyingo adą́ át'ée da .
PRED:	You are not a feast of worship to the Lord .
GOLD:	When you meet together , you are not really interested in the Lord 's Supper .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	Didlidgo náádahaniihii índa bąąhági át'éii biniyé náádahaniihii náádayiiłniihígíí doo baa nił hóózhǫǫd da .
PRED:	You did not rejoice because of the burnt offering and the sin offering .
GOLD:	You were not pleased with burnt offeringsor other offerings for sin .

ID:	1876
INPUT:	Díidíígíí t'áá ałtso ti'hoo'nííh bee dadeezt'i'ii ádaat'é .
PRED:	These things are all these things that are given to life .
GOLD:	But all this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	1877
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa yił hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' , áádóó éí kéyah biyi'góó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' bééhózínígo tádííyá .
PRED:	So the Lord was with Joshua , and he went through all the land .
GOLD:	So the Lord was with Joshua , and his reputation spread throughout the land .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	Áko Jerobówam hó ádił ni'jiisí'ígíí bee Ízrel dine'é ádił ni'iidzííh biih jíínilgo biniinaa Ízrel dine'é yóó'iididoo'ááł .
PRED:	And Jeroboam shall forgive Israel because of the sins of his sin which he had committed .
GOLD:	He will abandon Israel because Jeroboam sinned and made Israel sin along with him . ”

ID:	1879
INPUT:	Shiye' , shizaad nabíhíłtsaad ; ádíshnínígíí yíníłts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	My son , hear my words , and hear understanding .
GOLD:	My child , pay attention to what I say.Listen carefully to my words .

ID:	1880
INPUT:	t'áá shinii'jį' dine'é shá nídahałchįįhgo hoolzhish ; éí dá'ák'ehgi nááda'iiłniih , áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí bis sit'éhígíí bee ályaii yikáa'gi tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii deidiłid ;
PRED:	that my people may burn incense in the field , and they shall burn incense in the field , and burn incense on the altar .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	1881
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii binááł hasht'e'niidooniłgo ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii índa didlidgo nááhániihii néidiyoołnih ,
PRED:	And the priest shall take it in the sight of the Lord , and offer the burnt offering , and the burnt offering ,
GOLD:	The priest will present these offerings before the Lord : first the sin offering and the burnt offering ;

ID:	1882
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ákwe'é yílk'id binániigi bisóodi da'ałchozhgo lą'í naakai ,
PRED:	And there were many men sitting in the hill country .
GOLD:	There happened to be a large herd of pigs feeding on the hillside nearby .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	Mózes áádóó Éran díí bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóigo áhooníiłii t'áá ałtso Féro binááł ájiilaa , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Féro bijéí nááyííłtł'isgo bikéyahdóó t'áadoo Ízrel dine'é yéé'níłnii' da .
PRED:	Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh , and the heart of the Lord hardened them out of the land of Pharaoh , and did not let the children of Israel go .
GOLD:	Moses and Aaron performed these miracles in Pharaoh 's presence , but the Lord hardened Pharaoh 's heart , and he would n't let the Israelites leave the country .

ID:	1884
INPUT:	Diné léi' Job wolyéego Uz kéyahdi kééhat'į́ ; éí diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahí da nít'éé' áádóó t'áá ákogi ááníiłii nilį́į́ nít'éé' índa Diyin God yidósin áádóó bąąhági át'éii yá doolnih nít'éé' .
PRED:	And there was a man in the land of Canaan , and there was no man in the land of Canaan ; and he feared God , and his God , and his sin .
GOLD:	There once was a man named Job who lived in the land of Uz . He was blameless — a man of complete integrity . He feared God and stayed away from evil .

ID:	1885
INPUT:	Nidi Názarait danilíinii éí wáin deidlą́ągo ádaahłaa áádóó dahalne'ii danilíinii , T'áadoo dahołne'é , dabidohníigo bich'į' hadasoohdzíí' .
PRED:	But you have drunk wine , and have spoken to the prophets , saying , “ Do not speak to your people . ”
GOLD:	“ But you caused the Nazirites to sin by making them drink wine , and you commanded the prophets , ‘ Shut up ! '

ID:	1886
INPUT:	Áko télii éí Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í yiyiiłtsą́ągo Béílam yił neeztį́įgo Béílam báhóóchįįdgo bigish yee télii néineesxaal .
PRED:	When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord , he struck Balaam with his rod , and beat him with his rod .
GOLD:	This time when the donkey saw the angel , it lay down under Balaam . In a fit of rage Balaam beat the animal again with his staff .

ID:	1887
INPUT:	háálá kodóó náásgóó hooghan t'ááłá'íígíí biyi'dóó ashdlajilt'éego ałts'ájíkah doo , tá'ígíí éí naakiígíí yił ałk'ijį' danidlį́į doo , índa naakiígíí éí tá'ígíí yił ałk'ijį' danidlį́į doo ;
PRED:	For we will turn away from the house of one house , and the other will be against them , and they will be against the two .
GOLD:	From now on families will be split apart , three in favor of me , and two against — or two in favor and three against .

ID:	1888
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel áyidííniid , Ádaanínígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ła' bá nídiiłteeh . Áko Sámuel éí Ízrel dine'é áyidííniid , Nílááh , t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihikin hadaas'áágóó anáhóhkááh .
PRED:	The Lord said to Samuel , “ Listen to the words of the king , and take some of the people of Israel . ” Samuel said to Samuel , “ Go back to the cities . ”
GOLD:	and the Lord replied , “ Do as they say , and give them a king. ” Then Samuel agreed and sent the people home .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	Áko tsinaa'eeł biih jííyá , nít'éé' ííyol . Áko t'áá íiyisí t'óó bił adahayóí .
PRED:	And he went into the boat , and the wind was filled with fear .
GOLD:	Then he climbed into the boat , and the wind stopped . They were totally amazed ,

ID:	1890
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' díí bee nihonish'aahígíí éí Jew dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii díí Diyin God bikin áńdeidléhígíí bá kódaaht'į́į dooleeł : éí aláahgo naat'áanii binaalye'é bee t'áá tooh nílínígíí e'e'aahdę́ę'go nidi bíká anídaahjah ; da'ílíinii díí diné tsį́įłgo baa dahidoohnił , áko doo dabidí'nóoltł'ah da .
PRED:	And this is the law that I command the elders of the Jews to build the house of God , which is in the east side of the king 's house , but in the west side of the river , and ye shall not escape .
GOLD:	“ Moreover , I hereby decree that you are to help these elders of the Jews as they rebuild this Temple of God . You must pay the full construction costs , without delay , from my taxes collected in the province west of the Euphrates River so that the work will not be interrupted .

ID:	1891
INPUT:	Áko yá'át'éehii bidiníná doo yá'át'éehii yee k'éédashidiidlaa , índa ayóó'óósh'nínígíí bidiníná shik'ee dadeeznih .
PRED:	They gave me good things , and they hated me , and they hated me .
GOLD:	They repay evil for good , and hatred for my love .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	Neeznádiin honááhai nidi hats'íís k'adę́ę daatsaahgo doo baa nitsídzíkees da , áádóó Sarah doo ałchíi daígíí ałdó' doo baa nitsídzízkéez da , nidi hwe'oodlą' t'áadoo łahgo ádzaa da .
PRED:	And she was about twenty years old when she was about to die , and I did not know that Sarah was not of his body , but did not believe .
GOLD:	And Abraham 's faith did not weaken , even though , at about 100 years of age , he figured his body was as good as dead — and so was Sarah 's womb .

ID:	1893
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman dah diiyáago bikáá' náá'iiniihí béésh łitsoii bee ályaii si'áníjį' Bóhólníihii binááł hajiyá ; éí níbaal bii' dahozdísiniigi si'ą́ ; ákwii t'ááłáhídi míilgo didlidgo nááhániihii nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	And Solomon went out and stood before the altar of the Lord , where he was there in the tent of meeting ; and there he offered an offering .
GOLD:	There in front of the Tabernacle , Solomon went up to the bronze altar in the Lord 's presence and sacrificed 1,000 burnt offerings on it .

ID:	1894
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ánááshidoo'niid , Diné nílíinii , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Éí bijį́įdi bikáá' náá'iiniihí ályaago bikáá'dóó bik'ehgo hoogáałii bik'ehgo didlidgo náádahaniihii deididoołił , áádóó naaldlooshii náádahaaznii'ii bidił yikáa'gi tádeididoosas .
PRED:	The Lord said to me , “ Son of man , this is what the Lord God says : ‘ On that day the burnt offering will burn incense on the altar , and burn it on the altar , and burn it on the animals .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : These will be the regulations for the burning of offerings and the sprinkling of blood when the altar is built .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	éí bąą díí baa ákodanoozį́į́' : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God , bí Diyin God nilį́ ; bí Diyin God ba'ahódlíii nilį́ ; éí bibee aha'deet'áanii áádóó yee a'ááh nízinii ayóó'ádabó'níinii índa bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yik'eh dahół'íinii miildi ałk'i ná'iyoochííłgóó yá yi'ósin .
PRED:	Therefore you know that the Lord your God is a faithful God . He is a faithful God . He loves his covenant and love and his commandments .
GOLD:	Understand , therefore , that the Lord your God is indeed God . He is the faithful God who keeps his covenant for a thousand generations and lavishes his unfailing love on those who love him and obey his commands .

ID:	1896
INPUT:	Aláahgo shinanit'a'í nílíinii , baa nánooshkąąh , shidiits'į́į́h . T'óó shaa hojoobá'ígo nánooshkąąhígíí t'áadoo bits'ąą nanít'áhí ; naaltsoos ííł'íní Jánathan bighandi doo dadeestsaałígíí biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ doo anáshidííł'aał da .
PRED:	Please listen to me , my lord , I pray thee , and do not let me go to the poor ; do not send me to death in Jonathan 's house .
GOLD:	Listen , my lord the king , I beg you . Do n't send me back to the dungeon in the house of Jonathan the secretary , for I will die there . ”

ID:	1897
INPUT:	Nidinééh danilíinii bí nabídídííłkiłgo hazhó'ó yee nił dahodoolnih . Éí bąą shí shidinééh ajooba' bee bich'oninéego baa nitsíníkees le' , háálá áda'azįįd bijį́ niikai . Baa nánihooshkąąh , t'áá ha'át'íhída naa nídéelii éí ná nidaal'a'í áádóó David niye' baa didíí'ááł .
PRED:	Tell the young men , and tell them what I have found favor in your sight , for I beg you , for I beg you , and give your servants David your son . ”
GOLD:	Ask your own men , and they will tell you this is true . So would you be kind to us , since we have come at a time of celebration ? Please share any provisions you might have on hand with us and with your friend David . ”

ID:	1898
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí , éí naaldlooshii bitahdóó aláahgo ábóodziilii áádóó ha'át'íhída doo yik'ee dah diilyeedii ,
PRED:	A lion is like a lion among the beasts of the beast , and in his hand ,
GOLD:	the lion , king of animals , who wo n't turn aside for anything ,

ID:	1899
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii yee háádoodzihii t'áá biyi'ídi yaa nitsékos , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii éí saad nichǫ́'í bizéé'dę́ę́' háálį́ .
PRED:	The mouth of the righteous is his own mouth , but the mouth of the wicked is from the mouth of evil .
GOLD:	The heart of the godly thinks carefully before speaking ; the mouth of the wicked overflows with evil words .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	Haa'íyee' , bich'į' yaa ádadii'níiłgo bich'į' nidahodiidlaał , Bóhólníihii ánihiilaii bich'į' nitsidadidiigoh !
PRED:	Let us bow down , and bow down before the Lord , who made us .
GOLD:	Come , let us worship and bow down.Let us kneel before the Lord our maker ,

ID:	1901
INPUT:	Dį́į'go naanáz'áhídóó bidee' hadaaz'áa dooígíí t'áá ła' bizhi'ee bidee' t'áá bił ádadoohłííł , índa béésh łitsoii bik'ídadoołtih .
PRED:	You shall make four horns of the four corners of the four corners of the four corners of the four corners , and they shall cover them with bronze .
GOLD:	Make horns for each of its four corners so that the horns and altar are all one piece . Overlay the altar with bronze .

ID:	1902
INPUT:	Jó nihitsii' t'ááłá'í níláhígo nidi ałtso dayéélta' .
PRED:	For all the hair of your head were counted , and all of them were counted .
GOLD:	And the very hairs on your head are all numbered .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	Áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii bibee adziil yee Jesus Gáliliijį' nádzá , áádóó bee baa hane'ígíí kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' bikáá'góó adahosiists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the Holy Spirit came up to heaven , and he went up from heaven to heaven .
GOLD:	Then Jesus returned to Galilee , filled with the Holy Spirit 's power . Reports about him spread quickly through the whole region .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' shidine'é Ízrel bá náhodideesh'áałgo ákwii k'ihodideeshłééł , áko t'áá bí bikéyahgi kéédahat'į́į doo , índa doo nahjį' kónáádabidi'doolníił da , áádóó ałk'idą́ą́' doo yá'áshóonii ba'áłchíní atídahał'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę doo ákónáádahodoodlíił da .
PRED:	And I will make Israel a place for my people Israel , and they shall dwell in their own land , and there shall no more be taken away from them ; and the evil shall not be destroyed .
GOLD:	And I will provide a homeland for my people Israel , planting them in a secure place where they will never be disturbed . Evil nations wo n't oppress them as they 've done in the past ,

ID:	1905
INPUT:	A'át'e' doo bijéí bii' dahólóonii bik'idahojidlí , háálá Diyin God dayoo'į́į doo .
PRED:	Blessed are those who do evil in heart , for they will see God .
GOLD:	God blesses those whose hearts are pure , for they will see God .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bizaad k'ehgo Jónah hasht'e'ádiilyaago Nínevehgóó dashdiiyá . Ákohgo Níneveh ayóó át'é kin haal'á ha'naa nijígháahgo tágí jį́ oodááł bíighah .
PRED:	And Jonah rose up , according to the word of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) , and rose up , and went up to Ai for three days .
GOLD:	This time Jonah obeyed the Lord 's command and went to Nineveh , a city so large that it took three days to see it all .

ID:	1907
INPUT:	Áko Íílai biye'ké éí diné doo yá'áshóonii nilį́ ; Bóhólníihii doo yééhósin da .
PRED:	Eli 's sons were evil , and the Lord does not know him .
GOLD:	Now the sons of Eli were scoundrels who had no respect for the Lord

ID:	1908
INPUT:	Áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii dabitélii adeiniiłkaad ; asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii nináda'iisdla'jį' bibéégashii ąąh nidayiinííł .
PRED:	The fatherless cast them down to the donkeys , and cast them to the widow .
GOLD:	They take the orphan 's donkeyand demand the widow 's ox as security for a loan .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	Áko ałk'idą́ą́' nooh dashoołchínígíí daohsą́ą doo , áádóó ániidígíí bá hwiidoo'aał biniyé nooh dashoołchínígíí ch'ídahidoohjih .
PRED:	And ye shall eat the bread , and ye shall eat it ; and ye shall prepare it for him .
GOLD:	You will have such a surplus of crops that you will need to clear out the old grain to make room for the new harvest !

ID:	1910
INPUT:	Éí dik'ą́ągo ályaa ; ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí ahą́ą́h nániilyáago yílá deests'ǫ́ǫ́d áníłnééz áádóó yílá deests'ǫ́ǫ́d áníłtéelgo
PRED:	And he made the ephod of the robe , and the robe covered the robe , and the robe of the robe ;
GOLD:	He made the chestpiece of a single piece of cloth folded to form a pouch nine inches square .

ID:	1911
INPUT:	Nidi Nan biye' Jáshowa wolyéii nihiląąjį' sizínígíí éí díí kéyah yiih doogááł ; éí chánah ádeínóhsin ; jó , éí kéyahígíí Ízrel dine'é bíí' dooleełgo íidoolííł .
PRED:	But Joshua son of Nun , son of Nun , shall go into the land ; for he shall give the land to the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Instead , your assistant , Joshua son of Nun , will lead the people into the land . Encourage him , for he will lead Israel as they take possession of it .

ID:	1912
INPUT:	Háálá Silvéínas áádóó Timothy índa shí ałdó' nihitahgóó Diyin God biYe' Jesus Christ baa dahwiilne'ígíí éí , Aoo' , índa , Dooda , doo ha'níinii át'ée da , nidi bí éí , Aoo' oołeełii nilį́ .
PRED:	For we , Timothy , Timothy , and Timothy , are among you , the Son of God Jesus Christ , and not , but he is .
GOLD:	For Jesus Christ , the Son of God , does not waver between “ Yes ” and “ No. ” He is the one whom Silas , Timothy , and I preached to you , and as God 's ultimate “ Yes , ” he always does what he says .

ID:	1913
INPUT:	Daal'aadii índa da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii díidí yaa nídadóot'įįł biniyé ahíikai .
PRED:	The apostles and the elders gathered together to judge them .
GOLD:	So the apostles and elders met together to resolve this issue .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	Áko tł'ée'go Bóhólníihii éí Sálaman yich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago ííłní , Nisodizin diséts'ą́ą́' áádóó díí kin biyi'dóó shich'į' náá'iiniih doo biniyé ádá nidinisht'ą́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord appeared to Solomon in the night , saying , “ I have heard your prayer , and I have made a sacrifice to me in this house . ”
GOLD:	Then one night the Lord appeared to Solomon and said , “ I have heard your prayer and have chosen this Temple as the place for making sacrifices .

ID:	1915
INPUT:	Níla' ąą ánéinil'įįhgo hináanii t'áá ałtso nináneel'ą́ąjį' deinízinii yee hwiih danilį́įgo áníł'į́ .
PRED:	He opened the hand , and sees all living creatures .
GOLD:	When you open your hand , you satisfy the hunger and thirst of every living thing .

ID:	1916
INPUT:	Shiye' nílíinii , ákódaaníinii dadeeskaigóó bikéé' dah doóya' lágo ; t'ááká bikék'edóoya' lágo .
PRED:	My son , do n't follow those who say , “ Do n't go back to their land . ”
GOLD:	My child , do n't go along with them ! Stay far away from their paths .

ID:	1917
INPUT:	Símiyan dine'é bitahdóó éí Amáíhad biye' <unk> niiltį́ ;
PRED:	Of the tribe of Simeon he set a son from the tribe of Simeon .
GOLD:	SimeonShemuel son of Ammihud

ID:	1918
INPUT:	Áko tł'éé' hazlį́į́' áádóó jį́ hazlį́į'jį' ashdla'a jį́ azlį́į́' .
PRED:	And there was evening and the same day , and the fifth day .
GOLD:	And evening passed and morning came , marking the fifth day .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę tsosts'idiin yilt'éego Ííjip kéyah góyaa yíkai , áádóó k'ad éí yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' ánéelą́'ígi ánóohłą́ą'go ánihiilaa .
PRED:	You went down to Egypt , and now you have made you as many as the stars in heaven .
GOLD:	When your ancestors went down into Egypt , there were only seventy of them . But now the Lord your God has made you as numerous as the stars in the sky !

ID:	1920
INPUT:	Áádóó Beth-hóran wódahdi kin shijaa'ígíí índa Beth-hóran wóyahdi kin shijaa'ígíí ditą́ągo binaagóó ahéé'ítł'ingo áádóó bidáń'daditį́įhgo éí bich'ą́ą́h dah nída'atį́įhgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he set up the high places , and the border of the valley , and the gate thereof , and the gate thereof , and the gate of the gate .
GOLD:	He fortified the towns of Upper Beth-horon and Lower Beth-horon , rebuilding their walls and installing barred gates .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	Bii' tá'ádígisí bá naaz'ą́ą dooleełígíí éí tsinaabąąs bijáád bá nidaaz'áhígíí bitł'ááhdóó bídiilyį́į́' ; bijáád éí dį́į'go biyaadóó bąąh dah naaznilgo dego naakidi ké naazláádóó táá' dah alzhin ádanízah .
PRED:	And the four corners of the sea were four cubits , and the four cubits were four cubits , and four cubits high .
GOLD:	Under the panels were four wheels that were connected to axles that had been cast as one unit with the cart . The wheels were 21/4 feet in diameter

ID:	1922
INPUT:	Táá' yiską́ągo Féro ch'éenidoołt'eełgo ninaanish naa néididoo'ááł , áádóó Féro bibee adlání bee t'áá nahdę́ę́' baa ná'íkááh nít'éé' yę́ę bee bílák'ee nínáá'íkáah doo .
PRED:	On the third day , he will give you his work in the hand of Pharaoh , and let him return to the cup of Pharaoh .
GOLD:	Within three days Pharaoh will lift you up and restore you to your position as his chief cup-bearer .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bikin hadaas'áii bíí' daazlį́'ígíí łahjį' , índa dahootsooígíí Líívai dine'é yaa deideez'ą́ ; éí Bóhólníihii yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo ádzaa .
PRED:	And the cities of Israel gave to the Levites , and to the Levites , as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	So by the command of the Lord the people of Israel gave the Levites the following towns and pasturelands out of their own grants of land .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	Bik'ee ti'hoo'níihii nik'iildogo nąąh nááháka'go ts'ídá doo nidziil da .
PRED:	When you were afraid , you could not be strong .
GOLD:	If you fail under pressure , your strength is too small .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí Saul áyidííniid , Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é binanit'a'í nílíinii díí jį́ nąąh néist'įįd , áádóó bił kééhót'íinii ła' yeidiní'ą́ ; éí niláahgo yá'át'éehii nilį́ .
PRED:	Samuel said to Saul , “ The Lord has given you this day , O king of Israel , and I have given you a man greater than your neighbor . ”
GOLD:	And Samuel said to him , “ The Lord has torn the kingdom of Israel from you today and has given it to someone else — one who is better than you .

ID:	1926
INPUT:	Éí bide ádahólzinii t'áá ákogi át'éego yá k'éédoo'nííł áádóó dichin danilíinii ya'ałtso' . Bóhólníihii éí awáalyaaí ch'ééyii'nííł .
PRED:	He will give justice to those who are oppressed , and he will give them hungry . The Lord will put them in prison .
GOLD:	He gives justice to the oppressedand food to the hungry.The Lord frees the prisoners .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	Áko diné doo yá'áshóonii yóó'ádabi'diilyaago yiiłtsą́ . Hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah anídaakah áádóó ch'éédahakááh nít'éé' , áko kin haal'áagi yaa nidaaskai yę́ę baa dahoyoos'nah . Díí ałdó' t'áadoo nánídlíní da .
PRED:	And I saw the wicked , and they went into the sanctuary , and went out into the sanctuary ; and the city was destroyed . This also was vanity .
GOLD:	I have seen wicked people buried with honor . Yet they were the very ones who frequented the Temple and are now praised in the same city where they committed their crimes ! This , too , is meaningless .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	Da' nihíísh nihitahdóó ła' nihá naal'a'í hólǫ́ǫgo , áko éí nihwiiłdlaadę́ę́' , doodaii' na'niłkaadę́ę́' nádzáago ábididoohniił , Hágoshį́į́ nídaahgo ííyą́ ?
PRED:	Is there a servant among you among you , and when he comes out of the flock , and say , ‘ Come and eat ? '
GOLD:	“ When a servant comes in from plowing or taking care of sheep , does his master say , ‘ Come in and eat with me ' ?

ID:	1929
INPUT:	Diné éí hataos'nii' t'ah doo díík'ǫsh bił álnéhígíí hééł ádajiilaago dah dazhdiijaa' ; biyi' tááda'oo'nihí éí daha'éé' bee ałch'į' beda'astł'ǫ́ǫgo dah dazhdiiłjid .
PRED:	When the people had eaten the loaves of unleavened bread , they took away their clothes and put them on their clothes .
GOLD:	The Israelites took their bread dough before yeast was added . They wrapped their kneading boards in their cloaks and carried them on their shoulders .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	This message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1931
INPUT:	Háálá ó'oołdįįłii Bábilan dine'é yich'į' yinééł ; diné há dahayóii deidoołnéełgo hoda'ałtį́į́' dayiizti' , háálá Bóhólníihii Diyin God k'éédoo'níiłii nilíinii ałtso k'ééhodidoodlííł .
PRED:	For they shall fight against Babylon , and they shall fight with their mighty men ; for the Lord God of Israel shall repay them .
GOLD:	Destroying armies come against Babylon.Her mighty men are captured , and their weapons break in their hands.For the Lord is a God who gives just punishment ; he always repays in full .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	Tsosts'idi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ni'iileehígíí nídeínółtah doo ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' bee higéshí bee tł'oh naadą́ą́' higéésh hahalzhishdóó níléí tsosts'idi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ni'iileehígíí nídeí<unk> <unk> doo .
PRED:	On the seventh day you shall cut off your grain , and you shall cut it seven times from the first day to the seventh day .
GOLD:	“ Count off seven weeks from when you first begin to cut the grain at the time of harvest .

ID:	1933
INPUT:	Ánááshidi'ní , Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bich'į' dínáahgo ádíshnínígíí bee bich'į' hadíídzih .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Son of man , speak to the children of Israel , and speak to me what I have said . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Son of man , go to the people of Israel and give them my messages .

ID:	1934
INPUT:	Hweda'awéé' hanááł nihídahidiiltsxisgo dahidiitáah doo , áádóó dahakin haghadahideest'ą́ą doo , índa hweda'asdzą́ą́ yił nidahidoodił .
PRED:	They will be broken before you , and they will be broken , and they will be taken away , and their wives will be forgiven .
GOLD:	Their little children will be dashed to death before their eyes.Their homes will be sacked , and their wives will be raped .

ID:	1935
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii atíhodoolíiłgo hadił hak'ijį' nídoodleeł ; t'áá hó diné nidilt'éego haláahgo t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó yá'át'éehii nilį́įgo diltłish bee nidzistseed , áko shizhé'é David t'áadoo bił bééhóziní . Ízrel dine'é bisiláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í nilíinii Ner biye' Ábner áádóó Júdah dine'é bisiláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í nilíinii Jííther biye' Améísa ákójííł'įįd lá .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish him , and he will punish him with the sword , and he will kill him with the sword , and he will not know that my father David did not know that his father David , the captain of the army of Israel , and the army of Abner the son of Abner , the son of Nebat , the son of Nebat , the son of Abner , the son of Abner , the son of Nebat .
GOLD:	The Lord will repay him for the murders of two men who were more righteous and better than he . For my father knew nothing about the deaths of Abner son of Ner , commander of the army of Israel , and of Amasa son of Jether , commander of the army of Judah .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee ajooba' bee nihił hashne'go sheidiní'ánígíí shį́į́ daonii' .
PRED:	The grace of God has given me to you .
GOLD:	assuming , by the way , that you know God gave me the special responsibility of extending his grace to you Gentiles .

ID:	1937
INPUT:	Nidi doo t'áá k'ad hak'ee'ąą haalwodgóó hakéé' yilwołgo Ábner bitsiidétáán bikée'jigo hatsą́ą́' biyaa góne' hagháinísxi' , áko t'áá ákwe'é naa'ajíígo'go dadziztsą́ , índa t'áá ałtso hakéé' deíjeehígíí naa'ajíígo'go dadziztsáníjį' niníjéé' .
PRED:	But when he fled , he ran away from him , and cast them into the mouth of Abner 's spear , and they fell down in the middle of the spear , and all the men who followed him fell down to the dead .
GOLD:	But Asahel refused to turn back , so Abner thrust the butt end of his spear through Asahel 's stomach , and the spear came out through his back . He stumbled to the ground and died there . And everyone who came by that spot stopped and stood still when they saw Asahel lying there .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	Díí tséhígíí lą́ą , éí nihí kin ádaał'íní doo danoozį́į' da yę́ę át'é , nidi t'áá éí tsé bee naaná'ástł'inii silį́į́' .
PRED:	This is the stones which you have rejected , but all of you have become a wall .
GOLD:	For Jesus is the one referred to in the Scriptures , where it says , ‘ The stone that you builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone . '

ID:	1939
INPUT:	Áko tł'óół bee tsésǫ' góyaa hadahóólo' , háálá kin haal'áii binaa ahéénátł'inígíí bikáa'di bighan .
PRED:	And they threw him into the window , because the city was on the wall .
GOLD:	Then , since Rahab 's house was built into the town wall , she let them down by a rope through the window .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę bídayéełkaah yę́ędą́ą́'dóó wóshdę́ę́' shibik'eh hoogáałii bits'áhisoohkaigo doo bik'eh dahosooł'įįd da . Shaa nánóhkááh ; shí ałdó' nihaa náhodeeshłeeł , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii . Áko ádadohní , Ha'át'éegoshą' t'ą́ą́' nináhidiikah ?
PRED:	You have not obeyed my statutes from the days of your fathers , from the days of my youth , and have not mercy on me ; I will also judge you , ” says the Lord of hosts , “ Why do you return back ? ”
GOLD:	Ever since the days of your ancestors , you have scorned my decrees and failed to obey them . Now return to me , and I will return to you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies. “ But you ask , ‘ How can we return when we have never gone away ? '

ID:	1941
INPUT:	Naat'á gish biniyé bits'áoz'a' t'áá íiyisí dabidziil nít'éé' ; t'óó ahayóí ats'áoz'a'ígíí bitah góne' yadiineez nít'éé' ; dzíneezgo hats'áoz'a' t'óó ahayóigo ho'doot'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And their branches were very strong , and their branches were long , and their branches were long , and their branches were many .
GOLD:	Its branches became strong — strong enough to be a ruler 's scepter.It grew very tall , towering above all others.It stood out because of its heightand its many lush branches .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	áko bááh índa ch'iyáán ałtaaskąądii ts'ídá doo yinízin da .
PRED:	so that he could not eat bread and food .
GOLD:	They lose their appetitefor even the most delicious food .

ID:	1943
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii nahalne'
PRED:	John the Baptist
GOLD:	John the Baptist Prepares the Way

ID:	1944
INPUT:	T'áá háiida éí łikání halchin doo biniyé bił aheełt'éii ádá ájiilyaago éí hadine'é bits'ą́ąjį' hodi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	Whoever does what is to be clean , and he must be cut off from his people .
GOLD:	Anyone who makes incense like this for personal use will be cut off from the community . ”

ID:	1945
INPUT:	Dį́į́' bik'ehgo íidéetą́ą́' , áádóó bidáá' gónaa éí bee adlání bidáá' gónaaígíí nahalingo ch'ilátah hózhóón lílii wolyéii bee naashch'ąą' . T'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiin tóshjeeh bíighahgo bee tó siką́ .
PRED:	And it was four hundred cubits , and it was in the midst of it ; and it was a cubit in the midst of it ; and it was a hundred and twenty cubits .
GOLD:	The walls of the Sea were about three inches thick , and its rim flared out like a cup and resembled a water lily blossom . It could hold about 16,500 gallons of water .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	1Chr . 21 : 1-27
PRED:	David 's Death
GOLD:	David Builds an Altar

ID:	1947
INPUT:	Kódahóót'įįdóó bik'ijį' Heziikáíyah éí ba'ahódlíigo Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'go Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Senákerib éí Júdah kéyahgi nínáago , Kin hadaas'áii ditą́ągo binída'astł'inígíí yisnááh ádeeshłííł , nízingo yináshzhiizh .
PRED:	And it came to pass after these things , that Hezekiah sent messengers unto the Lord , that Hezekiah king of Assyria came to Judah , and I will make the cities of Judah .
GOLD:	After Hezekiah had faithfully carried out this work , King Sennacherib of Assyria invaded Judah . He laid siege to the fortified towns , giving orders for his army to break through their walls .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	Áko asdzání ła' dił bigháńdiniiltałgo naakits'áadah nááhai lá éí yee hináanii ałtso bik'é azee' bąąh ályaa lá nidi , doo ła'da náábidoołááł át'ée da ,
PRED:	And if a woman had a daughter of blood for twelve years , it is not able to make him clean .
GOLD:	A woman in the crowd had suffered for twelve years with constant bleeding , and she could find no cure .

ID:	1949
INPUT:	Diné ła' be'asdzą́ą́ yóó'ayííłt'e'go áádóó asdzání bits'áníyáádóó náánáła' diné ye'asdzą́ą́ náánásdlį́į'go ákoósh yaa nídoodááł ? Ákódahóót'įįdgo éí kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' dooládó' hóóchxǫ' da doo . Bił ałch'į' dah danilwo'ii t'óó ahayóí bił ahił da'díínílyá , áko shich'į' dah nánídááh , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	If a man has taken away his wife , and another woman has taken her away from her , then will she return to her ? And they have become a desolation , and they have become desolate , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If a man divorces a womanand she goes and marries someone else , he will not take her back again , for that would surely corrupt the land.But you have prostituted yourself with many lovers , so why are you trying to come back to me ? ” says the Lord .

ID:	1950
INPUT:	Shí dé'éyóní nishłį́ áádóó t'óó átsééd nihitah kééhasht'į́ ; łeeh ho'dii'níiłgi łahgo shaa hodinoh'aah , áko shąąh dadziztsánígíí áajį' yóó'áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	I am a stranger and a stranger , who is with you , and give me the rest of my life , and I will bury him .
GOLD:	“ Here I am , a stranger and a foreigner among you . Please sell me a piece of land so I can give my wife a proper burial . ”

ID:	1951
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii diné áłah silį́'ígíí yits'ą́ąjį' dah diikaigo , tsinaa'eeł yázhí bii' dzizdáhígíí yiih yikaigo tsinaa'eeł ła' hanaagóó naaznilígíí bił wónaanígóó dah dazh'diił'éél .
PRED:	Then the disciples left the crowd and went into the boat , and some of them went into the boat .
GOLD:	So they took Jesus in the boat and started out , leaving the crowds behind ( although other boats followed ) .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	Diyin dabidi'níinii áádóó Diyin God t'áá aaníinii
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	Idolatry Brings Destruction

ID:	1953
INPUT:	Diné nahagizgo yáłti'ii áádóó doo áhályáanii biláahgo diné baa hojoobá'ígo doo bina'adlo'góó naagháii agháago yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	It is better for the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of a fool , and a fool is better than a fool .
GOLD:	Better to be poor and honestthan to be dishonest and a fool .

ID:	1954
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Dízdiin nááhaidóó bik'ijį' Ííjip dine'é , dadine'é dabitahgóó tabidi'nooskaadii áádę́ę́' áłah ánáhodeeshdlííł ,
PRED:	But this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ After forty years I will gather the Egyptians and gather them from among the nations .
GOLD:	“ But this is what the Sovereign Lord also says : At the end of the forty years I will bring the Egyptians home again from the nations to which they have been scattered .

ID:	1955
INPUT:	Kódíshní , Nił honeedlį́įgo ná yá'át'ééh , háálá oo'áłígíí biyaagi diné ayą́ áádóó adlą́ índa bił hózhǫ́ǫgo hinánígíí t'ah náábíláahgo bá yá'ánáánát'éeh dooleełii ádin , áko oo'áłígíí biyaagi nizhdoołdįįł bijį́įjį' Diyin God haidiní'ánígíí biyi' nijishnishgo hwee hólóonii t'éí doodzih .
PRED:	So I said , “ Be well with you , for it is better for you to eat and drink and drink , so that he may destroy the sun until the sun . ”
GOLD:	So I recommend having fun , because there is nothing better for people in this world than to eat , drink , and enjoy life . That way they will experience some happiness along with all the hard work God gives them under the sun .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kónínígíí bohoolyaa , Éíbraham éí Diyin God joosdląąd , áko ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'éego há haadzíí' . Áko Diyin God bik'is jílį́įgo há ha'oodzíí' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , as it is written , Abraham believed God ; and Abraham spoke righteousness unto him . And he was a brother of God .
GOLD:	And so it happened just as the Scriptures say : “ Abraham believed God , and God counted him as righteous because of his faith. ” He was even called the friend of God .

ID:	1957
INPUT:	Náhookǫsdę́ę́' siláo dah yinéełii nihits'ą́ąjį' nízaadgóó kóhodeeshłííł índa kéyah bii' doo naagháhígóó hóółtseiijį' ahodínéeshkał ; alą́ąjį' yikahígíí éí ha'a'aahjigo tónteel bii'jį' índa akéédę́ę́' yikahígíí éí e'e'aahjigo tónteel bii'jį' ahodínéeshkał ; hats'á dahoníłchxonígíí <unk> xaaz doo , háálá doo yá'áshǫ' ayóó át'éii yaa naayá .
PRED:	I will drive out his army from the north side of the north , and will cast them out of the land of the east , from the east , from the east to the east , from the east , from the sea , from the sea , from the sea , and from the sea to the sea ; for they have done evil .
GOLD:	I will drive away these armies from the north.I will send them into the parched wastelands.Those in the front will be driven into the Dead Sea , and those at the rear into the Mediterranean.The stench of their rotting bodies will rise over the land. ” Surely the Lord has done great things !

ID:	1958
INPUT:	Jew dine'é éí hane' yá'át'éehii doo deiniizį́į́'góó bąą Diyin God yi'ana'í daazlį́į'go nihíjígo nihá yá'íít'ééh . Nidi ałk'idą́ą́' Jew dine'é dabizhé'é yę́ę Diyin God nábiizlá'ígíí binahjį' t'ah nidi Jew dine'é ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	It is better for us to be our enemies because of the Good News that the Jews had rejected the Good News . But when the Jews loved them , he loved them .
GOLD:	Many of the people of Israel are now enemies of the Good News , and this benefits you Gentiles . Yet they are still the people he loves because he chose their ancestors Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob .

ID:	1959
INPUT:	Áko t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii t'óó ahayóí dahodooleełgo lą'í yóó'adeidínóo'ah .
PRED:	Many prophets will turn away many prophets away from them .
GOLD:	And many false prophets will appear and will deceive many people .

ID:	1960
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'éegoda atída'jił'į́įgo bik'édígi atínídahodi'doolnííł . T'áá jį́įgo nidi badaa'ihii bee tsi'ndajikaígíí hoł nidahooshǫǫh . Baa yáhásinii índa bąą doo dahats'íidii dajílį́įgo áádóó baa bił dahoneenigo yooch'ííd yee danihinó'áahgo nihitah nída'adį́į́h .
PRED:	They will die in the same day , and they will die . They will be buried in the day of the evil . They will be ashamed , and they will be ashamed , and they will eat with lies .
GOLD:	Their destruction is their reward for the harm they have done . They love to indulge in evil pleasures in broad daylight . They are a disgrace and a stain among you . They delight in deception even as they eat with you in your fellowship meals .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii éí Jó'ab áádóó Abísheiyai índa Ítayai yich'į' haadzíi'go kóní , Shí shąą Ábsalam diné ániid naagháii t'áá baa dajiinohba' . Áko diné t'áá ałtso binááł aláahgo naat'áanii éí siláo binanit'a'í t'áá ałtso Ábsalam doo haada dazhdoolííłgóó yee áhodííniid .
PRED:	Then the king said to Joab , “ Be kind to the young men of Absalom . ” So the king commanded all the army to go up to Absalom .
GOLD:	And the king gave this command to Joab , Abishai , and Ittai : “ For my sake , deal gently with young Absalom. ” And all the troops heard the king give this order to his commanders .

ID:	1962
INPUT:	Áko i'íí'ą́ągo Jesus hódahooł'aahii naakits'áadahígíí bił dazh'dooyį́į́ł biniyé jidineezbin ,
PRED:	In the evening Jesus sat down with the twelve disciples to eat .
GOLD:	When it was evening , Jesus sat down at the table with the Twelve .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	Nihíyoo <unk> łígíí t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'éł'íinii bii' ałtso bił ahóóyá . T'óó ch'í'ít'ánígo hóóne'ígíí nahalingo nihee ninádahahááh .
PRED:	In the day of your wrath , and in the day of your wrath we have come out like a vision .
GOLD:	We live our lives beneath your wrath , ending our years with a groan .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Heziikáíyah haadzíi'go ání , Chaha'oh yildoh náásee neeznáá bik'eh ánízahjį' eeldohgo éí t'áá bééhózíní , éí dooda , nidi bíni' chaha'oh neeznáá bik'eh ánízahjį' t'ą́ą́' nídoolkił .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah answered , “ You can not know that the sun is ten shadow , but the shadow of the shadow of the sun will turn back . ”
GOLD:	“ The shadow always moves forward , ” Hezekiah replied , “ so that would be easy . Make it go ten steps backward instead . ”

ID:	1965
INPUT:	Ani'įįhii adínóo'į́į́ł áádóó ni'doołtsił índa í'doołdįįł t'éiyá yiniyé nádááh , nidi shí t'éí shidibé iiná bee dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł , áádóó łą́ągo bee dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł biniyé níyá .
PRED:	I have come to meet the thief and destroy them , but my sheep will have life , and I have come to you .
GOLD:	The thief 's purpose is to steal and kill and destroy . My purpose is to give them a rich and satisfying life .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	Háálá kót'éego baa hóóne' , Melkízedek náá'iiłniihii nilíinii bik'ehgo hool'áágóó náá'iiłniihii nílį́ .
PRED:	For it was said , Thou art a priest for ever .
GOLD:	And the psalmist pointed this out when he prophesied , “ You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek . ”

ID:	1967
INPUT:	Na'niłkaadii biníbaal nahjį' kólyaaígi át'éegobinahjį' hinishnánígíí shits'á honíle' ; she'iina' éí atł'óii biis<unk> yizdisígíí nahalin ; adiniih bik'ee nihozhneeł'ąąhígíí yee she'iina' niidoołt'ih ; jį́įgo áádóó tł'ée'go shá nihonít'i'go íílééh .
PRED:	As a flock is cut off from me , so let my life be like a flock , and let my life be cut off by night and night .
GOLD:	My life has been blown awaylike a shepherd 's tent in a storm.It has been cut short , as when a weaver cuts cloth from a loom.Suddenly , my life was over .

ID:	1968
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ááníiłgo bee ha'át'íí Diyin God baa hínííł ? Ha'át'íí éí nits'ą́ą́dóó néidiyiilé ?
PRED:	What shall God do to him ? What shall he take from him ?
GOLD:	If you are good , is this some great gift to him ? What could you possibly give him ?

ID:	1969
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá bí bizaad yee yik'i dahodii'ááh , áádóó yah a'atiingi shá baa hwiinít'į́į doo , nízinii łoh bá niit'ááh , índa t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yádaałti'go t'áá ákogi át'éii yiniyé át'íinii nahjį' kódeile' .
PRED:	And they have mercy upon their own mouth , and judge them in the gate ; and they shall take away the judgment of the righteous .
GOLD:	Those who convict the innocentby their false testimony will disappear.A similar fate awaits those who use trickery to pervert justiceand who tell lies to destroy the innocent .

ID:	1970
INPUT:	Nááyówehgo , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí tsés'náłtsooí hatahjį' yi'doołnih ; nidahaasdzí'ígíí t'áá bí nihits'ąą nida'ádinil'inígíí ałtso ábi'disdįįdjį' yi'doołnih .
PRED:	And the Lord your God will send you out of the midst of honey , which I have spoken to you , until I have sent you away from your own evil which I have commanded you .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	1971
INPUT:	Ajéí bił hózhóonii éí azee' idééłnínígíí nahalingo yá'át'ééh , nidi yínííł hade át'įįhgo hatah doo ákóhooł'įįh da .
PRED:	The heart of the heart is good , but the sorrow is not broken .
GOLD:	A cheerful heart is good medicine , but a broken spirit saps a person 's strength .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	Áko táá' nídeezid binih yáádayiitséehgo yaa nídiikaígíí tsosts'id nídeezidjį' ałtso yáádayiitsih .
PRED:	And it came to pass about three months , that when they saw it , that they had seen it , that they had seen it for seven months .
GOLD:	They began piling them up in late spring , and the heaps continued to grow until early autumn .

ID:	1973
INPUT:	áádóó bikáa'gi nahashch'id bikágí yik'ínídeiłtih doo áádóó náábíkáa'gi éí na'at'ą́hí t'áá át'é yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí bik'ínáltihgo ádayósin doo índa tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí éí tsits'aa' dílzinii bąąh hadaazhahígíí bii' nídítsih doo .
PRED:	And they shall cover them on the garment , and they shall cover them with fine linen , and they shall make the ark of acacia wood ; and they shall put it in the ark .
GOLD:	Then they must cover the inner curtain with fine goatskin leather and spread over that a single piece of blue cloth . Finally , they must put the carrying poles of the Ark in place .

ID:	1974
INPUT:	Áádóó áłah ílínígíí t'áá ałtso nidahałáago dahataałígíí éí dahataał índa béésh dilní bee í'dílzoołí yee ádaanínígíí dadiists'ą́ą́' , áko didlidgo náá'iiniihígíí ałtso deidííłidjį' nidahałá bíighah azlį́į́' .
PRED:	And all the assembly cried out , and the sound of the trumpet , and the trumpets , and all the burnt offering were burnt .
GOLD:	The entire assembly worshiped the Lord as the singers sang and the trumpets blew , until all the burnt offerings were finished .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí yideeztehgo ííłní , T'áadoo ádíníní , hayi'dę́ę́' haninááh !
PRED:	But Jesus began to rebuke him , saying , “ Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	But Jesus reprimanded him . “ Be quiet ! Come out of the man , ” he ordered .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	<unk> yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro-nííko éí Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yich'į' nídiibaa'go Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígóó yinéełgo aláahgo naat'áanii Josáíyah hach'į' nídiibaa'go Megído kin haal'áagi jiiłtsą́ągo ákwii jiisxį́ .
PRED:	At that time the king of Egypt went up against King Josiah , and when he saw that Josiah went up against the Euphrates River , he killed Josiah there .
GOLD:	While Josiah was king , Pharaoh Neco , king of Egypt , went to the Euphrates River to help the king of Assyria . King Josiah and his army marched out to fight him , but King Neco killed him when they met at Megiddo .

ID:	1977
INPUT:	Ne'ásaa' bee íłbézhí t'áadoo daniidóhí ch'il deeníní biyaa hadíídeezígíí nahalingo t'áá dahináago Diyin God hashké nídzingo até'éł'íinii yee nahjį' kóhodoolííł .
PRED:	As a potter , so shall he take away his wrath from the living God 's anger .
GOLD:	God will sweep them away , both young and old , faster than a pot heats over burning thorns .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	Tó nidayólíhígi daakahgo tó ádingo bichohoo'į́ ádaadįįh , áádóó t'óó bił dahaada łeh .
PRED:	The waters of the waters are full of water , and there is no hope in them .
GOLD:	They count on it but are disappointed.When they arrive , their hopes are dashed .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	Éí t'áá aaníí . Jó , éí doo da'oodlą́ą́góó biniinaa nahgóó adabi'diisti' , nidi ni éí ne'oodlą' bee doo nahgóó andi'dootih da . Áko t'áadoo ádaa hó'niihí , t'óó hodíínísin .
PRED:	Therefore , because they did not believe , but you are not trying to be put into the faith , but you would not be put to shame .
GOLD:	Yes , but remember — those branches were broken off because they did n't believe in Christ , and you are there because you do believe . So do n't think highly of yourself , but fear what could happen .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'éé nít'éé' bitahdóó diné doo ła' Ábsalam baa dzólnínígi át'éego baa ha'niih da . Bikétł'ááhdóó bitsiit'áajį' t'áá íiyisí hadaałt'é .
PRED:	And there was no man among all the tribes of Israel , as Absalom had done , and his head was very great .
GOLD:	Now Absalom was praised as the most handsome man in all Israel . He was flawless from head to foot .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	Bee ééhózinii daniidzin daaníigo dayííkeed
PRED:	A sign for a sign
GOLD:	Peter 's Declaration about Jesus

ID:	1982
INPUT:	Háálá ádajooníiłii áádóó hantsíkees shił bééhózin ; ał'ąą dine'é áádóó bizaad ał'ąą ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso áłah áhodeeshłíłígíí baa hodoolzhish , áko nihizhdookahgo bee ayóó ánísht'éii deizdoołtsééł .
PRED:	For I know the works of the poor and of all nations , and all the nations , shall come to pass , and they shall see my glory .
GOLD:	“ I can see what they are doing , and I know what they are thinking . So I will gather all nations and peoples together , and they will see my glory .

ID:	1983
INPUT:	Ách'į' kónanihídlééh , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , áko nich'į' dah nídidiikah ; ałk'idą́ą́' nihídayééłkaah yę́ęgi át'éego ániidí ánánihídlééh .
PRED:	Give us this to us , O Lord , and we will return to us , as in the days of our youth .
GOLD:	Restore us , O Lord , and bring us back to you again ! Give us back the joys we once had !

ID:	1984
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa naayáago Nííbat biye' Jerobówam yee ni'iisí'ígíí t'áá át'é éí bee Ízrel dine'é nida'iisíihgo áyiilaii t'áadoo yóó'iidíí'ą́ą da .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord . He did not turn away from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat , who made Israel sin .
GOLD:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1985
INPUT:	Tį' , Bóhólníihii bich'į' t'ą́ą́' nídiikah , háálá bí nini<unk> nizh , áko bí nánihidoołdzih ; adanihideesnih nidi , hasht'éénihidoodlííł .
PRED:	Let us return to the Lord , for he has broken his hand , and I will answer you , but I will make you clean . ”
GOLD:	“ Come , let us return to the Lord.He has torn us to pieces ; now he will heal us.He has injured us ; now he will bandage our wounds .

ID:	1986
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii bitsi' bighan góne' ayóó ánóolningo óola yishbizhgo éé' ályaii yee hadít'é .
PRED:	The king 's daughter is beautiful in the house of the king 's daughter , clothed with gold .
GOLD:	The bride , a princess , looks gloriousin her golden gown .

ID:	1987
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii baa dzíínílíi doo , áko nikee' doo niitł'ááhgóó áyósin doo .
PRED:	For he will trust in the Lord , and he will make his feet .
GOLD:	for the Lord is your security.He will keep your foot from being caught in a trap .

ID:	1988
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii dabidił éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah iikáah łeh , nidi dabitsį' níbaal haal'áhídóó bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi dadidlid łeh .
PRED:	And when the beasts of the animal is for sin offering , the high priest came into the holy place , but the flesh was burned up out of the camp .
GOLD:	Under the old system , the high priest brought the blood of animals into the Holy Place as a sacrifice for sin , and the bodies of the animals were burned outside the camp .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	Jó , éí t'óó kónízahíjį' diyingo nidaal'a'í t'áá bi'ohgo ájít'éego áhwiinilaa , áádóó aa ha'niihjí índa ił ídlį́į́jí naat'á ch'ah hak'i dííní'ą́ .
PRED:	You made him greater than the angels , and you put him on a crown of glory and honor .
GOLD:	Yet you made them only a little lower than Godand crowned them with glory and honor .

ID:	1990
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bindanit'a'í bi'deesteh
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Judgment against Israel 's Leaders

ID:	1991
INPUT:	dį́į́' góne' hanáádiit'i'ígíí éí béril , áádóó ániks , índa jásper ; t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo óola binídadeesghasgo ádaalyaa .
PRED:	And the fourth row , and a row , and a row ; and they set their hands on the gold .
GOLD:	The fourth row contained a blue-green beryl , an onyx , and a green jasper . All these stones were set in gold filigree .

ID:	1992
INPUT:	Éíbram éí Ííjip kéyahgi naagháá nít'éé'
PRED:	Abram in Egypt
GOLD:	Abram and Sarai in Egypt

ID:	1993
INPUT:	Áko baa nihinoohkaídóó nídidoohjahgo kin haal'áhígíí dadoołnééł , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí nihaididoo'ááł .
PRED:	And when you go out of your hand , you shall go to the city , because the Lord your God will give you .
GOLD:	you will jump up from your ambush and take possession of the town , for the Lord your God will give it to you .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	Háálá hajéí bee Jesus joodląąhgo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'éego há ha'adzih , áádóó t'áá hó Jesus bee ádee hazdidzihgo yisdáho'diltééh .
PRED:	For the heart of his heart is righteous , and by the oath of Jesus was saved by his own mouth .
GOLD:	For it is by believing in your heart that you are made right with God , and it is by openly declaring your faith that you are saved .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus dayílk'idgóó ajííyáago t'áá hóznízinígíí hágo bizhdííniid , áko éí haa haaskai .
PRED:	And Jesus went into the hill , and called them also , and they came to him .
GOLD:	Afterward Jesus went up on a mountain and called out the ones he wanted to go with him . And they came to him .

ID:	1996
INPUT:	diné shide ádahósinii áádóó agháago shi'ana'í danilį́įgo shinás'áhígíí bits'ąą náshidíł'įįh .
PRED:	hide me from the hand of the afflicted , and from my enemies .
GOLD:	Protect me from wicked people who attack me , from murderous enemies who surround me .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	Áko Nóah áádóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ áádóó haye'ké índa bida'asdzą́ą́ bił ch'íjíkai .
PRED:	Noah went out with his wife , his wife , his sons , and his wives .
GOLD:	So Noah , his wife , and his sons and their wives left the boat .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	Áádóó Jánathan éí Adonáíjah áyidííniid , Nidaga' , bídahwííníilníihii aláahgo naat'áanii David yee' éí Sálaman aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then Jonathan said to Adonijah , “ We have made king Solomon . ”
GOLD:	“ Not at all ! ” Jonathan replied . “ Our lord King David has just declared Solomon king !

ID:	1999
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii kóshidííniid , Nílááh , ha'ídées'į́'í ła' niníłteeh ; bíni'dii yoo'ínígíí yaa halne' doo .
PRED:	For thus saith the Lord unto me , Go , and let him declare what he hath done .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Lord said to me , “ Put a watchman on the city wall.Let him shout out what he sees .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	Ákwe'é Béthel hoolyée doo , jidííniid ; bitséédą́ą́' Luz hoolyéego kin haal' áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	The name of Bethel was called Bethel , which was called Bethel .
GOLD:	He named that place Bethel ( which means “ house of God ” ) , although it was previously called Luz .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	Áádóó David akéé'dóó nijighá , áko táa'go alą́ąjį'ígíí éí Saul yikéé' naakai .
PRED:	David was still alive , and the third followed Saul .
GOLD:	David was the youngest son . David 's three oldest brothers stayed with Saul 's army ,

ID:	2002
INPUT:	hooghandóó iiyehii ch'íghááh nahalingo áádóó diné bidziilii bił hózhǫ́ǫgo yiiltéhígíí nahalingo ha'a'ááh .
PRED:	He goes out like a rich man 's house , and his mercy like a donkey .
GOLD:	It bursts forth like a radiant bridegroom after his wedding.It rejoices like a great athlete eager to run the race .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	Nízaadgóó hada'íínółní , nihidishnínígíí bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo bąą shí ałdó' nahasdzáán t'áá si'ą́ą́ nít'éé' ach'į' nahwii'ná bee bich'į' hoolzhishígíí , éí nihokáá' dine'é bee bóhon<unk> át'éii , bits'ą́ąjį' nihííníshtą' doo .
PRED:	But I say to you , “ If you obey my voice , I also also will keep you from the end of the world . I will keep you from the end of the world .
GOLD:	“ Because you have obeyed my command to persevere , I will protect you from the great time of testing that will come upon the whole world to test those who belong to this world .

ID:	2004
INPUT:	Łah yaa adeez'ą́ągo sohodizin baa hoolzhiizhgo Peter áádóó John éí kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góde joo'ash .
PRED:	One day Peter and John went up to the temple .
GOLD:	Peter and John went to the Temple one afternoon to take part in the three o'clock prayer service .

ID:	2005
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é áádóó Ízrel dine'é doo ách'į' nida'jódlíígóó kéédahojit'į́įgo t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Dan kin haal'áádóó Bíyer-shííba kin shijaa'jį' hach'il na'atł'o'ii áádóó hatsin fig sikaadii bee dahozdíl<unk> go Sálaman abíyííłką́ .
PRED:	And Judah and the children of Israel were all around , every man according to the fruit of Dan , from Dan to Beersheba , and from Dan to Beersheba .
GOLD:	During the lifetime of Solomon , all of Judah and Israel lived in peace and safety . And from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south , each family had its own home and garden .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	<unk> nishłį́ , yisdáshíłteeh , háálá nibik'ehgo iináanii bíká ásht'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	I am the one who saved me , because I was your precepts .
GOLD:	I am yours ; rescue me ! For I have worked hard at obeying your commandments .

ID:	2007
INPUT:	Nihokáá' t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí yee nant'áa doo
PRED:	The Lord will rule over all the earth
GOLD:	The

ID:	2008
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel dine'é kódashiłníigo díí shí deídóokił : dibé nahalingo diné nihá nízhdínóołt'į́į́ł .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord God : This is what the house of Israel says : I will ask for you , and they will be like sheep .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am ready to hear Israel 's prayers and to increase their numbers like a flock .

ID:	2009
INPUT:	Tsin nitł'izii bee tsin níyizii áyiilaa áádóó óola yik'íísti' ; éí bikáá' adání bee naat'áa doo .
PRED:	He made poles of acacia wood , and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He made these poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .

ID:	2010
INPUT:	Łį́į́' bá bee atsxis hólǫ́ , télii bá azáát'i'í hólǫ́ áádóó diné doo áhályáanii bíígháándę́ę́' bee nídínóolghałii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	There is a donkey for a donkey , and a fool is nothing for a fool .
GOLD:	Guide a horse with a whip , a donkey with a bridle , and a fool with a rod to his back !

ID:	2011
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí Bóhólníihii yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí báhóóchįįdgo didooljé'ígi át'éego Jéíkab dine'é yich'į' hashké niidzį́į́' áádóó t'óó yówehda Ízrel dine'é yich'į' báhóóchįįd .
PRED:	Therefore the Lord heard this , and he was angry with Jacob as he was angry , and he became angry with Israel .
GOLD:	When the Lord heard them , he was furious.The fire of his wrath burned against Jacob.Yes , his anger rose against Israel ,

ID:	2012
INPUT:	Ákót'éego óola índa béésh łigaii bee nishíních'ąą'go áni'diilyaa nít' éé' ; áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii áádóó na'at'ą́hí da'dijihígíí índa na'at'ą́hí naashch'ąą'go bik'i tá'doolkadii ni'éé' nít'éé' ; ak'áán dibahí áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh índa ak'ah t'áá bił niyą́ą́ nít'éé' , t'áá íiyisí ayóó áníínílnin nít'éé' índa t'áá náás iiyííłdiłgo asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nílį́įjį' nííníyáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And I brought thee gold and silver , and clothed thee with fine linen , and clothed thee with fine linen , and with fine linen , and with oil , and with oil , and with oil , and with oil .
GOLD:	And so you were adorned with gold and silver . Your clothes were made of fine linen and costly fabric and were beautifully embroidered . You ate the finest foods — choice flour , honey , and olive oil — and became more beautiful than ever . You looked like a queen , and so you were !

ID:	2013
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Záíyandóó Jerúsalemgi kééhat'íinii baa ha'niih ! Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , who lives in Zion ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	The Lord be praised from Zion , for he lives here in Jerusalem.Praise the Lord !

ID:	2014
INPUT:	Bee dahool' inígíí bikáá' yí'nilgo Bóhólníihii binááł deidiiłtłah ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí yi'iilaa .
PRED:	And they put on the light , and anointed them before the Lord , as the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Then he lit the lamps in the Lord 's presence , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	2015
INPUT:	Anáá' baa áháyánígi át'éego shaa áhólyą́ ; nit'a' biyaagi náshidíł'įįh ;
PRED:	Take care of my eyes , and make me ashamed under your wings .
GOLD:	Guard me as you would guard your own eyes.Hide me in the shadow of your wings .

ID:	2016
INPUT:	Naagé ách'ą́ą́h dah yit'áałii índa naagé dah dadohjáahgo anaa'jį' hidohkááh .
PRED:	Take the shield , the shield , and the shields , and go to battle .
GOLD:	“ Prepare your shields , and advance into battle !

ID:	2017
INPUT:	Áko Záíba éí aláahgo naat'áanii áyidííniid , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í nishłį́įgo shich'į' yee hahaasdzí'ígíí t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo ná naal'a'í nishłíinii éí bik'eh ádeeshnííł . Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii ájíní , Miifíbosheth éí shibikáá' adání yich'į' dah náńdaahgo aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké atah jílį́įgo bił nída'jidį́įh doo .
PRED:	Then Michal said to the king , “ I am the Lord 's servant , according to all that my servant has commanded me , and I will do according to all that my servant has commanded him . ”
GOLD:	Ziba replied , “ Yes , my lord the king ; I am your servant , and I will do all that you have commanded. ” And from that time on , Mephibosheth ate regularly at David 's table , like one of the king 's own sons .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	Nidi adeenáago nihá naal'a' doo áádóó t'óó átsééd kééhat'íinii nahalingo nihił bighan doo , áádóó baa hózhǫ́ǫgo yihah wolyéhígíí baa hoolzhiizhjį' nihá naal'a' doo .
PRED:	But he shall serve you as a hired servant , and his house shall be for you , and in the end of the year of the year of the year .
GOLD:	Treat him instead as a hired worker or as a temporary resident who lives with you , and he will serve you only until the Year of Jubilee .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Bénjamin atah jiiłtsą́ągo hakin yaa áhályáanii ábizhdííniid , Díí diné shighan góne' yah ani'éésh . Áádóó aałk'ee áhóléehgo ałníní'ą́ągo díí diné shił da'dooyį́į́ł .
PRED:	When Joseph saw Benjamin , he said to the guard , “ Take this man 's house and eat it . ”
GOLD:	When Joseph saw Benjamin with them , he said to the manager of his household , “ These men will eat with me this noon . Take them inside the palace . Then go slaughter an animal , and prepare a big feast . ”

ID:	2020
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , doósh nahjį' ninihidííní'ą́ą da ? Diyin God nílíinii , nihisiláo dah yinéełii t'áadoo bił yínínáa da .
PRED:	O God , do you not leave us ? O God , do you not let your army live with your army .
GOLD:	Have you rejected us , O God ? Will you no longer march with our armies ?

ID:	2021
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné nílíinii , áhodooníiłii baa hólne' áádóó ahííkad ; háni'dii táadi diltłish bik'i néikęęs ; nidabidiztseedii bidiltłish éí diné ayóó ádaat'éii nidabidiztseedii bidiltłish bił biná'áznánígíí át'é .
PRED:	“ Therefore , son of man , put your hands on it three times , and let the sword fall by the sword , with the sword of the mighty men .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy to themand clap your hands.Then take the sword and brandish it twice , even three times , to symbolize the great massacre , the great massacre facing them on every side .

ID:	2022
INPUT:	Áko Ébed biye' Géíyal dashdiiyáago kin haal'áhí yah a'atiinígi dzizį́ , áádóó Abímelek índa diné bił naakaígíí aa niheekai yę́ędóó nídiijéé' .
PRED:	So he went out and stood at the gate gate gate , and Abimelech and the men who were with him went out of the battle .
GOLD:	Gaal was standing at the city gates when Abimelech and his army came out of hiding .

ID:	2023
INPUT:	Áko ałch'į' yájíłti'ígíí áádzísįįdgo Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́' Diyin God dah náhodiile' .
PRED:	And when he spake unto them , he departed from Abraham , and God departed from him .
GOLD:	When God had finished speaking , he left Abraham .

ID:	2024
INPUT:	Díí kót'éego t'áá ákwii k'os dah yildohgo e'e'ááhdóó náhool'įįh , áko abínígo k'os dah nídiildohgo nihináájí'nééh , áko jį́įgo , doodaii' tł'ée'goda k'os dah nídiildohgo dah náázhdii'nééh .
PRED:	This is the cloud that was in the cloud , and the cloud set up in the morning , and the cloud rose up in the morning , and set up the cloud by night , or by night .
GOLD:	Sometimes the cloud stayed only overnight and lifted the next morning . But day or night , when the cloud lifted , the people broke camp and moved on .

ID:	2025
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é bindanit'a'í danilíinii díí deidiizts'ą́ą'go aláahgo naat'áanii bighandóó dah diikaigo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ą́ądi yíkai , áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáń'dítį́į́h ániidíii bíighahgi dineezbin .
PRED:	And when the princes of Judah heard this , they went out from the king 's house , and came to the house of the Lord , and sat by the new wine of the Lord .
GOLD:	When the officials of Judah heard what was happening , they rushed over from the palace and sat down at the New Gate of the Temple to hold court .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph hazhé'é índa hak'isóó kéyah baa hozhdiní'ánígíí éí Ííjip kéyahgi agháago yá'áhoot'éehgi Rámsiiz hoolyéedi hasht'e'nidahaazná . T'áá Féro ádííniidígi át'éego ádadziidzaa .
PRED:	And Joseph and his brethren set up in the land of Egypt , as Pharaoh had commanded them .
GOLD:	So Joseph assigned the best land of Egypt — the region of Rameses — to his father and his brothers , and he settled them there , just as Pharaoh had commanded .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	Áko diné haniinaa ałts'ákah .
PRED:	So the people departed from him because of the crowd .
GOLD:	So the crowd was divided about him .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	Ákohgo kódíshníigo nił hodeeshnih nisingo baa nitsískees , Kǫ́ǫ́ nidaháaztánígíí índa shidine'é bahastóí danilíinii dabinááł nahíłniih . Jó , t'ą́ą́' náhideeshnih nínízingo t'ą́ą́' náhidííłnih , nidi doo ádíínííłdą́ą́' shił náhodíílnih , áko shił bééhózin doo , háálá ni , doodago éí ła' t'ą́ą́' néidiyoołnihígíí t'áá ádin , áko shí t'éí nikéé' góne' naashá . Áko áhodííniid , T'ą́ą́' náhideeshnih .
PRED:	Then I want to tell you , ‘ Here are my people and my people , and I will turn back to you . If you want to return , tell me what you have said , ‘ I will tell you , ' and you will not turn back from me . ”
GOLD:	I thought I should speak to you about it so that you can redeem it if you wish . If you want the land , then buy it here in the presence of these witnesses . But if you do n't want it , let me know right away , because I am next in line to redeem it after you. ” The man replied , “ All right , I 'll redeem it . ”

ID:	2029
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'ákóne' yí'ishgo bikáa'di jį́įgo k'os níyizgo yilzhoł , índa tł'ée'go éí yinééłgóó bee bá hool'in doo biniyé bikáa'di kǫ' níyizii bik'ehgo yííní'eezh .
PRED:	And he brought them to them in the day , in the cloud , and in the night he brought them into the midst of fire , to make light for the light .
GOLD:	You led our ancestors by a pillar of cloud during the day and a pillar of fire at night so that they could find their way .

ID:	2030
INPUT:	éí bąą ła'dadoohłííł . Baa nidiikah danoozį́į́' yę́ęgi át'éego t'áá bídanooł'ánígíí bik'ehgo ła'dadoohłííł .
PRED:	So you shall do according to what you have done . You shall do according to what you have done .
GOLD:	Now you should finish what you started . Let the eagerness you showed in the beginning be matched now by your giving . Give in proportion to what you have .

ID:	2031
INPUT:	Ákoshą' Paul ha'át'íí nilį́ ? Apá<unk> shą' ałdó' ha'át'íí nilį́ ? Jó , Diyin God yá naal'a'í niidlį́įgo hane' yá'át'éehii bee nihił dahwiilne'ígíí bee da'iisoohdląąd . Bóhólníihii t'áá ał'ąą nihaidiní'ánígíí bik'ehgo neiil'a' .
PRED:	What is Paul ? What is he ? For we have believed in the word of God ? We have believed in the word of the Lord , according to the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	After all , who is Apollos ? Who is Paul ? We are only God 's servants through whom you believed the Good News . Each of us did the work the Lord gave us .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	Nidi diné danilíinii doo dahwíists'ą́ą' da . Ákohgo diné be'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní yisxiłgo diné yich'į' ch'íhóníyil áádóó tł'éé' bíighah nídayi'iyiiłnaadgo hoos'įįd , áko hoos'įįdjį' t'óó yik'i deeskai .
PRED:	But the people did not listen to him . So he told the man to kill his wife , and he went out to the people all night , and he fell on them until morning .
GOLD:	But they would n't listen to him . So the Levite took hold of his concubine and pushed her out the door . The men of the town abused her all night , taking turns raping her until morning . Finally , at dawn they let her go .

ID:	2033
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii hashkéii biisxį́įgo háni'dii bitsį' yidzí'ígíí bee bééhózin doo biniyé nízhdoojih , áko doo ninázh'doodléeł da .
PRED:	Let the beast be killed by the beast , that he may know the flesh of the beast , that he may not make it known .
GOLD:	If it was torn to pieces by a wild animal , the remains of the carcass must be shown as evidence , and no compensation will be required .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	Háálá Nííbat biye' Jerobówam jideeskáa'go ni'iisí'ígíí áádóó éí bee Ízrel dine'é ádił nida'iisíihgo ádayiilaa ; éí eda'alyaii daahóhígíí bee Bóhólníihii Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God yádahóółchįįd .
PRED:	For they have sinned against Jeroboam the son of Nebat , the son of Nebat , and made Israel sin , and they have sinned against the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat in all the sins he had committed and led Israel to commit . The people provoked the anger of the Lord , the God of Israel , with their worthless idols .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída táyi' dahólóonii bit'a' ádinii áádóó bikágí doo dich'ízhígíí éí baa'ih danohsin doo .
PRED:	You shall be unclean , and all that is in any thing that is in the water , and the skin that is in it shall be unclean .
GOLD:	Any marine animal that does not have both fins and scales is detestable to you .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	Áko nídahooł'aahii , Éí bii'dę́ę́' hadanołchééh , bidishníigo néisiskan , nidi ch'ééh ádayííł'įįd .
PRED:	And his disciples cried out to him out of the midst of them , but they could not find him .
GOLD:	I begged your disciples to cast out the spirit , but they could n't do it . ”

ID:	2037
INPUT:	Kót'éego Iizííkiyel nihich'į' bee ééhózinii át'ée doo : t' áá ałtso nihinááł yaa naayáhígíí bik'ehgo nihí ałdó' ákódanoht'ée doo ; díí baa hoolzhiizhgo Bóhólníihii Diyin God nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	This will be a sign to you : according to all your works , so you shall know that I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Ezekiel is an example for you ; you will do just as he has done . And when that time comes , you will know that I am the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	2038
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' dine'é bił áhooníłígi át'éego naaldlooshii ałdó' bił áhoonííł ; ts'ídá t'ááłáhígo haz'ą́ ákót'éego bił áhoonííł : t'ááłá'í daatsaahígi át'éego ła'ígíí ałdó' daniné ; t'áá aaníí , t'áá ałtso aheełt'éego nídídzih ; éí bąą diné éí naaldlooshii doo yiláahgo át'ée da , háálá ts'ídá t'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nídandlíní da .
PRED:	For it is like the beasts of the earth , as it is like one man , and the other also shall be like one man ; therefore all men shall be as the beasts of the field , because there is no wild beasts .
GOLD:	For people and animals share the same fate — both breathe and both must die . So people have no real advantage over the animals . How meaningless !

ID:	2039
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'áá hó hatsin ałnáoszid jootį́įłgo kintahdóó Tsiits'in Si'ání hoolyéégóó hoł dah adiildee' , éí Hííbrew k'ehjí Gálgatha hoolyé .
PRED:	And Jesus took his cross , and led him out of the city , which is called the place of the place of the name of the name of which is called “ The name of Hebrew . ”
GOLD:	Carrying the cross by himself , he went to the place called Place of the Skull ( in Hebrew , Golgotha ) .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	Diné ła' bee ak'idi'yiitįįh bee hólóonii éí bijéí yee hóyą́ , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii yaa nitsídaakeesii bééhózingo áálnííł .
PRED:	The heart of a man is wise , but the thoughts of the foolish shall be known .
GOLD:	Wisdom is enshrined in an understanding heart ; wisdom is not found among fools .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ah abínídą́ą́' nídiijée'go dziłghą́ą́' góde haaskaigo ádaaní , Jó , kǫ́ǫ́ neiikai ; Bóhólníihii nihaa hodiní'ání góde hadiikah daniidzin , háálá ádił da'siilziih .
PRED:	And in the morning they rose up in the morning , and went up to the mountain , saying , Behold , we will go up to the mountain ; for we have sinned .
GOLD:	Then they got up early the next morning and went to the top of the range of hills . “ Let 's go , ” they said . “ We realize that we have sinned , but now we are ready to enter the land the Lord has promised us . ”

ID:	2042
INPUT:	Da' doósh díí nihił béédahózin da , ła' ałjiłnii bił jiináago éí bił ats'íís t'ááłá'íígíí jileeh ? Háálá Diyin God ání , T'ááłá'í ats'íís jidooleeł .
PRED:	Do n't you know that a prostitute with another prostitute ? For God says , “ One body will be one body . ”
GOLD:	And do n't you realize that if a man joins himself to a prostitute , he becomes one body with her ? For the Scriptures say , “ The two are united into one . ”

ID:	2043
INPUT:	Nahgóó dashdiináago Ííjip dine'é bił dahóózhǫǫd , háálá haniinaa Ííjip dine'é nídaasdzííd .
PRED:	And they departed from there , and were glad because of the Egyptians because they were afraid of the Egyptians .
GOLD:	Egypt was glad when they were gone , for they feared them greatly .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	Jó , shił bééhózingo nááshiisnii'ii hiná , áádóó niidoołkáałjį' ayííłką́ągo bí t'éí nihokáa'gi ahidíízį́į doo .
PRED:	For I know that I have not found me , and he will stand on you until the day of the month .
GOLD:	“ But as for me , I know that my Redeemer lives , and he will stand upon the earth at last .

ID:	2045
INPUT:	Ná'ooshkąąhgo sodiszin yę́ędą́ą́' shich'į' ééhosínísįįd ; dziil bee shii' sizíinii bidziilgo íinilaa .
PRED:	When I cried out to me , I cried out to you ; you have made my soul strong .
GOLD:	As soon as I pray , you answer me ; you encourage me by giving me strength .

ID:	2046
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad hasht'e'ninánóhkáahgo k'éhézdon atiin góne' dah nídahidoohkááh , áádóó nihiDiyin God Bóhólníihii áníinii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ , áko Bóhólníihii doo yá'át'éhígi ánihi'didoolnííł dííniidii łahgo át'éego yaa tsíńdookos .
PRED:	Now therefore , go straight straight , and follow the voice of the Lord your God , that he may do evil .
GOLD:	But if you stop your sinning and begin to obey the Lord your God , he will change his mind about this disaster that he has announced against you .

ID:	2047
INPUT:	nidi nááda'ayołniihgo didlidgo nááhániihii , éí náádahidoonihii didlidgo łikání halchingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih dooígíí dóola yázhí t'ááłá'ígo , deenásts'aa' t'ááłá'ígo índa dibé yázhí tsosts'idgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii ,
PRED:	You shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord , one young bull , one ram , seven male lambs without blemish .
GOLD:	You must present a burnt offering as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of one young bull , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	2048
INPUT:	Áko hodíínísingo doo ashą́ą́góó tł'oh yishbizhii shi'ée'go łeeshch'iih ák'éhésgazgo sodiszingo ná'ooshkąąhgo Bóhólníihii Diyin God bich'į' déé'į́į́' .
PRED:	I cried out to the Lord their God , and I cried out to the Lord their God .
GOLD:	So I turned to the Lord God and pleaded with him in prayer and fasting . I also wore rough burlap and sprinkled myself with ashes .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá áníiltso chin nilíinii nidahoniidlin áádóó t'áá ákogi ádeiit'ínígíí anilí baa'ihii nidahalin , índa t'áá áníiltso at'ąą' dadiibéehii nidahoniidlin áádóó doo ákwii ádeiit'ínígíí níyol nahalingo yóó'adanihii'éésh .
PRED:	But we all are hungry , and we are just , and we are just , and we are just as the wind .
GOLD:	We are all infected and impure with sin.When we display our righteous deeds , they are nothing but filthy rags.Like autumn leaves , we wither and fall , and our sins sweep us away like the wind .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii náádoodáłígíí t'ah doo baa hoolzhííshgóó t'áadoo aa nídaaht'į́įgo ándahoyo'aahí . Bóhólníihii nádzáago índa chahałheełdi ádajíít'įįdii yikáá' haidoonił índa t'áá hayi'ídi nidahodziz'áanii ííshjání íidoolííł . Áko éí bik'ehgo t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Diyin God haa haniih doo .
PRED:	Therefore , when the Lord comes , you shall not judge them in the beginning of the year of the Lord , and in the darkness , and in the darkness , and in the darkness , and in the darkness , and in all that he hath done . And every man shall praise his God according to his word .
GOLD:	So do n't make judgments about anyone ahead of time — before the Lord returns . For he will bring our darkest secrets to light and will reveal our private motives . Then God will give to each one whatever praise is due .

ID:	2051
INPUT:	Ákohgo Zuf hoolyéegi jiní'áazhgo há naal'a'í bił joo'ashígíí ábijiní , Tį' , t'ą́ą́' nikéédiit'ash ; shizhé'é daats'í télii yaa yooznahgo , jó , nihída nihikéé' bíni' íí'á .
PRED:	And when they came , the servant of his servant said to his servant , Come , let us go , and seek my father 's donkey ? For he has not followed us .
GOLD:	Finally , they entered the region of Zuph , and Saul said to his servant , “ Let 's go home . By now my father will be more worried about us than about the donkeys ! ”

ID:	2052
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí shí éí tsé yitł'ingo bo'oonishígíí t'áá k'éséłt'i' ; kéyah nidi t'áadoo ła' nidahaalnii' da ; shá nidaal'a'í éí t'áá ałtso kwe'é t'áá ahąąh deílníísh nít'éé' .
PRED:	Surely I have made a wall of stone , but there is none of my servants in it ; all my servants were in it .
GOLD:	I also devoted myself to working on the wall and refused to acquire any land . And I required all my servants to spend time working on the wall .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso t'óó bił adahóóyóigo ádadííniid , Da' díísh David biYe' át'į́ ?
PRED:	All the people were amazed and said , “ Is this the Son of David ? ”
GOLD:	The crowd was amazed and asked , “ Could it be that Jesus is the Son of David , the Messiah ? ”

ID:	2054
INPUT:	Hoos'įįdgo Jew dine'é ła' ahíikaigo , T'áadoo Paul dasiilyéhí doo nááda'diidį́įł da , doo nidi nááda'diidlį́įł da , daaníigo ádee hadadeesdzíi'go niná'ádadeest'ą́ .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the Jews gathered together together , that we would not eat bread , but we would not drink .
GOLD:	The next morning a group of Jews got together and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul .

ID:	2055
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ;
PRED:	The offering was a silver offering , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , and twenty shekels of fine flour mixed with oil .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	2056
INPUT:	ádaa dzódlíii , biyooch'íidgo yáłti'ii , t'áadoo át'éhígóó naagháii <unk> <unk> go bidił dahidinéehii ,
PRED:	He who speaks lies , does not sin , and does not sin .
GOLD:	haughty eyes , a lying tongue , hands that kill the innocent ,

ID:	2057
INPUT:	Áko ni , diné nílíinii , nidine'é ábidiní , Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii bee haz'áanii doo yik'eh hół'į́į da silį́į'go t'áá ákogi ájoonííł nít'éé' yę́ę doo yisdáhodoołtéeł da , áádóó diné doo yá'áshóonii bidoo yá'áshǫ' yits'áníyáago bidoo yá'áshǫ' yee doo ádił náá'doolzih da , índa diné t'áá ákogi ájít'éii ádił ni'dziilzíihgo t'áá ákogi ájoonííł nít'éé' yę́ę bee jiináago doo bízhneel'ą́ą da doo .
PRED:	“ Son of man , say to your people , ‘ If you obey the law of the righteous , you will not save the righteous , and you will not save the righteous from the wicked , and the wicked will be forgiven . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give your people this message : The righteous behavior of righteous people will not save them if they turn to sin , nor will the wicked behavior of wicked people destroy them if they repent and turn from their sins .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	Éí bąą bídahólníihii dooda bee bich'į' nidzistee'ii , éí Diyin God bibik'eh hoogáałii bich'į' dooda bee nidzistee'go át'é , áko dooda bee nidzistee'ii bee haa nídahódóot'įįłii ák'ijį' bídajílná .
PRED:	Therefore they have sinned against the Lord , and have sinned against God , and have sinned against them , and have sinned against them .
GOLD:	So anyone who rebels against authority is rebelling against what God has instituted , and they will be punished .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	Áádóó tsin nitł'izii bee tsin níyizii ashdla'go níbaal bii' hodílzinii booshk'iizhjí naaniigo bąąh daní'áa doo biniyéhígíí áyiilaa ,
PRED:	And he made five boards of acacia wood for the side of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he made crossbars of acacia wood to link the frames , five crossbars for the north side of the Tabernacle

ID:	2060
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii éí t'áá ákogi át'éego bééhózin doo . Bí éí tsé shá nilį́ áádóó doo ákogi é'ét'éii bii' ádin .
PRED:	And the Lord shall know that he is righteous ; he is my rock , and there is no justice in him .
GOLD:	They will declare , “ The Lord is just ! He is my rock ! There is no evil in him ! ”

ID:	2061
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é nát'ą́ą́' hak'i néijée'go Bénjamin dine'é t'áá íiyisí t'óó bił dahóóyée'go nídaasdzííd , háálá doo yá'át'éehii bik'i hoole'go yaa ákodaniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And the children of Israel turned back , and were afraid of the children of Benjamin , because they saw that evil is upon them .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	Siláo dah yikahii bitsi' nílíinii , nidine'é ał'ąą dah naazhjaa'go ídadi'doolnííł , háálá nihináshzhiizhgo nihik'ijį' nídiildzil , áko Ízrel dine'é bá hoo'áałii hał yee biniitsį' nídeididoołhał .
PRED:	O daughter of man , the daughter of the army , shall be gathered together with all the nations , for the time has come against us , and he shall break the rod of Israel .
GOLD:	Mobilize ! Marshal your troops ! The enemy is laying siege to Jerusalem.They will strike Israel 's leaderin the face with a rod .

ID:	2063
INPUT:	Tó bitáláwosh yóó'ahi'eełígi át'éego Samériyadóó aláahgo naat'áanii ábidi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	And the king of Samaria shall be cut off as the waters of the waters .
GOLD:	Samaria and its king will be cut off ; they will float away like driftwood on an ocean wave .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	Dooládó' bibee adziilii ayóó át'éii nihí da'iiniidlánígíí nihiyi' naalnishgo nihił béédahózin doo biniyé sodiszin . Jó , éí bibee adziil yee ayóó ábóodziilii yik'ehgo áánííł .
PRED:	I pray for you , that you may know that I am in your power , and that you may know his power .
GOLD:	I also pray that you will understand the incredible greatness of God 's power for us who believe him . This is the same mighty power

ID:	2065
INPUT:	Kármeldóó dine'é <unk> yai ałdó' , Árba dine'é Péí<unk> ałdó' ,
PRED:	The men of Sheba also had been one of them . He was also on the other side .
GOLD:	Hezro from Carmel ; Paarai from Arba ;

ID:	2066
INPUT:	Diné ła'da bibéésh łigaii , doodaii' bi'óola , doodaii' yee hadít'éii doo bidáneesh<unk> da .
PRED:	No one can save the silver or gold or gold .
GOLD:	“ I have never coveted anyone 's silver or gold or fine clothes .

ID:	2067
INPUT:	Áádóó bił kééhót'íinii bich'į' kéyah nahíłniihgo , doodaii' baa nahíłniihgo t'áadoo ałch'į' ałde áhwíínóhsiní .
PRED:	You shall sell your neighbor 's land , or do not lift up his neighbor .
GOLD:	“ When you make an agreement with your neighbor to buy or sell property , you must not take advantage of each other .

ID:	2068
INPUT:	Nímshai biye' Jííhu éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į doo biniyé ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo bidíísį́h índa Éí<unk> hólahdóó Shéífat biye' Iiláísha éí nitsásk'eh góne' Diyin God yá halne' doo biniyé ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo bidíísį́h .
PRED:	The son of Jehu , the son of Jehu , king of Israel , put oil on you , so that you may pour oil on your bed .
GOLD:	Then anoint Jehu grandson of Nimshi to be king of Israel , and anoint Elisha son of Shaphat from the town of Abel-meholah to replace you as my prophet .

ID:	2069
INPUT:	Áádóó bitsii' k' ínéígishgo , áko t'ááłá'í nínáhahgo bitsii' k'ínéígish , háálá bitsii' t'óó ahayóigo nidaazgo bąą k'ínéígish ; aláahgo naat'áanii bibee dah adiidlohígíí bik'ehgo dah néidiyiidlohgo naakidi neeznádiin shékel bíighahgo bitsii' áníłdáás .
PRED:	And the hair of the hair shall be circumcised , and he shall cut off the head of one year ; for the king cut off his head , and he cut off his head , and he cut off two hundred shekels of his head .
GOLD:	He cut his hair only once a year , and then only because it was so heavy . When he weighed it out , it came to five pounds !

ID:	2070
INPUT:	Áko hódzą́ áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįh t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii hazhó'ó yínahódíłkidgo álílee k'ehgo ída'ooł'įįłii índa déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii aláahgo bee hóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' nidahaaskaígíí t'áá ałtso biláahgo neeznáadi ahą́ą́h nániiláago yá'át'éehgo ak'idazhdiitánígíí bił bééhoozin .
PRED:	And all the wisdom and understanding saw that the king had gone out of the kingdom had more than all the kingdoms of the kingdom .
GOLD:	Whenever the king consulted them in any matter requiring wisdom and balanced judgment , he found them ten times more capable than any of the magicians and enchanters in his entire kingdom .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	Deílk'idgóó nínádahago' yę́ęgóó ch'il ahoshí áádóó ch'il deeníní t'óó báhádzidgo deíl'áago biniinaa doo ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ naagháa da doo , nidi béégashii áádóó dibéda t'éí bá át'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	They are covered with sackcloth , and I will not find any of them , but for the cattle and for the sheep .
GOLD:	No one will go to the fertile hillsides where the gardens once grew , for briers and thorns will cover them . Cattle , sheep , and goats will graze there .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	Nihich'į' doo yá'át'ééhgóó ádaaníiłii t'áadoo t'áá éí bee k'éédadohdle'é . Diné t'áá ałtso binááł bił yá'ádaat'éehii bee dahinohná .
PRED:	Do n't let the evil of your evil , but do good in the sight of all men .
GOLD:	Never pay back evil with more evil . Do things in such a way that everyone can see you are honorable .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	Áádóó Rúben dine'é bikéyah éí Jórdan tooh bihoodzo nít'éé' . Díí kéyah Rúben dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchííłgóó ákwii kin hadaas'áii áádóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił bíí' át'é .
PRED:	And the border of Reuben was over the Jordan : these are the land of Reuben according to their families , and their villages , and their villages .
GOLD:	The Jordan River marked the western boundary for the tribe of Reuben . The towns and their surrounding villages in this area were given as a homeland to the clans of the tribe of Reuben .

ID:	2074
INPUT:	Áhóót'įįdígíí bik'ee dadinoołgęęzhgo nisoozį́ áádóó danoł<unk> go t'áadoo baa nída'ahodółt'į́'í ; bił nidahondooh , nidi wáin doo bik'ee da ; nida'nt'i , nidi doo tó diłhił bik'ee da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of these things , and do n't be afraid in the morning , but in the morning he will not drink wine , but the waters will not be afraid .
GOLD:	Are you amazed and incredulous ? Do n't you believe it ? Then go ahead and be blind.You are stupid , but not from wine ! You stagger , but not from liquor !

ID:	2075
INPUT:	Didlidgo nááhániihii nidadziłtseedígi éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii nidadziłtseed doo , áádóó bidiłígíí éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi yik'ínídeiłka' doo .
PRED:	And the blood of the burnt offering shall be killed on the mountain , and the blood shall sprinkle its blood upon it .
GOLD:	The animal sacrificed as a guilt offering must be slaughtered at the place where the burnt offerings are slaughtered , and its blood must be splattered against all sides of the altar .

ID:	2076
INPUT:	Da'ooyą́ą́'dóó hwiih dasoolį́į'go nihighan yá'át'ééh ádahoołaaígíí bii' kéédahoht'į́įgo ,
PRED:	When you have eaten the meat that you have eaten , you will live in it .
GOLD:	For when you have become full and prosperous and have built fine homes to live in ,

ID:	2077
INPUT:	Diyin God íinízin ládą́ą́' t'áá ha'át'éhígoda k'ad índída nihaa deesháłígíí shá bohónéedzą́ íidoolíiłgo Diyin God bííníshkeedgo sodiszin .
PRED:	If God wants me to do what you want to do , I pray for you .
GOLD:	One of the things I always pray for is the opportunity , God willing , to come at last to see you .

ID:	2078
INPUT:	Áko t'ah abíínígo nízhdiijée'go didlidgo náádahaniihígíí áádóó hózhǫ́ǫ́jí náádahaniihígíí náádadziisnii' , áádóó diné dineezbingo da'ííyą́ą́' áádóó da'oodlą́ą́' , índa nídiijée'go tsi'deeskaigo be'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáago ida'niilzhiizh .
PRED:	And they rose up early in the morning , and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings ; and the people ate , and ate , and rose up , and bowed down to the image of the image .
GOLD:	The people got up early the next morning to sacrifice burnt offerings and peace offerings . After this , they celebrated with feasting and drinking , and they indulged in pagan revelry .

ID:	2079
INPUT:	Yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí éí bee éé' ts'ídá yá'át'éhígíí yiih nídaakahgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ągi nidaal'a' doo biniyé ádayiilaa ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo éé' dadílzinii Éran bá ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And they made the blue , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and fine linen , and put them in the sanctuary , as the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The craftsmen made beautiful sacred garments of blue , purple , and scarlet cloth — clothing for Aaron to wear while ministering in the Holy Place , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	2080
INPUT:	Áádóó kódeiniidzį́į́' , Náasdi ákónihi'doo'niidgo , doodaii' nihada'áłchíní ákódabi'doo'niidgo , kódadidii'niił , Shoo , Bóhólníihii bibikáá' náá'iiniihí béé'ályaaii éí danihizhé'é yę́ę ádayiilaa ; éí didlidgo náádahaniihii índa náádahidoonihii doo yiniyé ádayiilaa da , nidi éí nihita'gi bee ééhózinii biniyé át'é .
PRED:	And when they were called to him , and said unto his children , Behold , we say unto him , Behold , the altar of the Lord hath made us an offering and an offering , and a sign between us , and a sign between us .
GOLD:	“ If they say this , our descendants can reply , ‘ Look at this copy of the Lord 's altar that our ancestors made . It is not for burnt offerings or sacrifices ; it is a reminder of the relationship both of us have with the Lord . '

ID:	2081
INPUT:	Ákódzaago íídą́ą́' Júdah bik'isóó yits'ą́ą́' dah diiyáago Adálam dine'é léi' ła' Háírah yolyéego yaa níyá .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that he departed from his brethren , that there came a certain man from his brethren , and came to meet him .
GOLD:	About this time , Judah left home and moved to Adullam , where he stayed with a man named Hirah .

ID:	2082
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ałdó' Jézebel yaa haadzíi'go ání , Jézriyel kin haal'áii binaa ahéé'ítł'in bíighahgi łééchąą'í éí Jézebel deidoolghał .
PRED:	The Lord also said to Ahab , “ The dogs will eat the meat of Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	“ And regarding Jezebel , the Lord says , ‘ Dogs will eat Jezebel 's body at the plot of land in Jezreel . '

ID:	2083
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihoo'ishígíí éí kéyah yá'áhoot'ééhgóó , kéyahgi tó danílį́į́góó áádóó deíldzis góyaa índa deílk'id bitsį́įgi tó hadaazlį́į́góó nihideezh'eezh ;
PRED:	For the Lord your God has given you a good land , in the wilderness , in the valley , in the valley , and in the valley , and in the valley ,
GOLD:	For the Lord your God is bringing you into a good land of flowing streams and pools of water , with fountains and springs that gush out in the valleys and hills .

ID:	2084
INPUT:	Łeezh nísínídlį́į'jį' nitásiil nahgóó ahíghaasgo nanilnishgo índa íyą́ą doo , háálá łeezh bits'ą́ą́dóó áni'diilyaago łeezh nílį́ , áko łeezh nídíídleeł .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the dust of the dust , and thou shalt eat the dust ; for thou art dust from the earth , and thou shalt return to dust .
GOLD:	By the sweat of your browwill you have food to eatuntil you return to the groundfrom which you were made.For you were made from dust , and to dust you will return . ”

ID:	2085
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá hąhí Diyin God éí Christ bibee ajooba' yee nihíká ádííniidii bits'ánáhóhjeehgo náánáła' hane' bikéé' naanánoohdahgo bik'ee t'óó shił ahayóí !
PRED:	“ Why do you turn away from the grace of God , the grace of Christ Jesus , and you followed me . ”
GOLD:	I am shocked that you are turning away so soon from God , who called you to himself through the loving mercy of Christ . You are following a different way that pretends to be the Good News

ID:	2086
INPUT:	Nóah haye'ké táá' há niheezhchį́ : Shem áádóó Ham índa Jéífeth daolyé .
PRED:	And Noah had three sons : Shem , Shem , Shem , and Shem .
GOLD:	Noah was the father of three sons : Shem , Ham , and Japheth .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	Áko tsinaa'eeł bii'dę́ę́' hajookaigo t'áá áko diné hwéédahoosįįd .
PRED:	So they went out of the boat , and the people knew him .
GOLD:	and climbed out . The people recognized Jesus at once ,

ID:	2088
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodishní , Diné t'ááłá'í nootínígo doo daaldinii danół'íinii áts'á dahidoołtł'ił , índa Ííjip kéyahdi eda'alyaii doo bee ádidoołchxǫǫ ł da ; shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	And I said unto them , Ye shall cast away every man 's abominations , and ye shall not defile them in the land of Egypt ; I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Then I said to them , ‘ Each of you , get rid of the vile images you are so obsessed with . Do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt , for I am the Lord your God . '

ID:	2089
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah anádáahgo , aa ádahalyánígíí éí naagé nínádeidii'nił , áádóó bighan góne' ninádei'nił .
PRED:	So the king went into the house of the Lord , and the prophets took the shields , and brought them into the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Whenever the king went to the Temple of the Lord , the guards would also take the shields and then return them to the guardroom .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	Nihik'eelyéí áádóó nihich'il na'atł'o'ii neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'í shijaa' nínáyiidlahgo bá naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó bá nidaal'a'í yitaa néi'nih doo .
PRED:	He will bring the tenth of your grain and the ten vineyards to the ground and to his servants .
GOLD:	He will take a tenth of your grain and your grape harvest and distribute it among his officers and attendants .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	Áko asdzání ábizhdííniid , Shitsi' , ne'oodlą' bee doo ánít'éhí da násínídlį́į́' ; nił hózhǫ́ǫgo náádááł , áádóó nąąh dah haz'ą́ nít'é'ígíí bits'ą́ąjį' hadaníłt'ée doo .
PRED:	Then he said to her , “ My daughter , you have faith ; you have peace , and you will turn back from your sins . ”
GOLD:	And he said to her , “ Daughter , your faith has made you well . Go in peace . Your suffering is over . ”

ID:	2092
INPUT:	Nidi Éíbram éí Sérai áyidííniid , Ninaal'a'í bee nóhólnííh , jó'akon ; t'áá ni nínízinígi áhodíílííł . Áko Sérai atíháł'į́įgo bits'ą́ą́' yóó'ajoolwod .
PRED:	But Abram said to Abram , “ Behold , you are your servant 's servant , and you will do to him . ” So Abram fled from her .
GOLD:	Abram replied , “ Look , she is your servant , so deal with her as you see fit. ” Then Sarai treated Hagar so harshly that she finally ran away .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá ni t'éí ááhyiłníinii baa hodíílnihgo nidantł'ago deít'éehii k'énááłdǫǫłgo bíninil'ą́ągo yínii' . K'ad díí bee ak'e'ashchínígíí yíníłta' áádóó ááhyiłníinii shił bééhózin íinilaago éé' tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bee handi'doolnííł índa óola béésh da'ahólzha'í nizénázt'i'go éí táá' góne' aláahgo bee íhólníihgo bił haz'áanii binanít'áago ándeeshłííł .
PRED:	But thou shalt declare the interpretation , and declare it to thee , and thou shalt declare it : I know that thou hast made a garment of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and in the third kingdom .
GOLD:	I am told that you can give interpretations and solve difficult problems . If you can read these words and tell me their meaning , you will be clothed in purple robes of royal honor , and you will have a gold chain placed around your neck . You will become the third highest ruler in the kingdom . ”

ID:	2094
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí bizhé'é yę́ę David bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah neezdá , áádóó aláahgo yee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ayóó át'éego chánah silį́į́' .
PRED:	Solomon sat on the throne of David his father , and the kingdom of the kingdom became great .
GOLD:	Solomon became king and sat on the throne of David his father , and his kingdom was firmly established .

ID:	2095
INPUT:	Áko awáalyaaí yaa áhályáanii awáalyaa naazhjé'ígíí t'áá ałtso yee Jóseph yíhoos'níí' ; ákwii yaa naakaígíí t'áá ałtso hó hak'ehgo baa na'aldeeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	All the prisoners who were in prison were in charge of Joseph . He was in charge of all the work he had done .
GOLD:	Before long , the warden put Joseph in charge of all the other prisoners and over everything that happened in the prison .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	Jesus áhodííniid , T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Nihí shikéé' dah dahidoohkaígíí , łahgo náhodeesdzáadi Diné Silį́į'ii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bits'ádi'nílíidii yikáá'dóó dah neezdáago , nihí ałdó' bikáá'dóó nidahat'áii naakits'áadahgo bikáá'dóó dah nisoodáago , Ízrel dine'é naakits'áadahgo bindanoht'áa doo .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I tell you , you will follow me , and you will sit on the throne of Man , and you will sit on twelve throne . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I assure you that when the world is made new and the Son of Man sits upon his glorious throne , you who have been my followers will also sit on twelve thrones , judging the twelve tribes of Israel .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné bá nidzizį́įgo nidazhnitinii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii hak'ijį' nilį́įgo kwáháłní , Shidibé hazhó'ó naakai yę́ę nihaa tadaozhjéé' , áádóó da'níłts'ą́ą'gi nihaa adahaaswod , áádóó doo bik'i dasídóo'į́į' da nít'éé' . Shoo , doo yá'át'éhígi ádaohdzaaígíí biniinaa atínihideeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord , the God of Israel , who stand before you , and say to you , “ If you have been scattered , you have fled , and have fled , and I will punish you for the evil which you have done . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says to these shepherds : “ Instead of caring for my flock and leading them to safety , you have deserted them and driven them to destruction . Now I will pour out judgment on you for the evil you have done to them .

ID:	2098
INPUT:	Díí diné tł'ée'go Jesus yaa níyáago áyidííniid , Na'nitiní , Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' na'nitinii nílį́įgo nihił béédahózin , háálá diné ła' Diyin God doo hoł hólǫ́ǫ́góó , bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii baa nanináhígíí ch'ééh ázhdooł'įįł .
PRED:	This man came to Jesus in the night and said , “ Teacher , we know that you are from God , because no man is with him , because there is no sign in him . ”
GOLD:	After dark one evening , he came to speak with Jesus . “ Rabbi , ” he said , “ we all know that God has sent you to teach us . Your miraculous signs are evidence that God is with you . ”

ID:	2099
INPUT:	( Nidi David shá naal'a'í nilíinii binahjį' áádóó Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó kin haal'á náhodii'ánígíí Jerúsalem binahjį' t'ááłá'í dine'égo haa dideesh'ááł , )
PRED:	But I will give them one people from the cities of Israel , and from the city of Israel ,
GOLD:	But I will leave him one tribe for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem , which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	Chérabim dah diijahgo bąąs t'áá bíighahgóó deílyeed ; chérabim nídadiit'ááh biniyé dabit'a' de ádayiił'įįhgo bąąs doo bits'áhályeed da .
PRED:	And the cherubim stood by the cherubim , and the cherubim lifted up their wings , and they did not turn away from them .
GOLD:	When the cherubim moved , the wheels moved with them . When they lifted their wings to fly , the wheels stayed beside them .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	Jerúsalem ádił da'asiihii
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Sins of Jerusalem

ID:	2102
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo nant'áago t'ááłá'í náhááh góne' átsé nídízííd binih Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáádílkał aa nídazdeeztą́ągo hasht'éédajiidlaa .
PRED:	And in the first year of the reign of the first month , in the first year of the reign of the Lord he set up the doors of the house of Jehovah .
GOLD:	In the very first month of the first year of his reign , Hezekiah reopened the doors of the Temple of the Lord and repaired them .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	E'asdzą́ą́ jílíinii hahastiin ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' bíí' jílį́ . Nidi hahastiin hats'ą́ą́' daaztsą́ągo béédoochidii jileeh , áko t'áá hó jinízinígíí bił ahaa náázhdoot'ash , nidi Bóhólníihii íinízinii bik'ehgo t'éiyá .
PRED:	She is the wife of her husband as long as her husband is . But her husband is dead , and her husband will return to her , but as the Lord wants to do .
GOLD:	A wife is bound to her husband as long as he lives . If her husband dies , she is free to marry anyone she wishes , but only if he loves the Lord .

ID:	2104
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ha'asídí diné ła' náánáálwołgo yiyiiłtsą́ągo ch'é'étiin yaa áhályánígíí yił hoolne'go ííłní , Shoo , diné ła' náánáálwoł . Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Éí ałdó' baa hane' hólǫ́ sha'shin .
PRED:	When the young man saw another man , he told the door , “ Behold , there is another man . ” And the king said , “ There is also also also . ”
GOLD:	the watchman saw another man running toward them . He shouted down , “ Here comes another one ! ” The king replied , “ He also will have news . ”

ID:	2105
INPUT:	Ákohgo Líívai dine'é éí Júdah kéyahdi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę ła' Bénjamin bikéyahdi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the Levites dwelt in the land of Judah , and some of them dwelt in Benjamin .
GOLD:	Some of the Levites who lived in Judah were sent to live with the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	Kin biyi'dę́ę́' dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' niilkaadígíí bik'i na'ashk'aazhgo adee' áádóó ch'ilátah hózhóón bééda'alyaago naashch'ąą' . Dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' tsé bik'ijį' niilkaadígíí bee tsé doo daat'į́į́góó ályaa .
PRED:	And there were a boards of cedar wood , and flowers , and flowers , and flowers ; and it was made in the midst of wood , which was not of wood .
GOLD:	Cedar paneling completely covered the stone walls throughout the Temple , and the paneling was decorated with carvings of gourds and open flowers .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	Nihokáá'góó kéédahoht'íinii , yéé' áádóó a'áán índa łoh nihik'i náhoodleeł .
PRED:	You inhabitants of the earth shall fall upon you , and the pit shall fall upon you .
GOLD:	Terror and traps and snares will be your lot , you people of the earth .

ID:	2108
INPUT:	Amaráíyah , Málak , Hátash ,
PRED:	Hananiah , Hananiah , Hananiah ,
GOLD:	Amariah , Malluch , Hattush ,

ID:	2109
INPUT:	Áko Bígthan áádóó Tííresh , díí nidilt'éhígíí aláahgo naat'áanii yá naal'a'í ch'é'étiingi nídídáhí nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras yidiyoołhééł hát'į́ nít'éé' yę́ę Mórdiikai haa nahasne'go bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo bééhoozin .
PRED:	And Philip , and all these two servants , who were standing in the gate of the king 's gate , found that Mordecai had been put to death .
GOLD:	In those records he discovered an account of how Mordecai had exposed the plot of Bigthana and Teresh , two of the eunuchs who guarded the door to the king 's private quarters . They had plotted to assassinate King Xerxes .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	Jó , shizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii t'áá ałtso bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii binááł diné daneeznáanii nidahoniidlin nít'éé' . Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi ná naal'a'í nishłíinii nibikáá' adání yich'į' dah nídinibįįhgo nída'adį́įhii bitahgi ná'áshdį́įh doogo nishííníłtį́ . Éí bąą ha'át'íí t'áá ákóne' át'éii shį́įshą' náánáła' aláahgo naat'áanii baa nínáánáoshkąąh dooleeł ?
PRED:	Behold , my father 's house is true in the presence of the king , and he is the dead in the sight of the king . But as thy servant is in the field , I pray thee , I pray thee , and I pray thee , and I pray thee , and there is no king ?
GOLD:	All my relatives and I could expect only death from you , my lord , but instead you have honored me by allowing me to eat at your own table ! What more can I ask ? ”

ID:	2111
INPUT:	Jííbas kin haal'á bíighahgi jookahgo k'adę́ę e'e'aah , áko naal'a'í binanit'a'í áyidííniid , Tį' , díí Jííbas dine'é bikin haal'áhíjį' diikahgo t'áá ákwii danihiidoołkááł .
PRED:	And when they were near to the city , he said unto his servant , Come , let us go into this city , and let us go into this city .
GOLD:	It was late in the day when they neared Jebus , and the man 's servant said to him , “ Let 's stop at this Jebusite town and spend the night there . ”

ID:	2112
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego éí bee nihá k'ééhoodǫǫł doo .
PRED:	and one male goat for a sin offering ; and he shall make atonement for you .
GOLD:	Also , offer one male goat to purify yourselves and make yourselves right with the Lord .

ID:	2113
INPUT:	áádóó naat'ááh kin góne' yah anínáádzoodzáago Jesus ábizhdííniid , Háádę́ę'shą' naniná ? Nidi Jesus t'áadoo haadzíi' da .
PRED:	Then Jesus went into the temple and said to Jesus , “ Where are you from ? ” But Jesus did not answer him .
GOLD:	He took Jesus back into the headquarters again and asked him , “ Where are you from ? ” But Jesus gave no answer .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii páam sikaadii nooséłígi át'éego nanise' , áádóó Lébanan kéyahdi gadtsoh nahalingo nanise' .
PRED:	As the righteous trees of Lebanon , and as the trees of Lebanon .
GOLD:	But the godly will flourish like palm treesand grow strong like the cedars of Lebanon .

ID:	2115
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí naakidi neeznádiin naagé óola t'áá bízhání yee ádayiilaa ; naagé t'ááłá'í ní'ą́ bik'ehgo óola hastą́ądi neeznádiin shékel wolyéhígíí bíighahgo bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	King Solomon made two hundred shields of pure gold , six hundred shekels of gold , six hundred shekels of gold .
GOLD:	King Solomon made 200 large shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than fifteen pounds .

ID:	2116
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go dashdiiyá . Nít'éé' diné léi' , yúnak nilį́įgo t'áá íiyisí bóhólnííh , Iithiyópiyadóó asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh <unk> dasii yolyé , éí binaalye'é t'áá ałtso bá baa áhojilyą́ , áko Jerúsalemdi Diyin God bich'į' nahozhdoołaał biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ nijiyá ,
PRED:	And he rose up , and went forth , and a certain man , a certain man , who was called the queen of Ethiopia , and went to worship God in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So he started out , and he met the treasurer of Ethiopia , a eunuch of great authority under the Kandake , the queen of Ethiopia . The eunuch had gone to Jerusalem to worship ,

ID:	2117
INPUT:	Diné doo shich'ijí jílínígíí éí shits'ą́ą́jí jílį́ , áádóó doo shił ahanizh'niiłkaadígíí éí ta'izhnoołkaad .
PRED:	He that is not with me is not with me , and he that is not with me is not with me .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who is n't with me opposes me , and anyone who is n't working with me is actually working against me .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	K'ad nihidishtaałígíí baa híínídáagoádił ni'iisíhígíísh doo hanisíid da ?
PRED:	“ Now , is the one who is with you ? Do n't you look for us ?
GOLD:	For then you would guard my steps , instead of watching for my sins .

ID:	2119
INPUT:	beeldléí nahalingo dadíídis , áko łahgo ádadoonííł . Nidi ni t'éí t'ááłáhígi ánít'é , índa nee nináháháahii doo nidoot'ih da .
PRED:	As a garment , so that they may be clean ; but you are just , and you will not be safe .
GOLD:	You will fold them up like a cloakand discard them like old clothing.But you are always the same ; you will live forever . ”

ID:	2120
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes índa Diyin God yá dahalne'ii binaaltsoos t'áá ałtso t'áá dadeezt'i'dóó , éí t'áá hó áhodi'doolníiłgi Diyin God bizaad bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí t'áá ałtso hazhó'ó yee hoł hoolne' .
PRED:	And all the words of Moses and the prophets were read , and he told them all the words of the Scriptures .
GOLD:	Then Jesus took them through the writings of Moses and all the prophets , explaining from all the Scriptures the things concerning himself .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	Nidi Férisii áádóó Sádjusii danilíinii tó bee dabidi'doolzįh biniyé deíkáahgo jiiłtsą́ągo ábijiní , T <unk> ba'áłchíní danohłíinii ! Háishą' Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo bibee até'él'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' dah dadínóohchééh nihidííniid ?
PRED:	But when he saw the Pharisees and Sadducees , he said to them , “ Who can deliver you out of the wrath of God ? ”
GOLD:	But when he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees coming to watch him baptize , he denounced them . “ You brood of snakes ! ” he exclaimed . “ Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	2122
INPUT:	da' doósh éí Diyin God bił bééhodoozįįł da ? Jó , bí ajéí biyi'di nidanil'inii bił bééhózin ?
PRED:	Do n't God know that God does not know ? He knows his heart in his heart ?
GOLD:	God would surely have known it , for he knows the secrets of every heart .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	índa Hor dine'é biDził Síyer hoolyéhígi t'áá <unk> jį' ; éí honoojí bíighahgi bik'eh dazdeesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the children of Seir went out to Mount Seir , which is near the wilderness .
GOLD:	and the Horites at Mount Seir , as far as El-paran at the edge of the wilderness .

ID:	2124
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Łóó' hadasoołtsoozígíí ła' nídoohjááh .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Take some fish that you have taken . ”
GOLD:	“ Bring some of the fish you 've just caught , ” Jesus said .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	áádóó Ííjip dine'é daasnáanii nináhideesh'ishgo kéyah bii' kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęjį' Páthras kéyah áajį' anídahizhdoo'nééł , áko ákwii bee óhólnííh doo bidziilgóó kééhojit'į́į doo .
PRED:	And I will bring the Egyptians into the land of Egypt , and they shall go up to the land , and shall dwell there , and shall dwell in it .
GOLD:	I will restore the prosperity of Egypt and bring its people back to the land of Pathros in southern Egypt from which they came . But Egypt will remain an unimportant , minor kingdom .

ID:	2126
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí ándahodii'aahii há néidiinilgo Bóhólníihii éí ándahodii'aahii nídaadleehii yił dahólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' , áko hweda'ana'í bits'ą́ąjį' ánihodii'aahii yisdáhwiiníiłgo yiiníłką́ ; Bóhólníihii łahgo át'éego hąąh tsíńdeezkééz , háálá hweda'ana'í hade ádahósingo bik'ee chaał nidahojiyiinííh nít'éé' áádóó hóda'ats'ihgo bik'ee ti'dahojiyooznii' .
PRED:	And the Lord took the judges , and the judges of the Lord was between them , and he saved them from their enemies ; and they cried out of their enemies , because they were afraid of the Lord .
GOLD:	Whenever the Lord raised up a judge over Israel , he was with that judge and rescued the people from their enemies throughout the judge 's lifetime . For the Lord took pity on his people , who were burdened by oppression and suffering .

ID:	2127
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' bił nidahazt'i'ii t'áá ałtso , ats'íís yidánoolníinii , áádóó anáá' yidánoolníinii áádóó iiná bee ádaa hodzódlíii éí doo aTaa' bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ádaat'ée da , nidi nihokáá'dóó ádaat'é .
PRED:	For all flesh is the flesh , the flesh , and the eyes of the eye , and the spirit of life , and the glory of the Father is not of the world .
GOLD:	For the world offers only a craving for physical pleasure , a craving for everything we see , and pride in our achievements and possessions . These are not from the Father , but are from this world .

ID:	2128
INPUT:	Ashdla' góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Ásher dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin .
PRED:	The fifth lot was given to the children of Asher according to their families , according to their families .
GOLD:	The fifth allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Asher .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	Ákohgo Máíkah bi'e'elyaii áyiilaaígíí Dan kin haal'áagi dah sizį́įgo ádayiilaa ; Diyin God biníbaal bii' hodílzinii Sháíloh haz'ą́ągi si'ą́ yę́ędą́ą́' ákódayósin nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they set up the image of Micah , which he had made in Dan , in Shiloh , in the days of God , in Shiloh .
GOLD:	So Micah 's carved image was worshiped by the tribe of Dan as long as the Tabernacle of God remained at Shiloh .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	Áko Elkéínah náázhdi'yoołnihjį' anéíłkáahgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ Piinínah índa biyáázhké áádóó bich'é'éké t'áá ałtso éí náájiiłniihígíí łahjį' baa nízhdí'ááh ,
PRED:	After he had finished offering , he took away his wife , his wife , his sons , and all his daughters .
GOLD:	On the days Elkanah presented his sacrifice , he would give portions of the meat to Peninnah and each of her children .

ID:	2131
INPUT:	Hodiists'ą́'ígíí éí dahináanii bit'a' ahidadii'áago deít'áhígíí éí íits'a' lá áádóó bąąs bíighah dah dadiit'a'ígíí éí ayóó át'éego dadiits'a' lá .
PRED:	The voice of the living creatures heard the voice of the living creatures , and they heard the voice of the living creatures .
GOLD:	It was the sound of the wings of the living beings as they brushed against each other and the rumbling of their wheels beneath them .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	Nidi nídiidáahgo yiizįįh , háálá shiiniłtsánígíí índa nił yit'íní ání'diish'įįh dooleełígíí bee shá nanil'a' doo , áádóó bee shá nahólne' doo . Éí biniyé nich'į' yit'íní í'diishyaa áádóó nándiiłtį́ .
PRED:	But stand up , because you have seen me , and you have seen me , and I have made you known to me , that I may make you known to you , and I have chosen you .
GOLD:	Now get to your feet ! For I have appeared to you to appoint you as my servant and witness . Tell people that you have seen me , and tell them what I will show you in the future .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	Nidi Lat hakéédę́ę́' hwe'asdzą́ą́ nát'ą́ą́' nídéét'į́į'go t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ tsé áshįįh nídzísdlį́į́' .
PRED:	But Lot saw his wife , and turned back from him , and made salt .
GOLD:	But Lot 's wife looked back as she was following behind him , and she turned into a pillar of salt .

ID:	2134
INPUT:	Ahíláłk'e dadołniihgo k'é béé'ahohjih . Christ dayoodláanii áłah nídaadleehii t'áá ałtso k'é danihiłní .
PRED:	Greet one another with a holy kiss , and all the church of the church .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss . All the churches of Christ send you their greetings .

ID:	2135
INPUT:	Kót'ée nidi bee óhólníhígíí doo t'áá át'é nighahideesh<unk> da , nidi shá naal'a'í David yę́ę binahjį' áádóó Jerúsalem náhodii'ánígíí binahjį' Ízrel naakits'áadahgo dine'é danilíinii bitahdę́ę́' t'ááłá'í dine'égo éí niye' baa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	But I will not take away all the kingdoms of the kingdom , but I will give to the twelve tribes of Israel from the tribes of David my servant David , and from the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	And even so , I will not take away the entire kingdom ; I will let him be king of one tribe , for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem , my chosen city . ”

ID:	2136
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é baa nahódóot'įįł
PRED:	The People of Babylon
GOLD:	Prediction of Babylon 's Fall

ID:	2137
INPUT:	Deenásts'aa' bidee' naakigo yiniłtsáanii éí Míídiya índa Pérzha kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii át'į́ .
PRED:	And the two horns of the ram : and the king of Persia , and the king of Persia .
GOLD:	The two-horned ram represents the kings of Media and Persia .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	T'áá íídą́ą́' shaa náhást'įįdgoha'át'íísh biniyé t'áadoo biniyéhígóó naasdzil ?
PRED:	What have I done in that day ? Why have I done ?
GOLD:	Whatever happens , I will be found guilty.So what 's the use of trying ?

ID:	2139
INPUT:	Nidi aninéédę́ę́' náá'di'yiijeeh bídéét'i'gi , Diyin God kóníigo yee nihich'į' haadzíi'iísh t'ah doo dayínółta' da ?
PRED:	But you have not read the word of God that is raised from the dead ?
GOLD:	“ But now , as to whether there will be a resurrection of the dead — have n't you ever read about this in the Scriptures ? Long after Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had died , God said ,

ID:	2140
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso neheesdzíí' lá : ayáhígo ádaat'éii áádóó ayóó ádaat'éii , aye'ké áádóó atsi'ké danilíinii áádóó binaalye'é índa t'áadoo le'é deisná yę́ę t'áá át'é shónáyoost'e' lá .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that all these things were done , great , great , and great , and daughters , and daughters , and daughters , and all that they had taken .
GOLD:	Nothing was missing : small or great , son or daughter , nor anything else that had been taken . David brought everything back .

ID:	2141
INPUT:	Christ bíí' danohłínígíí biniinaa nihił nida'í'įįh nidi baa nihił dahózhǫ́ , háálá Níłch'i Diyinii ayóó át'éii , Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii , nihik'i hoole' . Danihódziih nidi Diyin God éí íiyisí dayódziih , nihíjígo nihee Diyin God baa ha'niih .
PRED:	Be glad because you belong to Christ , but rejoice , because the Spirit of the Holy Spirit is upon you , but God gives glory to you .
GOLD:	If you are insulted because you bear the name of Christ , you will be blessed , for the glorious Spirit of God rests upon you .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii bich'į' náá'jii łniihígíí éí ak'áán nááhidoonihii éí ómer bee í'neel'ąąhí bee ak'áán t'ááłáhídi haaką́ągo éí kwáart bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsooígíí bíighahgo bee ak'ah haaką́ągo bił ałtahgo néidiyoołnih .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer a grain offering unto the Lord , a ephah of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil .
GOLD:	When you present these offerings , you must also give the Lord a grain offering of two quarts of choice flour mixed with one quart of olive oil .

ID:	2143
INPUT:	Áko Kaldíya dine'é bisiláo éí aláahgo naat'áanii baa dadeeyáago Jériko dzígaidi yíníjéé' , áko hasiláo t'áá át'é hats'ąą taozhjéé' .
PRED:	And the army of the Chaldeans came to meet the king in the plains of Jericho , and all the army were scattered from him .
GOLD:	But the Babylonian troops chased the king and overtook him on the plains of Jericho , for his men had all deserted him and scattered .

ID:	2144
INPUT:	Mą'ii dootł'izhí yázhí éí ch'il na'atł'o'ii deíl'áágóó nidahwiiłchxǫǫhii bił nidahidiidił , háálá nihich'il na'atł'o'ii bílátah da'iigai .
PRED:	The walls came to the vine , and the vine was destroyed , because our vine is sick .
GOLD:	Catch all the foxes , those little foxes , before they ruin the vineyard of love , for the grapevines are blossoming !

ID:	2145
INPUT:	Dibé Yázhí nilíinii iiyehgo ada'niidą́ą'ii
PRED:	The Lamb of the Lamb
GOLD:	Songs of Victory in Heaven

ID:	2146
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Awéé' ałts'ánółgéeshgo ałníí'dóó díí asdzání baa nołteeh , áádóó łahjį'ígíí éí ła'ígíí baa nołteeh .
PRED:	And the king said , Take the child out of the midst of the child , and give it to the rest of the rest .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Cut the living child in two , and give half to one woman and half to the other ! ”

ID:	2147
INPUT:	Bee nahodoołtį́į́ł yę́ęgi nílóda haidiní'ą́ągo níló bee nááłtą́ áádóó bikéyah bikáá'góó ii'ni' dahodiiłtłah .
PRED:	When I gave the rain , there was hail and hail , and hail fell on the earth .
GOLD:	He sent them hail instead of rain , and lightning flashed over the land .

ID:	2148
INPUT:	T'áá áko Saul ni'jį' tsé'yaa ajíítłizhgo Sámuel bizaadígíí bik'ee t'áá íiyisí hoł yéé' hazlį́į́' áádóó hatah doo hwiina' da , háálá t'áadoo ajiyání i'íí'ą́ą́dóó yiską́ .
PRED:	And Saul fell down to the ground , and Samuel was afraid and afraid , because the evening came .
GOLD:	Saul fell full length on the ground , paralyzed with fright because of Samuel 's words . He was also faint with hunger , for he had eaten nothing all day and all night .

ID:	2149
INPUT:	Nídiidáahgo sis niteelí shóisíníłt'e'go ninázt'i'ígíí éí Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígóó dínáahgo áadi tsék'iz góne' nídíł'įįh .
PRED:	Arise , take your robe , and put it on your feet , and go down to the river , and hide it in a rock .
GOLD:	“ Take the linen loincloth you are wearing , and go to the Euphrates River . Hide it there in a hole in the rocks . ”

ID:	2150
INPUT:	Áko ándahodii'aahii áyidííniid , Baa nidaahkaígíí doo t'áadoo baa áńda'áhodółt'íní , háálá dine'é éí doo bá ándahodiyoh'aah da , nidi Bóhólníihii bá ándahodiyoh'aah ; bí nihił hólǫ́ǫgo nidahodiyoh'aah .
PRED:	He said to the judges , “ Do n't do what you do . Do n't do what you do , because you do n't judge the people , but you are to judge the Lord . ”
GOLD:	and he said to them , “ Always think carefully before pronouncing judgment . Remember that you do not judge to please people but to please the Lord . He will be with you when you render the verdict in each case .

ID:	2151
INPUT:	Háálá doo k'é dandzingo yádaałti' da , nidi t'áadoo íits'a'í kéédahat'íinii na'adlo' saad yee yindahagiz .
PRED:	For they speak evil against you , but they speak evil against your neighbor .
GOLD:	They do n't talk of peace ; they plot against innocent people who mind their own business .

ID:	2152
INPUT:	Áko dabik'isóó áłah ádayiilaago hodiyingo ádadooldee'go yah eekai , áádóó Bóhólníihii yee has'áanii bik'ehgo aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédahojidlééh biniyé yah ajookai .
PRED:	And they gathered together the brethren , and went into the holy place , and went into the house of the Lord , according to the commandment of the Lord .
GOLD:	These men called together their fellow Levites , and they all purified themselves . Then they began to cleanse the Temple of the Lord , just as the king had commanded . They were careful to follow all the Lord 's instructions in their work .

ID:	2153
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bee bóhólníihgo bił nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá át'é naaltsoos yi'iisnii' ; éí aláahgo bee óhólnííh bił nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá bí ak'eda'ałchíhígíí bik'ehgo índa t'áá ałtso t'áá bí bizaad yee yádaałti'ii bik'ehgo yee ak'e'ashchį́ , áko diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bí dabighangóó yee bídahólníihgo t'áá bí bizaadígíí bik'ehgo ba'áłchíní yił dahalne' doo .
PRED:	And he sent a letter to all the kingdoms of the kingdom , according to all the kingdoms , according to all the words of the kingdom , and according to all the words of every man according to his own house , according to his own house .
GOLD:	He sent letters to all parts of the empire , to each province in its own script and language , proclaiming that every man should be the ruler of his own home and should say whatever he pleases .

ID:	2154
INPUT:	Áádóó hach'į' hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , Díí dine'é bich'į' ná'áhwiinít'į́'ígo áádóó bił dahoníshǫ́ǫgo índa saad yá'ádaat'éehii bee bich'į' hahídziih ládą́ą́' ná nidaal'a'í danilį́įgo ahool'áa doo .
PRED:	And they answered and said , If thou wilt speak unto this people , and to good word , and to good word , if thou shalt speak unto thy servants forever .
GOLD:	The older counselors replied , “ If you are good to these people and do your best to please them and give them a favorable answer , they will always be your loyal subjects . ”

ID:	2155
INPUT:	Áko ch'ikę́ę́h bizhą́ą́ naagháii bił hóshǫ́ áádóó hats'ą́ą́dóó ach'oha'né bee hazlį́į́' , áádóó t'áadoo le'é bee chin ádąąh yildééh dooígíí áádóó bikiiní baazhdiní'ą́ , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bił haz'ánídę́ę́' ch'ikéí nidaal'a'í tsosts'idgo , éí bee ájít'ée dooígíí áádóó ch'ikéí bizhą́ą́ nidaakaii yee ádaat'ée dooígíí nídii'nil índa agháago yá'áhoot'éehgo haz'ą́ągi bił niho'dee'nil .
PRED:	And the young woman pleased him , and gave him grace , and gave him to the young men of the king , and to give him seven young women , and to the king 's seven young women .
GOLD:	Hegai was very impressed with Esther and treated her kindly . He quickly ordered a special menu for her and provided her with beauty treatments . He also assigned her seven maids specially chosen from the king 's palace , and he moved her and her maids into the best place in the harem .

ID:	2156
INPUT:	Shibee aya'ayiiltsósí há nideeshkałgo biishdoogááł , áko Kaldíya dine'é bikéyahgóó Bábilan kin haal'áadi hodeesłóós ; azhą́ áadi dazdootsaał nidi , kéyah t'áadoo yizdoołtséeł da .
PRED:	I will put my net into his net , and he will enter into Babylon , and he will die there , but he will not see the land .
GOLD:	Then I will throw my net over him and capture him in my snare . I will bring him to Babylon , the land of the Babylonians , though he will never see it , and he will die there .

ID:	2157
INPUT:	Ákohgo náhidiitahgo yiizį'go dah diiyá , dah náníljį́įhgo yigááł , índa Diyin God yaa haniihgo kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' bił yah ajookai .
PRED:	Then he stood among them and went into the temple of God and went into the temple of God .
GOLD:	He jumped up , stood on his feet , and began to walk ! Then , walking , leaping , and praising God , he went into the Temple with them .

ID:	2158
INPUT:	Áádóó hak'ídahidizheeh , áádóó éí lók'aatsoh yee hatsiits'iin nínádeidiiłhał .
PRED:	And they found him in his face , and cut off his head with his head .
GOLD:	And they spit on him and grabbed the stick and struck him on the head with it .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	Éí bąą tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' Jesus bił ada'soołkaal nít'éé' yę́ę Diyin God éí Bóhólníihii áádóó Christ nilį́įgo áyiilaa , díí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso t'áadoo naaki nilíní bił béédahózin le' .
PRED:	Therefore , therefore , God , has made him a cross , and the Lord Jesus Christ , and all Israel know that he has not known .
GOLD:	“ So let everyone in Israel know for certain that God has made this Jesus , whom you crucified , to be both Lord and Messiah ! ”

ID:	2160
INPUT:	Yádiłhił biyi' di sǫ' yíl'áhígi át'éego bada'áłchíní ałdó' k'ee'ąą díníníłt'ą́ , índa kéyah hóó' dadooleeł biniyé biih dazhdoonéełgo dahazhé'é yę́ę baa dííní'áanii biih hwííní'eezh .
PRED:	As the stars in heaven , so I gave them children , and brought them into the land that I gave to their fathers .
GOLD:	You made their descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and brought them into the land you had promised to their ancestors .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago hananit'a'í be'asdzą́ą́ , Ninaal'a'í kóshiilaa , níigo yił hoolne' , áko yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yik'ee báhóóchįįd .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the lord of his master 's wife told me , saying , Thy servant hath heard it ; and when he heard it , he became angry .
GOLD:	Potiphar was furious when he heard his wife 's story about how Joseph had treated her .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	Naat'áanii ła' ádił adzisiihgo t'áadoo ádaa ákoznidziní Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii doo ádoolníił da , nínígíí doo bik'eh ádziidzaagóó bee ádihozhdiilt'i'go
PRED:	“ If a prince sin against you , do not keep the commandments of the Lord God ,
GOLD:	“ If one of Israel 's leaders sins by violating one of the commands of the Lord his God but does n't realize it , he is still guilty .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá éí naal'a'í ch'íníyáago yił nidaal'a'ígíí ła' neeznádiin denériyas yąąh hayííł'áhígíí yik'íníyá , áko éí yisiłgo kóníigo yizák'íidiiníihgo yaa nídiidzá , Nąąh hááł'áhígíí shá niná'nídlé , yiłní .
PRED:	But he went out and found some of his servants who had a hundred shekels of silver , and took hold of him , and took him , saying , “ How much will you get up ? ”
GOLD:	“ But when the man left the king , he went to a fellow servant who owed him a few thousand dollars . He grabbed him by the throat and demanded instant payment .

ID:	2164
INPUT:	T'áá háiida ádee hadidzihgo diné haláahdi át'éii biniit'aa ádee hadidzih łeh , ákót'éego doo ałgha'dit'ááh nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	If you swear by a oath , you will not answer me .
GOLD:	Now when people take an oath , they call on someone greater than themselves to hold them to it . And without any question that oath is binding .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	Áádóó na'ałkǫ'ii dah adidooł<unk> biniyé t'áá ałch'ijí yee k'ídílchi'ígi át'éego bitahjį' t'áá ałch'ijí yee k'ídidoolchił , áádóó bee ádaa dahoji'niihii índa bee injilo'go ájoolíłígíí éí t'áá áłah Bóhólníihii hats'ą́ą́' naa'iidoołkał .
PRED:	And he shall put his hand upon the midst of the fire , and upon the midst of the midst of the fire ; and the multitude of the people that are in the midst of the Lord shall cast them away .
GOLD:	God will push down Moab 's peopleas a swimmer pushes down water with his hands.He will end their prideand all their evil works .

ID:	2166
INPUT:	T'áá éí bitł'éé' t'áá ákwe'é hoolzhishgo bił dashdiikaigo bik'i nidzisk'ą́ yę́ęgóó bá táádzízgiz , t'áá áko haghandóó danilíinii t'áá ałtso t'áá bił tó bee daho'doolzį́į́' .
PRED:	That night he sat down at night , and covered his house with water . All his house were baptized with water .
GOLD:	Even at that hour of the night , the jailer cared for them and washed their wounds . Then he and everyone in his household were immediately baptized .

ID:	2167
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Kéínan dine'é bikéyah yiih nihíí'eezhgo éí nihich'į' áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzí'ígíí bik'ehgo , áádóó éí kéyah nihaidiní'ą́ągo
PRED:	The Lord brought us into the land of Canaan , as he swore to your ancestors , and gave you the land that he promised to give you .
GOLD:	“ This is what you must do when the Lord fulfills the promise he swore to you and to your ancestors . When he gives you the land where the Canaanites now live ,

ID:	2168
INPUT:	Nidi na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá índa badaa'ihii t'áá ałtso áádóó adáhonooní t'óó bee ha'doodzih nidi t'áadoo baa yádaałti'í , háálá éí Diyin God bidiyį́į́' danohłį́įgo doo niheełt'ée da .
PRED:	But do not speak to anyone who does evil or bad things , but do not speak in the wilderness , because you are not like God 's people .
GOLD:	Let there be no sexual immorality , impurity , or greed among you . Such sins have no place among God 's people .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	Diyin God ádee hadoodzíi'ii bee Jesus náá'iiłniihii nilį́įgo baa ákohwiiniidzį́į́' .
PRED:	And we know that he is a priest by the oath of God .
GOLD:	This new system was established with a solemn oath . Aaron 's descendants became priests without such an oath ,

ID:	2170
INPUT:	Háálá niná'á<unk> ą́ągo Filístiya diné yiyiisxį́ , háálá Bóhólníihii éí bee yisdá'iildéehii ayóó át'éii Ízrel dine'é yá áyoolííł . Éí yiniłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí baa nił hóózhǫǫd , áko ha'át'éegoshą' David t'áadoo baanígóó bini'niłhį́įgo doo ádąąh dahast'áanii bidił bits'ánílį́įgo áníléehgo bee ádił iilziih ?
PRED:	For the sun has killed the Philistines , because the Lord has given Israel a great salvation ; and when he saw that David was very angry , why should he not take away the blood of David ?
GOLD:	Have you forgotten about the time he risked his life to kill the Philistine giant and how the Lord brought a great victory to all Israel as a result ? You were certainly happy about it then . Why should you murder an innocent man like David ? There is no reason for it at all ! ”

ID:	2171
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii t'áadoo nihik'ijį' si'ą́ągo béénílniihí , nidi tsxį́įłgo nihaa a'ááh niizįįh , háálá t'áá íiyisí yínííł dasiidlį́į́' .
PRED:	Do n't remember the sins of our fathers , but be merciful to us , because we are very sad .
GOLD:	Do not hold us guilty for the sins of our ancestors ! Let your compassion quickly meet our needs , for we are on the brink of despair .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	Dinéésh ła' kǫ' ádíiyiiltsoodgo bi'éé' doo didoolił da ?
PRED:	If a man takes up his clothes , shall not burn his clothes ?
GOLD:	Can a man scoop a flame into his lapand not have his clothes catch on fire ?

ID:	2173
INPUT:	Áko ání , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , diyin nigi ánáánát'éii yá'ąąshdi índa nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo hólǫ́ǫ da ; ni t'éiyá ná nidaal'a'í éí aha'deet'áanii áádóó aa a'ááh hasinii bił hasht'eyínísinii ninááł deíkááh .
PRED:	And he said , O Lord God of Israel , there is no other god in heaven , and on earth , and upon the earth ; only thy servants , and thy covenant .
GOLD:	He prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven and earth . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	2174
INPUT:	Háálá doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ááníiłii baa jíínílíigo ádííníniid , Doo ła' shoo'íní da . Nibee hódzáanii áádóó nił ééhózinii éí nił náhásxizgo nijéí biyi'di ádííníniid , Shí honishłǫ́ áádóó doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For thou hast done evil things , saying , There is no one to say unto me : I am with thee in thy heart , and with thy wisdom , and with thy wisdom , and with thy heart I am no other .
GOLD:	“ You felt secure in your wickedness. ‘ No one sees me , ' you said.But your ‘ wisdom ' and ‘ knowledge ' have led you astray , and you said , ‘ I am the only one , and there is no other . '

ID:	2175
INPUT:	Mt . 12 : 9-14
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Tree and Its Fruit

ID:	2176
INPUT:	Éí bąągo ííshją́ą́ ch'ozh áádóó na'ats'ǫǫsí éí kéyah dayííłchxǫ'ígíí ádá bééda'doohdlííł , áádóó Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God baa dahohniih ; eii shį́į́ áko Bóhólníihii bibee atí'él'íinii nihits'ą́ąjį' kwíidoolííł , índa nihidiyin danilíinii áádóó nihikédaayah ałdó' bits'ą́ąjį' kwíidoolííł .
PRED:	Therefore , you shall remember that it is poured out on them , and ye shall remember the land , and bless the God of Israel , and he shall turn away from you , and from your hand , and from your land .
GOLD:	Make these things to show honor to the God of Israel . Perhaps then he will stop afflicting you , your gods , and your land .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	Áko Féro éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Díkwíishą' ninááhai ?
PRED:	Pharaoh said to Jacob , “ How many years are you ? ”
GOLD:	“ How old are you ? ” Pharaoh asked him .

ID:	2178
INPUT:	Ániid nidaakaii t'éí ch'ééh nídahidikah doo , índa nínádadíníkah doo , índa diné ániid nidaakaii t'áá aaníí bik'eh dahodidlį́į doo ,
PRED:	The young men will return to him , and they will return to him , and the young men will obey him .
GOLD:	Even youths will become weak and tired , and young men will fall in exhaustion .

ID:	2179
INPUT:	Áko atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii biniyé dibé yázhí nidadoołtsił , áádóó ádadołdééh índa Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo danihik'is náádadi'yoołnih biniyé bá hasht'edadoohłííł .
PRED:	And ye shall kill the Passover , and ye shall offer for your brother according to the commandment of the Lord , as the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Slaughter the Passover lambs , purify yourselves , and prepare to help those who come . Follow all the directions that the Lord gave through Moses . ”

ID:	2180
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , Níłch'i Diyinii k'ehgo dahináanii nanishtinígi át'éego nanihidínéeshtįįłígíí doo ts'ídá shił bohónéedzą́ą da , nidi ts'ísee k'ehgo dahináanii nanishtinígi át'éego nanihinétą́ą́' . Christ bee awéé'chí'í danohłį́įgo t'áá bééhózínígo nihich'į' yáshti' nít'éé' .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , I do not want to teach you as I live in the Spirit , but I teach you the way of the flesh , but I speak to you , and I speak to you , and I speak to you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when I was with you I could n't talk to you as I would to spiritual people . I had to talk as though you belonged to this world or as though you were infants in Christ .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	Áko David hadiltłish bił béésh éé' bee áká dzíszasgo ch'ééh dashdiighááh , háálá doo <unk> jooł'į́į da nít'éé' . Áádóó David éí Saul ábizhdííniid , Díí doo bee ákǫ́ǫ́ deesháał da , háálá doo bídínéeshnáa da . Áko David éí t'óó háidii'nil .
PRED:	And David sought his sword with the sword , for he was not able to see . And David said to Saul , I will not go with these things ; for David said to David , I will not go .
GOLD:	David put it on , strapped the sword over it , and took a step or two to see what it was like , for he had never worn such things before. “ I ca n't go in these , ” he protested to Saul . “ I 'm not used to them. ” So David took them off again .

ID:	2182
INPUT:	Diyin God éí diné ayóó ádaat'éii t'áadoo baa hwiinít'íní niyiiłchxǫǫh , áádóó náánáła' yitsásk'ehjį' ayiinííł .
PRED:	Do n't judge the great people , and he makes another place .
GOLD:	He brings the mighty to ruin without asking anyone , and he sets up others in their place .

ID:	2183
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'áago biná'ástł'inígíí éí hastą́ą́h tsin sitą́ ; éí bijį́į́dóó , Bóhólníihii Áadi Hólǫ́ , wolyéego hahodoolzhish .
PRED:	And the wall of the city was six cubits , and the Lord is there , and it shall be a time .
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	2184
INPUT:	Áko Jéthro ádííniid , Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih le' ; éí Ííjip dine'é índa Féro bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánihíínilígíí índa bidine'é éí Ííjip dine'é yiyaa sinildę́ę́' yisdábíínil lá .
PRED:	And he said , Blessed be the Lord , who saved us from Pharaoh , and from the hand of Egypt , and from the hand of Pharaoh , and from the hand of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , ” Jethro said , “ for he has rescued you from the Egyptians and from Pharaoh . Yes , he has rescued Israel from the powerful hand of Egypt !

ID:	2185
INPUT:	K'idadi'dohłéeł nidi , doo da'doohhish da áádóó áliv bineest'ą' bik'i nidoohkahgo bik'ah bąąh hadahidoohnihgo doo bee adadidoołtłah da índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii bik'i nidoohkah , nidi wáin doo dadoohdlį́įł da .
PRED:	You shall not sow it , but you shall not sow it with olive oil , and you shall not eat it , but you shall not drink wine .
GOLD:	You will plant cropsbut not harvest them.You will press your olivesbut not get enough oil to anoint yourselves.You will trample the grapesbut get no juice to make your wine .

ID:	2186
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jeremiah Remains in Judah

ID:	2187
INPUT:	áko t'áá shiTaa' éí bee shóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii sheidiní'ánígi át'éego shí ałdó'
PRED:	so I also have given the kingdom of my Father , as I have given to me .
GOLD:	And just as my Father has granted me a Kingdom , I now grant you the right

ID:	2188
INPUT:	Áko díí ał'ąą dine'é éí Bóhólníihii deidósin , áádóó eda'alyaii ałdó' yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' ; bada'áłchíní áádóó banááda'áłchíní éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ádáát'įįdígi át'éego díí jį́įjį' ałdó' ákódaat'į́ .
PRED:	And these nations worshipped the Lord , and served the idols , and their children , and their children , as they have done to this day .
GOLD:	So while these new residents worshiped the Lord , they also worshiped their idols . And to this day their descendants do the same .

ID:	2189
INPUT:	Kót'éego Ízrel dine'é nihaa nídeidiyii'aahígíí éí nihí neheleehígíí t'áá át'é ła' át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' bił dah nídi'diilnihgo nááhániihii át'éego náá'iiłniihii Éran baa dahohjáah doo .
PRED:	And all the tribes of Israel shall bring them to the Lord , as a wave offering unto the Lord , to Aaron the priest .
GOLD:	You must present one-tenth of the tithe received from the Israelites as a sacred offering to the Lord . This is the Lord 's sacred portion , and you must present it to Aaron the priest .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	Índa Hínam biye' bihoníts'aa' hoolyéegi ha'áłchíní didlidgo náájiisnii' áádóó bee ééhózinii áádóó bee álílee áda'ooł'įįłii índa nidadilniihii choyooł'į́įgo ch'į́įdii yábiiłti'ii áádóó dadiłgąshii choyooł'į́ , áko t'áá íiyisí doo yá'ádaashóonii éí Bóhólníihii yinááł yaa naagháago yee yáhóółchįįd .
PRED:	And he offered burnt offering in the Valley of the valley of fire , and with signs , and wonders , and wonders , and an evil man , and he was very angry in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	Manasseh also sacrificed his own sons in the fire in the valley of Ben-Hinnom . He practiced sorcery , divination , and witchcraft , and he consulted with mediums and psychics . He did much that was evil in the Lord 's sight , arousing his anger .

ID:	2191
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá' t'áá ałtsoní daaht'į́įgo bee ák'idaahdláago tsi'nisoohkai . Na'atseed bijį́įjį' biniyé nihijéí hwiih danilį́įgo ádaahłaa .
PRED:	You have faith in all the earth , and you have filled your heart , and you have filled your heart until the day of the end .
GOLD:	You have spent your years on earth in luxury , satisfying your every desire . You have fattened yourselves for the day of slaughter .

ID:	2192
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání ánááhodoo'niid , Mesáíyah , Christ joolyéhígíí lá jígháahgo shił bééhózin ni , áko jiníyáago t'áá ałtsoní bee nihił hozhdoolnih .
PRED:	Then the woman said to him , “ I know that he is the Messiah , and he went and tell you everything . ”
GOLD:	The woman said , “ I know the Messiah is coming — the one who is called Christ . When he comes , he will explain everything to us . ”

ID:	2193
INPUT:	Jó , í'doołíłígíí t'áá ałtso nihich'į' bee haasdzíí' .
PRED:	For I have spoken to you all that will happen to you .
GOLD:	“ At that time I gave you instructions about everything you were to do .

ID:	2194
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaagóó haz'ánígíí bich'é'étiingi dáádiníbaal dooígíí éí tádiin ké silá áníłnéez doo ; yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii biyi'jį' yistł'ǫ́ǫgo naashch'ąą'go ályaa doo ; bá adaaz'áa dooígíí dį́į́' índa bitł'ááh naaznil dooígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí ałdó' <unk> doo .
PRED:	And the tabernacle shall be twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and fine linen , and scarlet , and fine linen ; and their sockets shall be of fine linen , and their sockets .
GOLD:	“ For the entrance to the courtyard , make a curtain that is 30 feet long . Make it from finely woven linen , and decorate it with beautiful embroidery in blue , purple , and scarlet thread . Support it with four posts , each securely set in its own base .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ ; t'áá éí shízhi' ; bee ayóó ánísht'éii doo náánáła' baa dideesh'áał da ; bee shaa ha'niihii doo eda'alyaii bich'į' kódeeshłíił da .
PRED:	I am the Lord , and I will not give me any of my glory ; I will not give my covenant to my covenant .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord ; that is my name ! I will not give my glory to anyone else , nor share my praise with carved idols .

ID:	2196
INPUT:	Áko Áízak haye' ábizhdííniid , Haaléit'éego t'áadoo hodina'í bik'ííníyá , shiye' ? Áko ájíní , Bóhólníihii niDiyin God shíká aalwodgo bik'íníyá .
PRED:	Isaac said to his son , “ How did you find the enemy ? ” And he said , “ The Lord your God has found me . ”
GOLD:	Isaac asked , “ How did you find it so quickly , my son ? ” “ The Lord your God put it in my path ! ” Jacob replied .

ID:	2197
INPUT:	Háálá badahojoobá'íígíí t'áá áłahjį' nihitaa daakai , nidi shí éí doo t'áá áłahjį' nihitaasháa da .
PRED:	For you always have the poor always with you , but I am not with you .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , but you will not always have me .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	Jéthro éí Mózes haadaaní nilį́įgo biye'ké áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ bił honoojíigi Diyin God bidziłdi dah oonéełgo áadi Mózes baa jíkai .
PRED:	Moses , Moses 's sons , his sons , and his wife , came to the mountain of God in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Jethro , Moses ' father-in-law , now came to visit Moses in the wilderness . He brought Moses ' wife and two sons with him , and they arrived while Moses and the people were camped near the mountain of God .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	Áko táłts'á'ii'eełígi doo yá'át'éehgo hóhááh át'éégóó biniinaa diné aghá'ánéelą́ą'go , Fííniks hoolyéedi t'áá jókááh át'éé ládą́ą́' nihił dah náádi'doo'ołgo áadi danihidoohah , dadííniid . Éí Kríit bibąąhgi táłts'á'ii'eełgo shádi'ááh áádóó e'e'aah bita'gi ąą áhoot'é .
PRED:	And in the year of the sea , a great multitude , two men , and two , and two , and they said , Let us pass by the sea , and between the sea , and the sea .
GOLD:	And since Fair Havens was an exposed harbor — a poor place to spend the winter — most of the crew wanted to go on to Phoenix , farther up the coast of Crete , and spend the winter there . Phoenix was a good harbor with only a southwest and northwest exposure .

ID:	2200
INPUT:	Niyót'ááh hiníláii nísh'į́įgo , níla' bee binishínílnishii , ooljéé' índa sǫ' ádaat'éii , dah dasínínilii baa nitséskeesgo
PRED:	I looked at heaven , and see the work of your hands , the stars , the stars ,
GOLD:	When I look at the night sky and see the work of your fingers — the moon and the stars you set in place —

ID:	2201
INPUT:	k'ad hazhó'ó ííníłts'ą́ą'go díní'į́į́' , áko ná naal'a'í nishłíinii Ízrel dine'é bił nich'į' ádił nida'ayeelzíi'ii bee nił hashne'go Ízrel dine'é ná naal'a'í danilíinii k'ad t'áá ákwíí jį́ índa t'áá ákwíí tł'éé' bá nich'į' sonídíszįįhígíí yíísíníłts'ą́ą́' ; shí áádóó shizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii bił ádił nida'ayeelzíí' .
PRED:	Now hear , and behold , and I have sinned against thy servant Israel , that I may speak unto thy servant Israel all day and night , that I may pray unto thee , and to thy servant Israel all night , and to thy house , and to thy house .
GOLD:	listen to my prayer ! Look down and see me praying night and day for your people Israel . I confess that we have sinned against you . Yes , even my own family and I have sinned !

ID:	2202
INPUT:	Ánathath kin haal'áagi diné kéédahat'íinii doo yá'áshónígi ádahodeeshłíłígíí yihah góne' atíháshłéehgo t'ááłá'í nidi doo ła' jidoodzih da .
PRED:	I will destroy the inhabitants of Kohath , and I will destroy every man in the days of the evil .
GOLD:	Not one of these plotters from Anathoth will survive , for I will bring disaster upon them when their time of punishment comes . ”

ID:	2203
INPUT:	Nidi éí bíni' bił ch'aa daashchį́ , háálá díí jį́įjį' , bee aha'deet'ą́ áłtséhígíí dayółta'go , t'áá shiidą́ą'dii bintsíkees bik'ída'asti' yę́ę doo nahgóó iil<unk> da , háálá éí Christ bee t'éiyá nahgóó adooltsos .
PRED:	But he has hid his face , because it has been a covenant between the beginning , and has not been cut off from the beginning of the birds , for Christ is taken away from the beginning .
GOLD:	But the people 's minds were hardened , and to this day whenever the old covenant is being read , the same veil covers their minds so they can not understand the truth . And this veil can be removed only by believing in Christ .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	Jéíkab éí hazhé'é kéyah Kéínan yiyi' tádííná yę́ęgi kééhojit'į́ .
PRED:	Jacob lived in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	So Jacob settled again in the land of Canaan , where his father had lived as a foreigner .

ID:	2205
INPUT:	Ha'át'íhída t'áá nant'inee bee nihił hashne'ii t'áadoo bahat'aadí baa dahołne' , áádóó ha'át'íhída bee nihijeeh náníshniihígíí kin bighą́ą́'dóó baa dahołne' .
PRED:	Do n't tell you what I tell you . Tell you what I tell you . Tell you about what I tell you . Tell you about what I tell you .
GOLD:	What I tell you now in the darkness , shout abroad when daybreak comes . What I whisper in your ear , shout from the housetops for all to hear !

ID:	2206
INPUT:	Áko hane' yá'át'éehii yits'ą́ą́jí danilíinii t'áá shizááká bich'į' naasdzilgo dashoołtsą́ áádóó k'ad shaa dahodoohts'a'ígi át'éego nihí ałdó' t'áá nihizááká nidaałdzil .
PRED:	And you have seen the Good News , and now you have made me strong , as you hear it .
GOLD:	We are in this struggle together . You have seen my struggle in the past , and you know that I am still in the midst of it .

ID:	2207
INPUT:	A'ohgo ádaat'éii yá'áhoot'ééhgóó yoo'ish , áádóó a'ohgo ádaat'éii hohonít'i'ii bínabizhniłtin .
PRED:	He will teach the wicked , and he will teach the way of the poor .
GOLD:	He leads the humble in doing right , teaching them his way .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	Naalte' danohłíinii , nihokáa'gi nihinanit'a'í t'áá ałtsojį' bik'eh dahonoł'į́ . T'óó bináałgo bił hóshǫ́ t'éiyá biniyé ádaaht'į́įgo éí dooda , nidi nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Bóhólníihii dadíínóhsingo nihinanit'a'í bik'eh dahonoł'į́ .
PRED:	You servants , obey the Lord in all the world . If you do this , you must do it , but you must obey the Lord .
GOLD:	Slaves , obey your earthly masters in everything you do . Try to please them all the time , not just when they are watching you . Serve them sincerely because of your reverent fear of the Lord .

ID:	2209
INPUT:	Éí bąą haa'íshą' bááh díík'ǫsh t'áá shiidą́ą'dii bił ályaii t'áadoo bił anída'iilzįįhgo ninádahwiidlaahí , háálá díík'ǫsh t'áá shiidą́ą'diígíí éí áká naat'á áádóó doo yá'áshóonii yaa halne' , nidi díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii éí t'áádóo nídí áádóó t'áá aaníinii yaa halne' , áko éigi át'éego ninádahwii<unk> doo .
PRED:	So do n't let the bread be eaten at the beginning of unleavened bread , because the time is near , and the evil bread is at the beginning , but the truth will be preached to them .
GOLD:	So let us celebrate the festival , not with the old bread of wickedness and evil , but with the new bread of sincerity and truth .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	Mózes dah nízdiidzá áádóó baadaaní jílíní Jéthro baa nidzídzáago ábizhdííniid , Baa nánooshkąąh , Ííjip kéyahdi shik'éí kéédahat'íinii bich'į' nídeeshdááł ; t'ah daats'í dahiná shił bééhodoozįįł . Áko Jéthro éí Mózes áyidííniid , Nílááh hózhǫ́ǫgo yínááł .
PRED:	And Moses went out and went to his father-in-law , and said unto him , I pray thee , I pray thee , I pray thee , that I may return to my brethren in the land of Egypt : and Moses said unto them , Go in peace .
GOLD:	So Moses went back home to Jethro , his father-in-law . “ Please let me return to my relatives in Egypt , ” Moses said . “ I do n't even know if they are still alive. ” “ Go in peace , ” Jethro replied .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa áyidííniid , T'áadoo nił yé'í ; t'áadoo ádił nisindáhí ; nídiidáahgo diné nidaabaahii t'áá ałtso dah dii'éeshgo nihílááh , Éí'ai kin haal'áágóó dohkááh ; jó , Éí'ai dine'é áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í áádóó bidine'é áádóó bikin haal'áhígíí índa bikéyah nihílák'eidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord said to Joshua , “ Do n't be afraid . Take away your sins , and take all the men of war , and go to Ai , and give them into the hand of the king of Ai , and into his hand . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do not be afraid or discouraged . Take all your fighting men and attack Ai , for I have given you the king of Ai , his people , his town , and his land .

ID:	2212
INPUT:	Diyin God doo yidósinii doo yá'áshóonii haidilts'i' , áádóó yee yáłti'ígíí kǫ' nahalingo hidiiltłáád .
PRED:	The fear of God is a wicked man , and the words of fire is like fire .
GOLD:	Scoundrels create trouble ; their words are a destructive blaze .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	Ła'da nanihídééłkidgo , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé k'e'oh'ad ? nihiłníigo , Jó , Bóhólníihii choidooł'įįł , bididoohniił .
PRED:	He asked them , “ Why do you say to them , ‘ The Lord has given you ? '
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	2214
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalem yisnáajį' Jeremáíyah éí awáalyaa bich'éédą́ą'gi dzizdáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Jeremiah stayed in the court of Jerusalem , and he sat in the court of the prison .
GOLD:	And Jeremiah remained a prisoner in the courtyard of the guard until the day Jerusalem was captured .

ID:	2215
INPUT:	Bee aha'deet'áanii shinááł baa nidziskai yę́ę t'áadoo bida'jiilaagóó béégashii yáázh ahádajishgizhgo bita' gónaa ch'ídadziiskai yę́ędą́ą́' shibee aha'deetáanii k'ídadzizti'ígíí kóhodeeshłííł :
PRED:	When they have broken the covenant before me , I will make a covenant with the bull , when they came out of the flock , and cut off the covenant of my covenant ,
GOLD:	Because you have broken the terms of our covenant , I will cut you apart just as you cut apart the calf when you walked between its halves to solemnize your vows .

ID:	2216
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá tł'óó'dę́ę́' sínízį́įgo nikwá'ásiní bąąh ni'ííníláhígíí nich'į' ch'éidoodlééł .
PRED:	But if you stand in the door , you who stand in the middle of the day of the day of your soul , you will receive him out of the fire .
GOLD:	You must wait outside while he goes in and brings it out to you .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	Áádóó ch'íhoní'eezhgo áhodííniid , Nílááh , yisdádoohkahígíí biniyé tsį́įłgo dah doohjeeh ; t'áadoo nát'ą́ą́' nídadóht'į́'í ; halgaigi nidi t'áadoo nida'áhodołziidí ; dził <unk> jeeh ; t'áadoo ádaohdzaagóó éí ádadoohdįįł .
PRED:	And when he brought them out , he said to them , “ Go quickly quickly , and do n't turn back , but do n't let there be a time in the field . Do n't destroy it . ”
GOLD:	When they were safely out of the city , one of the angels ordered , “ Run for your lives ! And do n't look back or stop anywhere in the valley ! Escape to the mountains , or you will be swept away ! ”

ID:	2218
INPUT:	Áko ákwii áhooníiłii ayóó át'éii doo baa nijóya' át'ée da , nidi diné bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí t'áá díkwíí t'éí bik'i dah dahizhdilníihgo nááhizhdiiłjéé' .
PRED:	And there was not able to do great things , but a few men who were sick on him .
GOLD:	And because of their unbelief , he could n't do any miracles among them except to place his hands on a few sick people and heal them .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	Áko David éí Saul bich'į' ádee hazdoodzíi'go Saul hooghangóó dah nídiidzá , nidi David áádóó diné bił nijikaígíí éí bidziilgo nahont'in nahaz'ą́ą́góó bił dah nízhdiikai .
PRED:	David made a vow to Saul , and David went back to his home , but David and his men were with him .
GOLD:	So David promised this to Saul with an oath . Then Saul went home , but David and his men went back to their stronghold .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Offerings for the Passover

ID:	2221
INPUT:	Diné bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ , háálá á nidahwii'aahii bidááhdę́ę́' nidanihidiyoo'ish , áádóó kin yii' áłah nídaadleehí naaznilgóó ninihída<unk> <unk> doo ,
PRED:	Take heed to the people , for they will bring you before the judges , and they will be able to stand in the synagogue .
GOLD:	But beware ! For you will be handed over to the courts and will be flogged with whips in the synagogues .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	Asdzání ádee hadahadziihgo bá bee haz'áanii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Laws concerning Vows

ID:	2223
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Revolt against Athaliah

ID:	2224
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God yá naal'a'í hach'į' báhóóchįįdgo ání , Ashdladi , doodaii' hastą́ądi <unk> dííłt'oh nít'éé' , ákohgo Síriya dine'é ałtso ádííłdįįłjį' atídíílííł nít'éé' , nidi k'ad Síriya dine'é t'áá tá'ídi atídíílííł .
PRED:	Then the man of God was angry with him and said , “ You will destroy five or six times . You will destroy the Arameans , but now you will destroy them . ”
GOLD:	But the man of God was angry with him . “ You should have struck the ground five or six times ! ” he exclaimed . “ Then you would have beaten Aram until it was entirely destroyed . Now you will be victorious only three times . ”

ID:	2225
INPUT:	Peter ánáázhdoo'niid , Shik'isóó , t'áadoo bich'į' ni' nishłíní nihizhé'é David yę́ę binahjį' nihich'į' hadeesdzih , éí daaztsą́ áádóó yóó'ábi'diilyaa , áádóó díí jį́įjį' tséní'ootséél góne' abi'dooltínígi t'ahdii bik'eh haz'ą́ .
PRED:	Peter said , “ I will speak to you , my brothers , that I may speak to your father David , and he is buried , and he is buried in the tomb until this day . ”
GOLD:	“ Dear brothers , think about this ! You can be sure that the patriarch David was n't referring to himself , for he died and was buried , and his tomb is still here among us .

ID:	2226
INPUT:	Jó , ats'íís bee hadilyaii lą'í nidi ats'íís éí t'ááłá'í .
PRED:	For there are many body , but one body is one body .
GOLD:	Yes , there are many parts , but only one body .

ID:	2227
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalem kin haal'áadi níyáago łahgo shił bééhoozin , Iiláíyashib éí nihiDiyin God bikin góne' łahgo haz'ą́ Tobáíyah yá hasht'ehoolaaígíí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįd da lá .
PRED:	And I saw the rest of Jerusalem , and I know that there was no peace in the house of our God .
GOLD:	When I arrived back in Jerusalem , I learned about Eliashib 's evil deed in providing Tobiah with a room in the courtyards of the Temple of God .

ID:	2228
INPUT:	Áko Gídiyan éí diyingo naal'a'í ábizhdííniid , Bóhonishníihii nílíinii , Bóhólníihii nihił hólǫ́ǫgo ha'át'íí biniyé díí t'áá ałtso bee kónihi'dool'įįd ? Áko álílee yee ááníłígíí danihizhé'é yę́ę ákót'éego yee nihił dahoolne'go ádaaní , Da' doósh Bóhólníihii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezh da ? Nidi k'ad Bóhólníihii yóó'anihidíí'ą́ągo Mídiyan dine'é yílák'ee nihidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	Gideon said to the angel , “ Lord , why have you done all these things to us ? ” And they said , “ Did n't the Lord deliver us out of Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	“ Sir , ” Gideon replied , “ if the Lord is with us , why has all this happened to us ? And where are all the miracles our ancestors told us about ? Did n't they say , ‘ The Lord brought us up out of Egypt ' ? But now the Lord has abandoned us and handed us over to the Midianites . ”

ID:	2229
INPUT:	áádóó Jóseph ádííniidígi át'éego dahodichingo tsosts'id nídoohahígíí baa hoolzhiizh . Áko kédaayahgóó t'áá ałtsogi dahodííchįįd , nidi Ííjip kéyahgi t'éiyá t'áá át'éé nít'éé' ch'iyáán hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And the seven days of famine came to pass , as Joseph had commanded , and the famine was in all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the seven years of famine began , just as Joseph had predicted . The famine also struck all the surrounding countries , but throughout Egypt there was plenty of food .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	Áko Jesus ch'il hooshahii hach'ah áádóó éé' tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bee joogáałgo áádę́ę́' ch'ízhníyá . Áko Páílat éí diné áłah silį́'ígíí áyidííniid , Jó , kǫ́ǫ́ dzizį́ .
PRED:	Then Jesus went out of the robe and scarlet robe . Then Pilate said to the crowd , “ Here is the place where I am . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe . And Pilate said , “ Look , here is the man ! ”

ID:	2231
INPUT:	níbaal bii' hodílzinii áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí binaa haz'ánígi nídadilbałígíí áádóó bich'éédą́ą'gi dáádiníbaal ałdó' áádóó dabitł'óól áádóó yee yininádaalnishígíí t'áá át'é índa níbaal bee háádiil'įįhígíí t'áá át'é nideiyée doo ; díí bindaanishgo nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	And the tabernacle , and the tabernacle , and the tabernacle , and the tabernacle , and the tabernacle , and all its vessels , and all its vessels , and all its vessels , shall serve them .
GOLD:	They are also to carry the curtains for the courtyard walls that surround the Tabernacle and altar , the curtain across the courtyard entrance , the ropes , and all the equipment related to their use . The Gershonites are responsible for all these items .

ID:	2232
INPUT:	K'ad díí Ízrel dine'é bee bił hodíílnih , Bíni' diné índa asdzání t'ááłá'í jinítínígo hoł kééhat'íinii t'áadoo le'é béésh łigaii índa óola bee yódí ádaalyaii bídeízhdóokił .
PRED:	Now tell the people of Israel , “ Let every man give gold and gold . ”
GOLD:	Tell all the Israelite men and women to ask their Egyptian neighbors for articles of silver and gold . ”

ID:	2233
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee adziilii yit'íní ályaa
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	Job Responds to the

ID:	2234
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Edom Refuses Israel Passage

ID:	2235
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God k'ehgo yínííł daniidlį́įgo éí łahgo át'éego Diyin God bich'į' tsínánihidiiłkosgo bee yisdá'iildéehii yaa nihii'éésh , áko éí doo bik'édí daniidlį́į da , nidi nihokáá'jí k'ehgo yínííł danilį́įgo éí aniné t'éiyá nánídlį́ .
PRED:	For if we do not turn back to God , he will help us . He will help us , but we will not have pity on the face of the world .
GOLD:	For the kind of sorrow God wants us to experience leads us away from sin and results in salvation . There 's no regret for that kind of sorrow . But worldly sorrow , which lacks repentance , results in spiritual death .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	Áádóó Mó'ab kéyah nidzisgaigi éí Jériko binaashiijí Jórdan tooh nílíní ha'a'aahjigo haz'ánígi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab , in the plains of Jericho , on the east side of Jericho , saying ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2237
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné dį́lt'éego diné bitah doo nahwii'náa da léi' hach'į' dayíłtsóós .
PRED:	And four men were sick , and there was no man in trouble .
GOLD:	four men arrived carrying a paralyzed man on a mat .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God éí diné t'áadoo biniyéhígóó nidaakaii yééhósin ; doo ákwii é'ét'éii ałdó' yiyiiłtséehgo yiníł'į́ . Da' éísh doo yaa nitsíkees da doo ?
PRED:	For God knows the works of the wicked , who sees the iniquity also ? Is it not the thoughts of iniquity ?
GOLD:	For he knows those who are false , and he takes note of all their sins .

ID:	2239
INPUT:	Diné éí níłch'i t'ą́ą́' jótą' dooleełígíí doo bíjíighah da , áádóó dazdootsaałígíí bijį́ doo dadeestsaał da dzinízin , nidi doo bízhneel'ą́ą da ; anaa' baa na'aldeehdę́ę́' doo hwéé'doolnih da , doodaii' doo yá'áshóonii baa ázhdeet'ánígíí doo bits'áhodi'dooltéeł da .
PRED:	A man shall not keep his spirit , and he shall not die on the day of death , but he shall not escape from the battle , nor shall he deliver him away from the evil .
GOLD:	None of us can hold back our spirit from departing . None of us has the power to prevent the day of our death . There is no escaping that obligation , that dark battle . And in the face of death , wickedness will certainly not rescue the wicked .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	one male goat for a sin offering ;
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáahgi naaki íí'áhígíí béésh łitsoii bee ályaii áádóó béésh łitsoii bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ánígíí éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin dabiyi'ígíí Kaldíya dine'é nidayiizti'go éí béésh łitsoii Bábilangóó adayiizyį́ .
PRED:	And the bronze pillars that were before the Lord , and the pillars that were in the house of the Lord , and the pillars that were in the house of the Lord , and carried them to Babylon .
GOLD:	The Babylonians broke up the bronze pillars in front of the Lord 's Temple , the bronze water carts , and the great bronze basin called the Sea , and they carried all the bronze away to Babylon .

ID:	2242
INPUT:	Áádóó neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii naadeesh'niłígíí tsits'aa' dílzinii biih dadoohnił .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the ark of the covenant , which I will do to thee .
GOLD:	When the Ark is finished , place inside it the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , which I will give to you .

ID:	2243
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í índa Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiiháshafat éí bi'éénééz yiih yí'áazhgo Samériya dań'dítį́įhgi t'áá bíni' haz'ą́ą́ léi'gi t'áá ał'ąą bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah siké , áko náás áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii t'áá ałtso hadááhdóó dahoolne' .
PRED:	And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah put on his robe , and sat on the throne in Samaria , and all the prophets told him .
GOLD:	King Ahab of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah , dressed in their royal robes , were sitting on thrones at the threshing floor near the gate of Samaria . All of Ahab 's prophets were prophesying there in front of them .

ID:	2244
INPUT:	Áko Jesus baa dziiskaigo diné níłch'i bida'iiníziinii lą'í bii' hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę bi'éé' hólǫ́ǫgo áádóó bintsékees yá'át'éehgo índa hasht'edít'éego ákwii sidáago dajiiłtsą́ , áko t'áá ádzíłtso t'óó hayadahodeesyiz .
PRED:	And when they came to Jesus , they saw many demons sitting in good and in peace , and they were afraid .
GOLD:	A crowd soon gathered around Jesus , and they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons . He was sitting there fully clothed and perfectly sane , and they were all afraid .

ID:	2245
INPUT:	HaDiyin God bibááh níjídį́įh doo ; aláahgo dadiyinígíí áádóó dadiyingoígíí t'áá áłah jiyą́ą doo .
PRED:	He shall eat the bread of his God , and the most holy , and all the assembly of all the congregation .
GOLD:	However , he may eat from the food offered to God , including the holy offerings and the most holy offerings .

ID:	2246
INPUT:	Áádóó da'oo'ínígíí dabináá' doo ádaadįįł da doo áádóó dadiits'a'ígíí bijaa' yee da'íists'ą́ą' doo .
PRED:	And the eyes of their eyes shall not perish , and hear their ears , and hear their ears .
GOLD:	Then everyone who has eyes will be able to see the truth , and everyone who has ears will be able to hear it .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Náás da'ahíínółchííhgóó danihi'éé' bibąąhdi bijánil áńdaał'įįh doo , áádóó bijánil bikáa'gi tł'óół yá nahalingo dootł'izh danít'i'go áńdaał'įįh doo ,
PRED:	“ Speak to the children of Israel , saying , ‘ You shall put your robe on your generations , and you shall make them like a garment .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : Throughout the generations to come you must make tassels for the hems of your clothing and attach them with a blue cord .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	Ííhad bik'ai' nish'náájí diltłish bąąh ní'áhígíí nishtł'ají yee yił háádéelgo habid góne' yaa ayííłgeed .
PRED:	He put a sword on his right hand , and put it into the mouth of his right hand .
GOLD:	Ehud reached with his left hand , pulled out the dagger strapped to his right thigh , and plunged it into the king 's belly .

ID:	2249
INPUT:	Áko éí hatahgóó Éídar yiziłígíí binih dį́į́'ts'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo índa ashdla'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh ts'ídá ákódaat'į́į dooleeł .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the fourteenth month , on the fourteenth day of the month , on the fourteenth day of the month , it shall be done .
GOLD:	calling on them to celebrate an annual festival on these two days .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Land Division East of the Jordan

ID:	2251
INPUT:	Be'ek'id bąąhgi Jesus nínáázhdí'níitą́ą́' . Áko diné t'óó ahayóí haa áłah silį́į́' , éí bąą tsinaa'eeł biih jííyáago bii'dóó dah dzineezdá , áko diné áłah silį́'ígíí t'áá át'é tábąąhgóó yíl'á .
PRED:	Jesus began to teach him the sea . And a large crowd came out of the boat , and sat down on the side of the sea , and all the multitude were around the sea .
GOLD:	Once again Jesus began teaching by the lakeshore . A very large crowd soon gathered around him , so he got into a boat . Then he sat in the boat while all the people remained on the shore .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ayóó át'éego ádeínóhsin ! Bidził dílzinii si'ą́ądi bich'į' nidahohłá , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hó jidiyin !
PRED:	Praise the Lord your God , and worship his holy mountain , for he is your God .
GOLD:	Exalt the Lord our God , and worship at his holy mountain in Jerusalem , for the Lord our God is holy !

ID:	2253
INPUT:	Ak'eh honíł'ínígíí bee naa jóshłíigo , ándishnínígíi nidi biláahgo ádííníiłgo shił bééhózingo nich'į' ak'e'ashchí .
PRED:	I write to you , if you obey me , I write to you more than you .
GOLD:	I am confident as I write this letter that you will do what I ask and even more !

ID:	2254
INPUT:	Jéshuwa áádóó biye'ké áádóó bik'isóó danilíinii áádóó Ho<unk> yah ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ła' Kádmiyel ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii índa Hénadad biye'kéhígíí dabiye'ké áádóó dabik'isóó éí Líívai dine'é danilíiniida yił deizį'go Diyin God bikin ałtso bini'doonishígíí díí diné nidaalnishii bił nidajishnish .
PRED:	And the sons of Joshua and his brethren , the sons of Jeshua , the sons of Jeshua , the sons of Levi , and the sons of Levi , and the sons of Levi , and the Levites , and all the work of the house of God .
GOLD:	The workers at the Temple of God were supervised by Jeshua with his sons and relatives , and Kadmiel and his sons , all descendants of Hodaviah . They were helped in this task by the Levites of the family of Henadad .

ID:	2255
INPUT:	Jóseph éí Matatháíyas biye' , Matatháíyas éí Éímas biye' , Éímas éí Néíham biye' , Néíham éí <unk> biye' , <unk> éí Néígeiyai biye' ,
PRED:	And Joseph the son of Zeruiah , the son of Zeruiah , the son of Uriah , the son of Uriah , the son of Zeruiah ,
GOLD:	Joseph was the son of Mattathias.Mattathias was the son of Amos.Amos was the son of Nahum.Nahum was the son of Esli.Esli was the son of Naggai .

ID:	2256
INPUT:	Áádóó Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígóó níyá , áadi sis niteelí nídéł'į́į́' yę́ędóó hanéígeedgo nídiilá . Nít'éé' , sis niteelí yę́ę doo chonáánáot'įįh át'éégóó yíchxǫ' lá , jó'akon .
PRED:	And he went to the river , and hid it , and hid it in the river ; and behold , there was no rain in thee .
GOLD:	So I went to the Euphrates and dug it out of the hole where I had hidden it . But now it was rotting and falling apart . The loincloth was good for nothing .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	T'áá háiida doo danihinízinígíí éí bee hwéédahózin doo biniyé kin haal'áádóó dah náádahidoohkáahgo nihikee' łeezh bąąh nidahinołdéeh doo .
PRED:	If you do not know him , you must go out of the city and wash your feet with dust .
GOLD:	And if a town refuses to welcome you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	2258
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehdi daneest'áanii nááda<unk> jooł ; diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bich'il na'atł'o'ii nínéiniłt'į́hígi nidahodikai .
PRED:	The fruit of the field is taken away ; the wicked are gathered in the field .
GOLD:	They harvest a field they do not own , and they glean in the vineyards of the wicked .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Pekahiah Rules in Israel

ID:	2260
INPUT:	Áko hach'į' hádaasdzíí' , Diné ditł'oii léi' akałsis biníí' gónaa yee ákászaaz . Áko Eihazáíyah ání , Éí lá Tíshbeh dine'é Iiláíjah át'į́ ni .
PRED:	And they answered him , There was a man sitting at his feet . And Ahaziah said , “ You are Elijah the prophet . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ He was a hairy man , and he wore a leather belt around his waist. ” “ Elijah from Tishbe ! ” the king exclaimed .

ID:	2261
INPUT:	Áádóó Jésii éí bááh áádóó tó abid bee wáin áádóó tł'ízí yázhí ałdó' éí télii béédzíiztł'ingo haye' David éí Saul yich'į' ayíílóóz .
PRED:	And Jesse took the bread , and a young goat , and a young goat , and a donkey , and brought him to Saul .
GOLD:	Jesse responded by sending David to Saul , along with a young goat , a donkey loaded with bread , and a wineskin full of wine .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	Áko Gídiyan éí Jórdan toohdi jiníyáago tsé'naa nizhníyá , hó áádóó diné táadi neeznádiin hoł naakaígíí bił ch'ééh dzideeskai nidi t'áá bikéé' dajíbááh .
PRED:	So Gideon went to the Jordan , and he and the three hundred men who were with him were with him , but they followed him .
GOLD:	Gideon then crossed the Jordan River with his 300 men , and though exhausted , they continued to chase the enemy .

ID:	2263
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread

ID:	2264
INPUT:	Éí bąą Diyin God ba'áłchíní háá'áyį́į́h t'ahdii bá hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Therefore the children of God was still in the Sabbath .
GOLD:	So there is a special rest still waiting for the people of God .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ábsalam ádííniid , Árkadóó dine'é Húshai ałdó' k'ad hágo bidohní , Haa'íshą' ha'át'íí didooniiłígíí hazhó'ó deídíilts'įįł .
PRED:	Absalom said , “ Now you also say , ‘ Let 's hear what we want to do . '
GOLD:	But then Absalom said , “ Bring in Hushai the Arkite . Let 's see what he thinks about this . ”

ID:	2266
INPUT:	Áko Éísaf ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii dahataałii t'áá nideidzįįhígi naazį́ ; David yę́ę áádóó Éísaf yę́ę áádóó Hííman yę́ę índa Jedúthan éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá náásgóó áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii nilį́įgo ádííniidii yik'ehgo naazį́ , áko dáń'da'ditį́į́h yaa ádahalyánígíí dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó naazį́ , éí bindaanishígíí doo ni' kódeilééhgóó ; jó , dahak'is Líívai dine'é há ch'iyáán hasht'éédayiil'įįh .
PRED:	And the Levites stood in their place , in the place of the sons of Levi , and in the place of David , and of the sons of Levi , and the son of Levi , according to the words of the king , and the Levites stood by the gate ; and the Levites stood by the gates .
GOLD:	The musicians , descendants of Asaph , were in their assigned places , following the commands that had been given by David , Asaph , Heman , and Jeduthun , the king 's seer . The gatekeepers guarded the gates and did not need to leave their posts of duty , for their Passover offerings were prepared for them by their fellow Levites .

ID:	2267
INPUT:	Háálá diné t'áadoo nilíní da nidi ayóó ánísht'é nízinii , éí ádina'adlo'go át'é .
PRED:	For it is not a man , but a false witness .
GOLD:	If you think you are too important to help someone , you are only fooling yourself . You are not that important .

ID:	2268
INPUT:	Háishą' éí bá nidahołt'i' ? Háishą' bich'į' nihizéé' nidahołts'ǫǫdgo nihitsoo' háádaołgo' ? Ts'ídá bee haz'áanii doo yik'eh hół'íinii índa t'óó áhodil'íinii ba'áłchíní danohłį́ .
PRED:	Who do you think about ? Why do you think about your mouth ? Do you think that you do not obey the law and do not obey the law ?
GOLD:	Whom do you mock , making faces and sticking out your tongues ? You children of sinners and liars !

ID:	2269
INPUT:	Áko díí yee nanihinitin , díí nihokáa'gi doo Diyin God k'ehgo iináanii índa ts'ísee k'ehgo adáhonooníinii yóó'adahidiit'aah , áádóó hazhó'ó ádaa ádahwiilyą́ągo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego índa Diyin God k'ehgo dahinii'náago ánihósingo
PRED:	And we teach you these things , that we love the world and the flesh , and the way of the flesh , and of truth , and of truth ,
GOLD:	And we are instructed to turn from godless living and sinful pleasures . We should live in this evil world with wisdom , righteousness , and devotion to God ,

ID:	2270
INPUT:	Díí t'áá íiyisí doo yá'át'éhígi ádaoht'ínígíí danohsingo doo danihíísíilts'ą́ą' da doo ; éí asdzání dé'éyóní danilíinii bił ahánda'ohgehgo Diyin God bich'į' bee haz'áanii k'ídahohtíih doo .
PRED:	If you do not listen to what you do , we will not listen to you . You will not listen to the law of your God . ”
GOLD:	How could you even think of committing this sinful deed and acting unfaithfully toward God by marrying foreign women ? ”

ID:	2271
INPUT:	Kót'éego hadeesdzih , dííniidgo , jó , na'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii binisílo' doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	I will say to you , ‘ You have rejected your descendants . '
GOLD:	If I had really spoken this way to others , I would have been a traitor to your people .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	Ákohgo shádi'ááhdę́ę'go yah a'atiindę́ę́' shił yah íí'áazhgo wóne'di ahééhool'áhíjį' shił niní'áázh , áádóó shádi'áahjigo yah a'atiinígíí yí'nééł'ąąd , nít'éé' t'áá ła' áníłtsooígi áníłtso lá ;
PRED:	Then he brought me to the gate of the south gate . He measured the gate . He measured the gate of the south gate .
GOLD:	Then the man took me to the south gateway leading into the inner courtyard . He measured it , and it had the same measurements as the other gateways .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é yíníłta' ; éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii áádóó ahii' háá'ahoolchíiłii bik'ehgo ashiiké t'ááłá'í bee nídadeezidóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso deídííłtah .
PRED:	Take the Levites and their families , according to their families , by their families , by their families , and by their families , from twenty years old and upward , all the years old .
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	2274
INPUT:	Áádóó ła'da alį́į́' ła' jiisxį́įgo t'áá alį́į́' ła' ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	And if any man kills a beast , he shall make an animal for him .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who kills another person 's animal must pay for it in full — a live animal for the animal that was killed .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	Áko ádííniid , Ákódeeshníłígíí t'áá íiyisí doo óoshne' át'ée da . Bee adlání bits'ą́ą́' hanáát'ánígíí éí shinaalte' jílį́į doo . Áko nihí t'éiyá nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihizhé'é bich'į' nídoohkah .
PRED:	And he said , I will do so , and he shall be my servant , and he shall be my servant ; and ye shall come to your father in peace .
GOLD:	“ No , ” Joseph said . “ I would never do such a thing ! Only the man who stole the cup will be my slave . The rest of you may go back to your father in peace . ”

ID:	2276
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní Christ yik'eh dahół'į́į doo biniyé yik'i dées'eezgo yee yíhoosníí' . Nidi , T'áá ałtsoní yee hóhoosníí' , ha'níigo , t'áá ałtsoní nínígíí éí Diyin God doo atahgo ááhyiłníi da . Diyin God yee' Christ t'áá ałtsoní yee yíhoosníí' .
PRED:	For God of all things is under his feet , to keep his feet , but in all things is the glory of God : but God is not in all things .
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ God has put all things under his authority. ” ( Of course , when it says “ all things are under his authority , ” that does not include God himself , who gave Christ his authority . )

ID:	2277
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí tsé shá nilį́ , índa bine' adziihii shá nilį́ , áádóó yisdáshiiłteehii nilį́ ; shiDiyin God éí bee shidziilii nilį́įgo bine' ahinishchééh ; shinaage' índa adziil bee yisdáhásháahii nilį́įgo bikáá' nehesdzíihii nilį́ .
PRED:	The Lord is my rock , and my salvation ; my God is my shield ; my shield is my shield and my shield .
GOLD:	The Lord is my rock , my fortress , and my savior ; my God is my rock , in whom I find protection.He is my shield , the power that saves me , and my place of safety .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	Záker , Sheriibáíyah , Shebanáíyah ,
PRED:	Shemaiah , Hananiah , Hananiah ,
GOLD:	Zaccur , Sherebiah , Shebaniah ,

ID:	2279
INPUT:	Diyin God be'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' nihíni' danilį́į le' . Níłch'i Diyinii aidii'aahii ałdó' hádaaht'į́įgo Diyin God bá dahołne' dooígíí éí agháago hádaaht'į́ .
PRED:	May God 's love be given to you , as well as the gift of the Spirit .
GOLD:	Let love be your highest goal ! But you should also desire the special abilities the Spirit gives — especially the ability to prophesy .

ID:	2280
INPUT:	Éí bąą Ízrel dine'é bíí' dadooleełii doo bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'dzíłk'iiz da ; Bóhólníihii t'éí hóó' dooleełii nilį́įgo hach'į' ádee hadoodzíí' .
PRED:	Therefore the children of Israel have no inheritance ; they have sworn to the inheritance of the Lord .
GOLD:	They will have no land of their own among the Israelites . The Lord himself is their special possession , just as he promised them .

ID:	2281
INPUT:	Yiską́ągo kóhoodzaago diné ła' naa deesh'aałígíí éí dinéhígíí Bénjamin dine'é bikéyahdę́ę́' naaghá , áko ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo ats'ádííłtéełgo shidine'é Ízrel yinant'áa doo . Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' shidine'é yisdéidoonił , háálá shidine'é bich'į' nidahwii'nánígíí nish'į́įgo shich'į' daachago diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when I will give thee a man from Benjamin , that thou shalt anoint him out of the tribe of Benjamin , and anoint me from the hand of the Philistines : for I have heard the cry of my people .
GOLD:	“ About this time tomorrow I will send you a man from the land of Benjamin . Anoint him to be the leader of my people , Israel . He will rescue them from the Philistines , for I have looked down on my people in mercy and have heard their cry . ”

ID:	2282
INPUT:	Íílah nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	The King of Edom
GOLD:	Elah Rules in Israel

ID:	2283
INPUT:	Nidi Jónah dah diiyáago Társhish kin haal'áajigo Bóhólníihii bits'ąą yóó'ajilyeedgo Jápa kin haal'áá góyaa ajííyá áádóó Társhishgóó tsinaa'eeł deez'éél léi' bik'ízhníyá , áko bik'é nazh'níláago biih jííyáago Társhish kin haal'áajigo atah hoł dah adii'éelgo Bóhólníihii hólǫ́ǫ́dóó yóó'ajilyeed .
PRED:	But Joab went away from Tyre , and found a ship from the Lord to Tyre , and came to Tyre , and found a ship with him ; and when he had gone with him , he went with him , and went with him , and fled from the Lord .
GOLD:	But Jonah got up and went in the opposite direction to get away from the Lord . He went down to the port of Joppa , where he found a ship leaving for Tarshish . He bought a ticket and went on board , hoping to escape from the Lord by sailing to Tarshish .

ID:	2284
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áii binahjį' sin
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	A Song about the

ID:	2285
INPUT:	áádóó doo chin bąąh hólóonii ch'il hísap wolyéii tó yiih yidoołjołgo níbaal áádóó łeets'aa' t'áá át'é áádóó ákóne' naháaztáanii índa tsinda , doodaii' seesyíinii , doodaii' daaztsáanii , doodaii' jishcháá' yíhidéé'ná'ígíí bik'ízhdoołtah ,
PRED:	and he shall cast it out with water , and with water , and with all the vessels , and with all the vessels , and with the dead , or with the dead , or with the dead ,
GOLD:	Then someone who is ceremonially clean must take a hyssop branch and dip it into the water . That person must sprinkle the water on the tent , on all the furnishings in the tent , and on the people who were in the tent ; also on the person who touched a human bone , or touched someone who was killed or who died naturally , or touched a grave .

ID:	2286
INPUT:	Nidi díí bee haasdzí'ígíí t'áadoo dasidoots'ą́ą́'góogo , t'áá shí ádee hadisdziihgo ádíshní , Díí aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bił haz'ą́ągi doo yidoolaałí da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But if you do not listen to these words , I swear by myself , ” says the Lord . “ This is the house of the king . ”
GOLD:	But if you refuse to pay attention to this warning , I swear by my own name , says the Lord , that this palace will become a pile of rubble . ' ”

ID:	2287
INPUT:	Díí ni'góó nidaa'na'ii ła' bee t'ááká baa'ihgo áda'doołnééh lágo , doodaii' t'ááká éí bee doo bi'didéehii áda'doołnééh lágo , jó , éí nihidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	“ Do not make any of these things unclean things that are on the earth . You must not make them unclean . You must make them unclean .
GOLD:	Do not defile yourselves by touching them . You must not make yourselves ceremonially unclean because of them .

ID:	2288
INPUT:	Nidi bikáa'gi hosh índa ch'il deeníní hanoot'ą́ągo , éí doo ílį́į́góó baa nitsáhákees , índa doolchxǫǫłgo bá ha'doodzihgi bich'į' hoolzhish , áko t'óó kǫ' bee adidoolk'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	But if you lie down on the ground , you will be defiled , and you will be defiled . It will be a time to be burned with fire .
GOLD:	But if a field bears thorns and thistles , it is useless . The farmer will soon condemn that field and burn it .

ID:	2289
INPUT:	Áko ádííniid , Shibóhólníihii , díishą' ha'át'íí ádaat'é ? Nít'éé' diyingo naal'a'í áshidííniidgo áshíłní , Díí ádaat'éhígíí hazhó'ó nił bééhodeesįįł .
PRED:	And he said unto me , My lord , what are these ? And the angel said unto me , Take these things .
GOLD:	I asked the angel who was talking with me , “ My lord , what do these horses mean ? ” “ I will show you , ” the angel replied .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	Dahasnáanii t'áá ałtso haa a'ááh danízingo áyiilaa .
PRED:	He gave mercy to all the living .
GOLD:	He even caused their captorsto treat them with kindness .

ID:	2291
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'áanii adinídíinii yii' dayíkáah doo , áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'dóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii yee ayóó ádaat'éii yił , yah adahakáah dooleeł .
PRED:	They shall walk in the law of the nations , and the kings of the earth shall enter into the glory of his glory .
GOLD:	The nations will walk in its light , and the kings of the world will enter the city in all their glory .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	Shoo , Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdígíí yee diltłi'go áádóó bilid diłhił nahalingo nízaadę́ę́' honíle' ; báháchį'go yáłti' áádóó bitsoo' kǫ' ó'oołdįįłii nahalin ,
PRED:	Behold , the anger of the Lord is burned with fire , and his tongue is far away from a distance , and his tongue is like a flame of fire .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord is coming from far away , burning with anger , surrounded by thick , rising smoke.His lips are filled with fury ; his words consume like fire .

ID:	2293
INPUT:	Áko David áádóó diné hoł naakaígíí hastą́ądi neeznádiin daats'í yilt'éego nídiijée'go Kii'áílah kin haal'áádóó t'áá ooleełjigo aheeskai . Áko David éí Kii'áílahdóó dah náázdiidzáago Saul bił hóone'go t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ deeyáa da .
PRED:	And David and six hundred men who were with him went up to Keilah , and went to Keilah . And David went away from Keilah , and told Saul not .
GOLD:	So David and his men — about 600 of them now — left Keilah and began roaming the countryside . Word soon reached Saul that David had escaped , so he did n't go to Keilah after all .

ID:	2294
INPUT:	Éí Ííjip kéyahdi áádóó díí jį́įjį' Ízrel dine'é bitahgóó índa náánáła' dadine'é bitahgóó bee éédahózinii áádóó t'óó bik'e'ayóigo ádahooníiłii yaa naayá . Áko díí jį́ át'éhígi át'éego nízhi' bee ch'índit'áahgo í'diinilyaa ,
PRED:	In that day I have done miracles and wonders among the tribes of Israel , and among the nations , and to this day , as you are in your name .
GOLD:	You performed miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt — things still remembered to this day ! And you have continued to do great miracles in Israel and all around the world . You have made your name famous to this day .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Mózes éí Biizáliyel áádóó Ahóliyab yíká ádííniid , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí diné náádaała' bíni' bíighahgo iichįįhgo át'é hwiindzin bii' hólǫ́ǫgo áyiilaaígíí t'áá éí adiih ádaat'į́įgo atah nideeshnish daniizį́'ígíí ałdó' Mózes háká ádííniidgo
PRED:	At that time Moses called Zadok and Abiram , and the Lord called for him to take the rest of those who were in the heart of Moses .
GOLD:	So Moses summoned Bezalel and Oholiab and all the others who were specially gifted by the Lord and were eager to get to work .

ID:	2296
INPUT:	Díí Sálaman binaanish naat'i'gi aląąjį' naazį́įgo bídahólnííh nít'éé' ; éí ashdladi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin ánéelą́ą'go diné nidaalnishígíí yindant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And these were the princes of Solomon 's work : and the work of the people were fifty and fifty .
GOLD:	Solomon appointed 550 of them to supervise the people working on his various projects .

ID:	2297
INPUT:	Ch'į́įdiitah kéédahat'ínígíí nidááh dookahgo hideesnáá' ; daneeznáanii t' áá éí nihokáá'góó aghádahideezíinii nayiisnáá' , áko ał'ąą dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso yikáá'dóó nidaha'áii yikáá'dóó nídahidiikai .
PRED:	And the inhabitants of the pit shall come to meet thee , and the dead shall see the soul of the earth ; and all the kings of the nations went forth from the throne .
GOLD:	“ In the place of the dead there is excitementover your arrival.The spirits of world leaders and mighty kings long deadstand up to see you .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	Naaki góne'ígíí áádóó náá'ákéédę́'ígíí áádóó t'áá ałtso ałkéé' da'néełkaadígíí ałdó' ákódabizhdidooniił , Íísa bidááh noohkaigo kót'éego bił nidahodoołnih ,
PRED:	And the second and the second , and all that are with him shall say to him , ‘ When you come to meet Esau , tell him ,
GOLD:	Jacob gave the same instructions to the second and third herdsmen and to all who followed behind the herds : “ You must say the same thing to Esau when you meet him .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	nidi nahasdzáán bits'ą́ą́dóó áhí hááshígishgo ni' t'áá át'é nít'éé' nínéíłtłoh .
PRED:	But you have brought me out of the earth , and I have filled all my soul with water .
GOLD:	Instead , springs came up from the ground and watered all the land .

ID:	2300
INPUT:	Háálá doo ákwii áát'įįdii shik'i diilkǫ' ; hééł nahalingo shide áníłdáás .
PRED:	For his iniquity is upon me , and his face is before me .
GOLD:	My guilt overwhelms me — it is a burden too heavy to bear .

ID:	2301
INPUT:	Áko Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í háká aalwodgo Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Damáskas kin haal'á góde aní'eezhgo yisná , áádóó diné deisnáago Ker hoolyéégóó adayiizh'eezh , áko Ríízin dayiisxį́ .
PRED:	And the king of Assyria called him , and brought him up to Damascus , and took him to the city of Damascus ; and they killed him .
GOLD:	So the king of Assyria attacked the Aramean capital of Damascus and led its population away as captives , resettling them in Kir . He also killed King Rezin .

ID:	2302
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Filístiya dine'é áádóó Iithiyópiya dine'é bikéyah nahós'a'dóó Árab dine'é éí bádahachį'go Jiihóram yich'į' néidíníiłkaad .
PRED:	And the Lord smote Jehoram with the Philistines , and with the Canaanites that dwelt in the land of Assyria , and smote Jehoram .
GOLD:	Then the Lord stirred up the Philistines and the Arabs , who lived near the Ethiopians , to attack Jehoram .

ID:	2303
INPUT:	Háálá bá naal'a'í Éíbraham yich'į' diyingo yee nihoní'áanii yénáálnii' .
PRED:	For he remembered the statutes of his servant Abraham , which he had commanded .
GOLD:	For he remembered his sacred promiseto his servant Abraham .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	Áko haa'íshą' éí háá'áyį́į́h biih dahidiikahgi t'áá awołí bee ádeiit'į́į doo , ła' doo ak'eh dahół'į́į́góó biniinaa ch'ééh ádáát'įįd yę́ęgi át'éego éí dooda .
PRED:	So let us go into the Sabbath , not as they did not obey him .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	2305
INPUT:	Ool<unk> gi índa wáin bąąh haha'níihgi t'áá bíni'ídi doo ha'doołtsoł da ; wáin ániidíii ałdó' bá ádin doo .
PRED:	The moon and the wine shall not be eaten ; neither shall the wine be for the wine .
GOLD:	So now your harvests will be too small to feed you.There will be no grapes for making new wine .

ID:	2306
INPUT:	Dahazhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii yóó'azhdíí'ą́ ; Bóhólníihii t'áadoo yik'ehgo naayáa da .
PRED:	The Lord , the God of their ancestors , did not obey the Lord .
GOLD:	He abandoned the Lord , the God of his ancestors , and he refused to follow the Lord 's ways .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	Áko Saul áhodííniid , Kót'éego David bich'į' hadahidoohdzih , Aláahgo naat'áanii éí doogehii doo yinízin da , nidi t'áá hazhó'ó Filístiya dine'é bicho' bílátahgi bicho'azis ahénálgizhígíí neeznádiingo ní'doojih nízin , áko aláahgo naat'áanii jílíinii éí bee hwe'ana'í k'éézhdidoodlííł . Nidi Saul íinízin , David éí Filístiya dine'é ts'ídá t'áá dahodiyoołhéłí .
PRED:	Then Saul said to him , “ You shall not speak to David , but the king will take ten hundred shekels of the Philistines , and he will bring them to the king of the Philistines . ” But Saul thought that Saul would not kill the Philistines .
GOLD:	he told them , “ Tell David that all I want for the bride price is 100 Philistine foreskins ! Vengeance on my enemies is all I really want. ” But what Saul had in mind was that David would be killed in the fight .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	Mózes áádóó Éran índa Ízrel dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii éí Líívai dine'é dabi'déélta'ígíí t'áá ałtso ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłgo dabizhé'é yę́ę ya'áłchíní danilį́įgo dajííłta' ;
PRED:	Moses , Aaron , and the elders of Israel were counted by their families , by their fathers ' houses .
GOLD:	So Moses , Aaron , and the leaders of Israel listed all the Levites by their clans and families .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	Kót'éego Iiláísha haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo díísh jį́įjį' tó doo bąąhígóó ánályaa .
PRED:	So Elisha did what Elisha had said . He did not sin until this day .
GOLD:	And the water has remained pure ever since , just as Elisha said .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	Nít'éé' naal'a'í nitsidinígo'go binanit'a'í náyookąąhgo ííłní , Shinanit'a'í , ha'íínílní , t'áadoo tsį́į́ł shíł'íní , t'áá ná niná'deeshdléełgo át'é .
PRED:	Then the servant fell down to the master and said , “ My lord , do n't let me get back for you . ”
GOLD:	“ But the man fell down before his master and begged him , ‘ Please , be patient with me , and I will pay it all . '

ID:	2311
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihó'ahaz biye' Jiihó'ash daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jó'ash biye' Amazáíyah hináago ashdla'áadah nínáánááhai .
PRED:	Amaziah son of Joash , king of Israel , died for forty years .
GOLD:	King Amaziah of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of King Jehoash of Israel .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasin bíká sohodizin
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Prayer for Restoration

ID:	2313
INPUT:	Jerúsalem bich'é'é nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bił aheníłt'éego naa ch'íhodeesh'ááł ? Záíyan bich'ikę́ę́h nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bił ahąąh nindeeshniłgo handi'yeeshnih lá ? Tónteel áníłtélígi át'éego nich'į' ayééchǫ'go háísh hadaałt'é ánándoodlííł ?
PRED:	O daughter of Jerusalem , what shall I give thee ? O daughter of Zion , what shall I do to thee , O daughter of Zion ? And how shall I break thee , O daughter of Zion ? And who shall cause thee into the sea ?
GOLD:	What can I say about you ? Who has ever seen such sorrow ? O daughter of Jerusalem , to what can I compare your anguish ? O virgin daughter of Zion , how can I comfort you ? For your wound is as deep as the sea.Who can heal you ?

ID:	2314
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' t' óó shi'dizhchį́ yę́ędą́ą́' t'áadoo dasétsą́ą da ? Ha'át'éegoshą' t'óó háítłizh yę́ędą́ą́' shii' sizíinii t'áadoo shii' haalwod da ?
PRED:	Why did I not see him when I was born ? Why did I not see my soul ?
GOLD:	“ Why was n't I born dead ? Why did n't I die as I came from the womb ?

ID:	2315
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nik'ehgo ádahoot'éii shił bééhonísįįh ; nik'ehgo da'nítiinii bínashiníłtin .
PRED:	Remember your ways , O Lord , and teach me your ways .
GOLD:	Show me the right path , O Lord ; point out the road for me to follow .

ID:	2316
INPUT:	Ákohgo diyingo naal'a'í tsosts'id góne'ígíí bidilní yee ádííniidgo , yá'ąąshdi ayóó át'éego iinéé' dadiists'ą́ą'go kódadííniid , Nihokáá' bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí nihiBóhólníihii índa biChrist bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii silį́į́' , éí hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áágóó yinant'áa doo .
PRED:	Then the seventh angel cried out and said , “ A great voice in heaven , saying , ‘ The kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ will reign forever and ever . '
GOLD:	Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet , and there were loud voices shouting in heaven : “ The world has now become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ , and he will reign forever and ever . ”

ID:	2317
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidiyoołnih ; kót'éego náá'iiłniihii éí há k'ééhodoołdǫǫł índa ho'didéeh doo .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer the burnt offering , and the grain offering , and the grain offering , and the priest shall make atonement for him , and he shall make atonement for him .
GOLD:	and offer it on the altar along with the grain offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the person who was healed , and the person will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	2318
INPUT:	Héshban kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił , Jéízer kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił ; éí t'áá ałtsogo dį́į'go kin hadaas'áii hóó' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	Heshbon with its pasture lands and its pasture lands : four cities .
GOLD:	Heshbon , and Jazer — four towns .

ID:	2319
INPUT:	Bił dahózhóonii bił nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' , yínííł nidaakaii bił daahcha .
PRED:	Let your joy be glad , and weep for joy .
GOLD:	Be happy with those who are happy , and weep with those who weep .

ID:	2320
INPUT:	Íífreiyim yájíłti'go diné bitah dahoditłid nít'éé' ; Ízrel dine'é bitahgi t'áá bí ayóó át'éii í'díl'į́ , nidi Béíyal bich'į' nahojiłáago ádił adzisiihgo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	And when he was speaking , the people trembled , and the people were afraid , and they worshipped Baal , and he died .
GOLD:	When the tribe of Ephraim spoke , the people shook with fear , for that tribe was important in Israel.But the people of Ephraim sinned by worshiping Baaland thus sealed their destruction .

ID:	2321
INPUT:	Áádóó nihikéyahdóó kin hadaas'áii nahjį' kódadeeshłííł índa niłdzilgo bine' na'adzi' bił nahaz'áanii ałtso naa'ahideeshtł'ił .
PRED:	And I will cut off thy cities , and cast them into pieces .
GOLD:	I will tear down your wallsand demolish your defenses .

ID:	2322
INPUT:	Diyin God bízhi' áádóó bina'nitin doo baa'ihgo bá ha'doodzih da biniyé , da'oodlání naalte' danilíinii t'áá ałtso binanit'a'í t'áá ałtsojį' ił ídlį́ yą́ą́h danilį́įgo ádayósin doo .
PRED:	And all the churches shall be worthy of glory , and for the name of God , and for the sake of all the church .
GOLD:	All slaves should show full respect for their masters so they will not bring shame on the name of God and his teaching .

ID:	2323
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin góne' binda'anishii
PRED:	The Temple of the Temple
GOLD:	The Prince , Levites , and Priests

ID:	2324
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání ła' nááhoołtsą́ągo ákǫ́ǫ́ naazínígíí ánéidoo'niid , Díí éí ła' át'į́ .
PRED:	And a woman saw him , and said unto him that stood there , This is one .
GOLD:	When the servant girl saw him standing there , she began telling the others , “ This man is definitely one of them ! ”

ID:	2325
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel hadzistihgo haye'ké éí Ízrel dine'é yá nihodiyii'aahii danilį́įgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	Samuel was old when Samuel was old , and he made the judges of Israel .
GOLD:	As Samuel grew old , he appointed his sons to be judges over Israel .

ID:	2326
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin diyingo nideet'ą́
PRED:	The Temple
GOLD:	Solomon Praises the

ID:	2327
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdahidookosgo áádóó bibąąhági ádaat'éii bá yóó'iididoo'áałgo bá ashja'ósin dooleeł biniyé Jesus , Aląąjį' Sizíinii índa Yisdá'iiníiłii nilį́į dooleełgo Diyin God binish'náájí dah yineesdá .
PRED:	to turn back from the right hand of God , to turn back to God and to forgive sins . He is the Son of Man , and to forgive sins .
GOLD:	Then God put him in the place of honor at his right hand as Prince and Savior . He did this so the people of Israel would repent of their sins and be forgiven .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Háadish naaghá ? Áádóó Záíba éí aláahgo naat'áanii áyidííniid , Shoo , Ló-dííbar kin shijaa'di Ámiyel biye' Méíkir yighandi sidá .
PRED:	The king said to him , “ Where is she ? ” And he said to the king , “ Behold , behold , I have lived in the house of Gilead . ”
GOLD:	“ Where is he ? ” the king asked. “ In Lo-debar , ” Ziba told him , “ at the home of Makir son of Ammiel . ”

ID:	2329
INPUT:	Áko Paul éí diné yił dah diikaigo , biiskání doo ąąh chin dooleełjí nahaghá há ádaalyaa . Áádóó doo hąąh chinígóó í'dazhdilnéehgo bíighah adooleełgi , t'ááłá'í jinítínígo há náádahidoonihígíí hazhó'ó baa hozhdoolnih biniyé kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah ajííyá .
PRED:	And Paul went with the people , and he was hungry for them , and he went into the temple to tell each man to offer his offering .
GOLD:	So Paul went to the Temple the next day with the other men . They had already started the purification ritual , so he publicly announced the date when their vows would end and sacrifices would be offered for each of them .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í David biniinaa ak'ah bik'i yeiniziidgo yínísį́į'ii nits'ą́ąjį' doo habidínííłniił da .
PRED:	I will not say to you because of your servant David 's anointed .
GOLD:	For the sake of your servant David , do not reject the king you have anointed .

ID:	2331
INPUT:	Shí , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' danohłį́ yę́ędóó háánihíí'eezhii ásht'į́ .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , who brought you out of Egypt , out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord your God , who rescued you from the land of Egypt , the place of your slavery .

ID:	2332
INPUT:	Áko mána éí ch'il <unk> yander bílástsii' nahalin áádóó tsé déliyam wolyéhígíí nahalingo łigai .
PRED:	And it was like a tree , and as a row of a tree , and as a precious stone .
GOLD:	The manna looked like small coriander seeds , and it was pale yellow like gum resin .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	Áko Léíban éí Jéíkab bízhníłná . Jéíkab éí dziłdi biníbaal nideiznil ; Léíban áádóó hak'isóó Dził Gíliyadi haníbaal nidadziznil .
PRED:	And Laban gave Jacob his tent , and he set them in the hill country of Jacob , and Laban and his brethren in the hill country of Gilead .
GOLD:	Laban caught up with Jacob as he was camped in the hill country of Gilead , and he set up his camp not far from Jacob 's .

ID:	2334
INPUT:	nidi nahasdzáán bikáa'gi bee da'iináanii baa nitsáhákees , áádóó at'į́ hodíní'ah , índa t'áá ałtso bidáhoneení ghadahodiit'aahgo éí saad yę́ę deighą́ , áko doo bineest'ą' dahaleeh da .
PRED:	But they see the living things that are on the earth , and go out , and speak out of every man 's garden , and there is no fruit .
GOLD:	but all too quickly the message is crowded out by the worries of this life , the lure of wealth , and the desire for other things , so no fruit is produced .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	Nida'ayeeldįįdjį' nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo áádóó nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ dooleełígíí biniyé abíínígo aa a'ááh nínízinii bee hwiih daniidlį́įgo ánihílééh .
PRED:	Make us glad , and we will rejoice in the morning , that we may rejoice and rejoice .
GOLD:	Satisfy us each morning with your unfailing love , so we may sing for joy to the end of our lives .

ID:	2336
INPUT:	T'ááká Níłch'i Diyinii noołtł'ááh yíila' .
PRED:	Do n't let the Holy Spirit fall .
GOLD:	Do not stifle the Holy Spirit .

ID:	2337
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán éí Bóhólníihii bí áádóó bee hadít'éii ałdó' t'áá ałtso bí ; nahasdzáán índa yikáá' kéédahat'íinii ałdó' bíí' danilį́ ,
PRED:	The earth also is the Lord 's and his glory , and all the inhabitants of the earth , and the inhabitants of it .
GOLD:	The earth is the Lord 's , and everything in it.The world and all its people belong to him .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Curses the Fig Tree

ID:	2339
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł t'áá nináhááh bik'eh nída'ohdį́įh doogo Bóhólníihii náhodidoo'áałgi nihí índa nihada'áłchíní bił ákódaaht'į́į doo .
PRED:	You shall eat it in the sight of the Lord your God , and you shall eat it in the place of the Lord your God , and your children .
GOLD:	Instead , you and your family must eat these animals in the presence of the Lord your God each year at the place he chooses .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí eda'alyaii yich'į' nidahałáii baa hwiinít'į́
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Sinful Leaders Condemned

ID:	2341
INPUT:	Jesus índa bídahooł'aahii iigehjį' hágo bi'doo'niid .
PRED:	And when Jesus was called to his disciples , he called them to the feast .
GOLD:	and Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the celebration .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	Kódzaadóó bik'ijį' Job bi'dizhchínígíí yiyéédzíí' .
PRED:	After this , Job spoke to Job 's son .
GOLD:	At last Job spoke , and he cursed the day of his birth .

ID:	2343
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shaa jiiníbaah , háálá doo shidziil da yishłeeł ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , náshíłdziih , háálá shits'in daneezgai .
PRED:	Be merciful to me , O Lord , for I am weak , for I am weak ; for my bones are sick .
GOLD:	Have compassion on me , Lord , for I am weak.Heal me , Lord , for my bones are in agony .

ID:	2344
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í éí asdzání yich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago áyidííniid , Jó , doo ałchíhí nílį́įgo na'áłchíní t'ah doo haleeh da , ákondi i'dí'nííltsąął , índa ashkii dííłchííł .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord appeared to the woman , saying , “ You are not children , but you will not give birth to children , but you will give birth to a son . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord appeared to Manoah 's wife and said , “ Even though you have been unable to have children , you will soon become pregnant and give birth to a son .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	Áko t'áá nihiyi'ídi doo kódidoohniił da , T'áá shí shibee adziilii índa t'áá shí shíla' bee shidziilii bee jit'íinii <unk> t'įįd .
PRED:	But you shall not say to them , ‘ I and my power has been able to use my power and my power . '
GOLD:	He did all this so you would never say to yourself , ‘ I have achieved this wealth with my own strength and energy . '

ID:	2346
INPUT:	Áádóó asdzání éí tsin bineest'ą' ch'iyáán yá'át'éehii át'éego áádóó bik'izhníghalgo hoł yá'íít'éehgo índa tsin la' t'áá hojíyą́ áhóle'ígi át'é dziniizį́į'go bineest'ą' ła' nizhdii'ą́ągo jííyą́ą́' , áádóó hahastiin ałdó' ła' baazhní'ą́ągo yiyííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	And when the woman saw that a good tree was good and good , he took it , and gave it to her , and gave it to her , and gave it to her husband .
GOLD:	The woman was convinced . She saw that the tree was beautiful and its fruit looked delicious , and she wanted the wisdom it would give her . So she took some of the fruit and ate it . Then she gave some to her husband , who was with her , and he ate it , too .

ID:	2347
INPUT:	nidi nináá' doo yá'át'ééhgóó nits'íís t'áá át'é bił chahałheeł doo . Áko éí bąągo niyi'di adinídíín dooleeł yę́ę éí t'áá át'é chahałheeł nilį́įgo dooládó' chahałheeł da doo !
PRED:	But all the body of darkness shall be filled with darkness . Therefore , it shall be light in darkness !
GOLD:	But when your eye is unhealthy , your whole body is filled with darkness . And if the light you think you have is actually darkness , how deep that darkness is !

ID:	2348
INPUT:	Ákohgo Mídiyan dine'é áádóó Ámalek dine'é índa ha'a'aahdóó dine'é t'áá ałtso t'áá ła' bizhi'ee áłah daazlį́į'go Jórdan tooh ha'naadi Jézriyel kin shijaa'gi yíldzis góyaa dah yinééł .
PRED:	And Midian gathered together the Amalekites , the Amalekites , and all the people of the east , and all the people of the east , in the valley of Jezreel .
GOLD:	Soon afterward the armies of Midian , Amalek , and the people of the east formed an alliance against Israel and crossed the Jordan , camping in the valley of Jezreel .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	Áko yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó diyingo kin haal'áii , Jerúsalem ániidíii , bá'iigehii bahastiin yiba' hasht'e'ádiilyaagi át'éego hasht'e'ádiilyaago hadahooleełgo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	And I saw the holy city of God from heaven , which was prepared for a new man , which is prepared , as the bridegroom is prepared .
GOLD:	And I saw the holy city , the new Jerusalem , coming down from God out of heaven like a bride beautifully dressed for her husband .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nilį́įgo náhást'éíts'áadah náhááh góne' , ashdla' nídízííd binih , neeznáá yoołkááł góne' , aláahgo naat'áanii yá naal'a'í léi' éí siláo yinanit'a'í nilíinii Nébuzar'éídan Jerúsalemjį' níyá .
PRED:	In the fifth year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , in the tenth month , in the tenth month of the tenth month of the king of Babylon , the captain of the captain of the guard , came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	2351
INPUT:	Naalte' éí binanit'a'í doo yilááh át'ée da , nihidishníigo saad bee nihich'į' haasdzíi'ii béédaałniih . Atídashiilaago , nihí ałdó' atídanihidoolííł ; shizaad yik'eh dahół'į́įgo , nihí ałdó' nihizaad yik'eh dahół'į́į doo .
PRED:	Remember what I command you to do . Remember what I command you . If you do , you will punish me . You will do what I say to you . You will obey my words .
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	2352
INPUT:	Áádóó jį́honaa'éí t'ááłáhígi si'ą́ silį́į́' índa tł'éhonaa'éí t'áá ákwe'é si'ą́ silį́į́' ; Ízrel dine'é bi'ana'í k'éédeidiidlaajį' ákódzaa . Da' díísh doo Jáshar binaaltsoos biyi' bee ak'e'ashchį́į da ? Jį́honaa'éí yá ałníi'gi si'ą́ągo doo hah i'íí'ą́ą da nidi k'asdą́ą́' ła'a jį́ bíighah náá'ásdlį́į'go índa i'íí'ą́ .
PRED:	And the sun became a place of the sun , and the sun became a place , and the sun had made it to the enemies of Israel until evening , and the sun was not written in the midst of the sun until evening .
GOLD:	So the sun stood still and the moon stayed in place until the nation of Israel had defeated its enemies.Is this event not recorded in The Book of Jashar ? The sun stayed in the middle of the sky , and it did not set as on a normal day .

ID:	2353
INPUT:	Áko díí éí łe'hasin biniyé bee haz'áanii át'é ; éí e'asdzą́ą́ jílíinii hahastiin t'ah bíhojółníihgo bits'ą́ą́' dashdiiyáago ázhdoolchxǫ'go ,
PRED:	This is the law of jealousy , and the wife departed from her husband , and said ,
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law for dealing with suspicion . If a woman goes astray and defiles herself while under her husband 's authority ,

ID:	2354
INPUT:	T'áá adadziiskaigóó ał'ąą dine'é baa dadziiskaidi shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó ádajiilaago diné ádaaní , Díí dine'é Bóhólníihii bidine'é ádaat'į́ , ákondi Bóhólníihii bikéyahdóó nahjį' hadadziizná , dahałní .
PRED:	And when they came to the nations , they turned back to my name , and said , This people are the people of the Lord , but they said , They have taken away from the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	But when they were scattered among the nations , they brought shame on my holy name . For the nations said , ‘ These are the people of the Lord , but he could n't keep them safe in his own land ! '

ID:	2355
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Saul éí bee na'abaahí há neijaahii ábijiní , Nidiltłish handzį́įsgo shighá níłgééd . Áko díí doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhii t'ááká ákódashóle'go shá nidahółt'i' lágo . Nidi bee na'abaahí há neijaahii doo íinízin da , háálá t'áá íiyisí yináldzid . Éí bąą Saul t'áá hó hadiltłish hadzíídzį́įzgo bik'ijį' tsé'yaa ízh'doolgo'go haghá níjilgo dadzistsą́ .
PRED:	Saul said to his armor , “ Take me with the sword , and go with me . Do n't let them go with the uncircumcised . But they were afraid of him , because he was afraid of his enemies , and he fell down on him .
GOLD:	Saul groaned to his armor bearer , “ Take your sword and kill me before these pagan Philistines come to run me through and taunt and torture me. ” But his armor bearer was afraid and would not do it . So Saul took his own sword and fell on it .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	Mídiyan dine'é íinilaa yę́ęgi ánílééh áádóó Kíshan tooh nílį́įgi Sísera áádóó Jéíbin íinilaa yę́ęgi ánílééh ,
PRED:	You have made Midian as you have made Midian , and Sisera as you have done to Sisera and Sisera .
GOLD:	Do to them as you did to the Midianitesand as you did to Sisera and Jabin at the Kishon River .

ID:	2357
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é bikéyah łahjį' Símiyan dine'é bikéyah silį́į́' , háálá Júdah dine'é t'áá áchą́hwíídéeni'go baa deet'ą́ ; éí bąą Símiyan dine'é kéyah íí' dooleełii Júdah dine'é bikéyah łahjį' baa hodeet'ą́ .
PRED:	And the land of Judah was at the end of the tribe of Simeon , because the tribe of Judah was given to the tribe of Simeon . Therefore the tribe of Simeon was given to the tribe of Judah .
GOLD:	Their allocation of land came from part of what had been given to Judah because Judah 's territory was too large for them . So the tribe of Simeon received an allocation within the territory of Judah .

ID:	2358
INPUT:	óola łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo shékel wolyéii neeznáá dah hidiidloh bíighahgo éí bii' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadeezbingo ,
PRED:	one golden golden shekels of gold , full of incense ;
GOLD:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .

ID:	2359
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath

ID:	2360
INPUT:	Atsoo'ígíí éí kǫ' nahalin . Atsoo' éí íiyisí doo yá'át'éehii nilį́įgo nihits'íís yee hadít'éii yitah hólǫ́ , nihits'íís t'áá át'é niyiiłchxǫǫh . Hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'ą́ądi hodook'ą́łígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó nihił hoolzhishígíí yidiiłtłi' .
PRED:	His tongue is like fire , and his tongue is full of evil , and the whole body is in the fire of the fire of heaven ; and the fire of the fire is burned with fire .
GOLD:	And among all the parts of the body , the tongue is a flame of fire . It is a whole world of wickedness , corrupting your entire body . It can set your whole life on fire , for it is set on fire by hell itself .

ID:	2361
INPUT:	Áko Mózes ádííniid , Jó , nits'ą́ą́' ch'ééníshdááh áádóó Bóhólníihii néideeshkąąłgo tsé'édǫ́'ii éí Féro áádóó bá nidaal'a'í índa bidine'é bits'ą́ąjį' yiską́ągo yóó'anídooldah , nidi t'ááká Féro nihináá'dóleehgo t'áadoo Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' nááda'ayółniih da lágo .
PRED:	And Moses said , Behold , I have heard thee , and I will pray unto the Lord , and from Pharaoh 's servants , and from his people , and from the hand of Pharaoh , and from his people , but ye shall not sacrifice unto the Lord .
GOLD:	Moses answered , “ As soon as I leave you , I will pray to the Lord , and tomorrow the swarms of flies will disappear from you and your officials and all your people . But I am warning you , Pharaoh , do n't lie to us again and refuse to let the people go to sacrifice to the Lord . ”

ID:	2362
INPUT:	K'os tó yadayiinil ; yá bits'ą́ą́dóó dahodiists'ą́ą́' ; nik'a' ałdó' t'áá ałtsogóó adahal<unk> .
PRED:	He made the clouds of clouds , and his arrows with his arrows .
GOLD:	The clouds poured down rain ; the thunder rumbled in the sky.Your arrows of lightning flashed .

ID:	2363
INPUT:	Kéínan éí Íínas biye' , Íínas éí Seth biye' , Seth éí Ádam biye' , Ádam éí Diyin God biye' .
PRED:	who was the son of Zerah , who was the son of Adam , who was the son of God .
GOLD:	Kenan was the son of Enosh.Enosh was the son of Seth.Seth was the son of Adam.Adam was the son of God .

ID:	2364
INPUT:	Áko Máíkal éí e'elyaii néidiiłtį́įgo tsásk'eh yikáá' niiníłtį́ , áádóó tł'ízí bighaa' tsii'ááł bits'iiyah nizníłtsoozgo bik'ídzísti' .
PRED:	So Michal took the image and put it on the bed , and put it on the head of the goats , and put it on the head of the goats .
GOLD:	Then she took an idol and put it in his bed , covered it with blankets , and put a cushion of goat 's hair at its head .

ID:	2365
INPUT:	Áko nínéidiiłtį́įgo bił hózhǫ́ǫgo biwosgi dah yidoołtéełgo ,
PRED:	And he took it , and put it on his shoulder , and put it on his shoulder ,
GOLD:	And when he has found it , he will joyfully carry it home on his shoulders .

ID:	2366
INPUT:	Saul yę́ę biye' éí diné naaki bá naal'a'go siláo binanit'a'í nilį́ : ła' Béíyanah wolyé , náánáła'ígíí éí Rííkab wolyé , t'áá áłah Ríman biye' nilį́įgo Biyérath kin shijaa'dóó Bénjamin dine'é nilį́ . ( Jó , Biyérath kin shijaa'ígíí Bénjamin dine'é bíí' át'é ,
PRED:	Saul was the son of Saul , the leader of the army of the army of the people of Benjamin . The rest of the tribe of Benjamin was from Benjamin . The rest of the tribe of Benjamin was Benjamin .
GOLD:	Now there were two brothers , Baanah and Recab , who were captains of Ishbosheth 's raiding parties . They were sons of Rimmon , a member of the tribe of Benjamin who lived in Beeroth . The town of Beeroth is now part of Benjamin 's territory

ID:	2367
INPUT:	Daniel éí Nébukadnézzar yaa nayiizyeelii ááhyiłníinii yaa halne'
PRED:	Daniel 's King Nebuchadnezzar
GOLD:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Dream

ID:	2368
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul ájíní , Shí áádóó shiye' Jánathan nihita'gi yáá'iilt'e' ánílééh . Nít'éé' Jánathan bik'i hodiit'ą́ .
PRED:	Saul said , “ Give us a lot between me and Jonathan my son . ” And Jonathan set his hand on him .
GOLD:	Then Saul said , “ Now cast lots again and choose between me and Jonathan. ” And Jonathan was shown to be the guilty one .

ID:	2369
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii sikaadii nishłį́ , nihí t'éí ats'áda'iitł'óohii danohłį́ . Shii' hojílóonii , áádóó shí hwii' honishłóonii , ts'ídá éí aneest'ą' lą'í hats'ą́ą́dóó náhoodleeł , háálá t'áá shídingo t'áadoo bídanooł'ání da .
PRED:	I am the vine , and I am the vine . I am the one who is in it , and the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of many fruit ; for they are no more .
GOLD:	“ Yes , I am the vine ; you are the branches . Those who remain in me , and I in them , will produce much fruit . For apart from me you can do nothing .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	Índa bikáá' adání bikáa'gi bááh nááhániihii niná'niłígíí éí na'at'ą́hí t'áá át'é yá nahalingo dootł'izhgo bik'ínáltih doo áádóó łeets'aa't'ą́hída , béésh adee'da , łeets'aa' nímazída áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihii bee naakáhígíida bikáa'gi niná'nił doo . Bááh nááhániihii t'áá áłahjį' ákwii sinilgo óolzin doo .
PRED:	And I will pour out all the bread of the table on it , and I will cover it with fine linen , and they shall not spread in it ; and they shall not bring it upon the vessels of the grain offering , and their drink offering shall be at all times .
GOLD:	“ Next they must spread a blue cloth over the table where the Bread of the Presence is displayed , and on the cloth they will place the bowls , ladles , jars , pitchers , and the special bread .

ID:	2371
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ni t'éí níká shił chohoo'į́ ; ni lą́ą , Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God nílíinii , ni éí shich'į' ééhodíísįįł .
PRED:	O Lord , I trust in thee , O Lord my God ; thou shalt answer me .
GOLD:	For I am waiting for you , O Lord.You must answer for me , O Lord my God .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	Da' há naal'a'ísh ábizhdííniidígi ádzaaígíí biniyé ahé<unk> bijiníi doo ? Dooda !
PRED:	Do n't you say , ‘ No , ' as he commanded his servant . ”
GOLD:	And does the master thank the servant for doing what he was told to do ? Of course not .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí Zéídak áyidííniid , Nílááh , Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii kin haal'áágóó nídóh'aah . Shich'oha'néego Bóhólníihii shąąh tsídeezkéezgo shił nihéédoot'ash , áko bitsits'aa' dílzinii índa bí hólǫ́ǫgi shił ííshjání íidoolííł .
PRED:	Then the king said to Zadok , “ Go to the city of God . If I find favor in the sight of the Lord , then the ark will be with me . ”
GOLD:	Then the king instructed Zadok to take the Ark of God back into the city . “ If the Lord sees fit , ” David said , “ he will bring me back to see the Ark and the Tabernacle again .

ID:	2374
INPUT:	Jerúsalemgi jíkaigo da'oodlání áłah nádleehii índa daal'aadii áádóó da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii bił dajílį́įgo baa jíkai , áko Diyin God hanahjį' yaa naayáhígíí t'áá ałtso baa nidahodzisne' .
PRED:	And when they came to Jerusalem , they brought him to the church , and to the elders , and to the elders , and to all that God had done .
GOLD:	When they arrived in Jerusalem , Barnabas and Paul were welcomed by the whole church , including the apostles and elders . They reported everything God had done through them .

ID:	2375
INPUT:	Obadáíyah joogááł nít'éé' , shoo , Iiláíjah hadááh níyá , áko bééhodzoosįįdgo ni'jį' yaa ádziidzaago ájíní , Da' niísh ánít'į́ , shinanit'a'í Iiláíjah ?
PRED:	And Ezra went in , and behold , Elijah came to meet Elijah . And when he saw that he had known , he bowed down to the ground , and said , Are you Elijah my lord ?
GOLD:	As Obadiah was walking along , he suddenly saw Elijah coming toward him . Obadiah recognized him at once and bowed low to the ground before him . “ Is it really you , my lord Elijah ? ” he asked .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Shelemáíyah biye' Hananáíyah áádóó Zéí<unk> biye' hastą́ą́h góne' naagháhígíí Héínan wolyéii łahgo tsé néíztł'in áádóó haghą́ąhjį' Berakáíyah biye' Miishálam t'áá bí bighan bíighahjį' tsé néíztł'in .
PRED:	After him Hananiah the son of Uriah , the son of Meshullam , and the sixth of the sixth of the house of Zadok , the son of Meshullam , the son of Meshullam , built beside the house of Meshullam .
GOLD:	Next Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun , the sixth son of Zalaph , repaired another section , while Meshullam son of Berekiah rebuilt the wall across from where he lived .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	Lístragi Paul bił nidzílne'
PRED:	Paul and Silas
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas in Lystra and Derbe

ID:	2378
INPUT:	Áko ánáádazhdoo'niid , Haa'íshą' kin haal'áago áádóó kin wót'ááh yí'áago yá bich'į' niní'áago ádadiilnííł , kót'éego yízhí ayóó át'éii bee nihi'dójíigo ádadiilnííł , áko nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó nihiidiildah da .
PRED:	And they said , Let us go to the city and to the city , saying , “ Let 's make us a great name , and we will not listen to the face of the earth . ”
GOLD:	Then they said , “ Come , let 's build a great city for ourselves with a tower that reaches into the sky . This will make us famous and keep us from being scattered all over the world . ”

ID:	2379
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes díí hach'į' yee haadzíi'go ání , T'áá tsosts'id nínáhahgo hodílzingo ééhidichííd baa náhálzhishgo áádóó chadaha'ohgi hodílzingo áłah nída'adleeh nídeit'aahgo
PRED:	And Moses said unto them , Take the feast of the seven years , and the feast of the feast , and the feast of the feast .
GOLD:	Then Moses gave them this command : “ At the end of every seventh year , the Year of Release , during the Festival of Shelters ,

ID:	2380
INPUT:	Éí t'áá bí ádeinízingo Diyin God bidiyį́į́' yíká ííjéé' . Jó , éí t'áá aaníí bąąh hadaaz'áii danilį́ , háálá Jew dine'é danilíinii Níłch'i Diyinii bee ak'ihojidlíii éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'jíłk'iiz hazlį́į́' , áko doo Jew dine'é dajílíinii ałdó' hanaalye'é bee hak'ihodzisdli'ígíí ła' t'áá ákónéehee bee Jew dine'é bíká anízhdoojah .
PRED:	They called for himself , and they are the saints , because the Spirit was with the Gentiles , and there was also a blessing among the Gentiles .
GOLD:	They were glad to do this because they feel they owe a real debt to them . Since the Gentiles received the spiritual blessings of the Good News from the believers in Jerusalem , they feel the least they can do in return is to help them financially .

ID:	2381
INPUT:	Sádjusii danilíinii ła' haa yíkai , éí aninéédę́ę́' doo náá'di'yiijeeh da daaní ,
PRED:	Some of the Pharisees came to Jesus , saying , “ The dead is not raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus was approached by some Sadducees — religious leaders who say there is no resurrection from the dead .

ID:	2382
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , díí diné éí eda'alyaii dabijéí yídayółtą'ii áádóó doo ákwii ádaat'éii yik'ee dadidoogohii ádá nidayiisnil . Bíni'diísh nidashídíłkid ?
PRED:	“ Son of man , they have set up the idols of this people who hate their idols , and they have made them afraid ?
GOLD:	“ Son of man , these leaders have set up idols in their hearts . They have embraced things that will make them fall into sin . Why should I listen to their requests ?

ID:	2383
INPUT:	Léímek hwíídíiską́ą́dóó tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan tsosts'id honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	And all the days of Adam were seven hundred and seven hundred and seven years , and he died .
GOLD:	Lamech lived 777 years , and then he died .

ID:	2384
INPUT:	Áko nidziih doo , háálá ná chohoo'į́ hólǫ́ ; t'áá aaníí ánaagóó ha'ísíid doo índa hasih haz'ą́ągi háánílyį́įh doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt be in thee , for thou shalt be in thee ; yea , thou shalt rest in thy place , and in thy place .
GOLD:	Having hope will give you courage.You will be protected and will rest in safety .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	Díí Jéíkab ba'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii baa hane' . Jóseph tsosts'idts'áadah binááhaigo bínaaíké yił nida'niłkaad , áko hazhé'é be'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní Bílhah índa Zílpah biyáázhké bił tázhdíkááh , áko bąąhági ádajit'į́įgo Jóseph éí bizhé'é yee yił hoolne' .
PRED:	These are the families of Jacob 's descendants : Joseph and Joseph had seven years old , and his brothers , his wife , and his sons : and they spake to Joseph their father 's wife .
GOLD:	This is the account of Jacob and his family . When Joseph was seventeen years old , he often tended his father 's flocks . He worked for his half brothers , the sons of his father 's wives Bilhah and Zilpah . But Joseph reported to his father some of the bad things his brothers were doing .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádzíłtso doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádajooníiłii éí adinídíín nilíinii dajijoołá , áko doo yit'íní í'dazhdi'doolníłígíí biniyé doo ła' adinídíinjį' ch'ídajíkáah da .
PRED:	For all who do evil are the light , and they do not go out to light .
GOLD:	All who do evil hate the light and refuse to go near it for fear their sins will be exposed .

ID:	2387
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip kéyahgi Jóseph yę́ę doo yééhósinii aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And Joseph king of Egypt became king of Egypt .
GOLD:	Eventually , a new king came to power in Egypt who knew nothing about Joseph or what he had done .

ID:	2388
INPUT:	T'óó bíighah dahidikáhígíí , éí t'áá ákóne' deíkáahii yich'į' áníi łeh ,
PRED:	Those who pass by day say to those who walk in the way ,
GOLD:	She calls out to men going bywho are minding their own business .

ID:	2389
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii nahalne'
PRED:	John the Baptist
GOLD:	John the Baptist Prepares the Way

ID:	2390
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' dine'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii biniinaa atíidoolííł biniyéBóhólníihii bił haz'ą́ą́dóó ch'íníyá , jó'akon ; nihokáá' dine'é bidił bits'ádaazlį́įgo ádeile'iiyidooltsééł áádóó nidadzistseedii doo nínáádazhdidooł'į́įł da .
PRED:	For behold , I have come out of the world because of their sins , and behold , the blood of the earth shall see , and ye shall not steal .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord is coming from heavento punish the people of the earth for their sins.The earth will no longer hide those who have been killed.They will be brought out for all to see .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	áko nił yá'áhoot'éeh doo , índa nízaadgóó ni' bikáa'gi hinínáa doo .
PRED:	that you may be good , and that you may live on the earth .
GOLD:	If you honor your father and mother , “ things will go well for you , and you will have a long life on the earth . ”

ID:	2392
INPUT:	Háálá díí ał'ąą ana'í ch'ídahidínóołkałígíí éí áhodooníiłii neiłkaahii áádóó nidadilniihii dayíists'ą́ą́' nít'éé' , nidi nihí éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God díí doo bidazhdoolíił da , nihó'ní .
PRED:	For the Lord your God would not listen to these nations who had gone out of these nations , but he would not do this to you .
GOLD:	The nations you are about to displace consult sorcerers and fortune-tellers , but the Lord your God forbids you to do such things . ”

ID:	2393
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham t'áá íiyisí abínígo nízhdii'na'go hatélii bik'i dah adziznil áádóó hatsíłkéí naaki ádíjii'nil ; haye' Áízak ałdó' bił bee adidlidgo náá'iiniih biniyé chizh ahizhdííłkaal . Diyin God doohkah hałní<unk> góó dashdiikai .
PRED:	And Abraham rose up early in the morning , and set up his donkey , and put two young men , and two young men , for the burnt offering ; and they went to the place of God .
GOLD:	The next morning Abraham got up early . He saddled his donkey and took two of his servants with him , along with his son , Isaac . Then he chopped wood for a fire for a burnt offering and set out for the place God had told him about .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	Kóshíłní , Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é nidaalteehii bich'į' nidéł'a' ; éí shich'į' nidaalteeh ; díí jį́įjį' bí áádóó dabizhé'é yę́ę shich'į' ádił nida'iiszíí' .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Son of man , I have sent messengers against the house of Israel , and they have sinned against me , and have sinned against me today . ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ I am sending you to the nation of Israel , a rebellious nation that has rebelled against me . They and their ancestors have been rebelling against me to this very day .

ID:	2395
INPUT:	Ádahodooníiłii yaa halne'go yoołkááł góne' doo nahałtingóó íidoolííł biniyé yá yidádi'doołkałgo bee óhólníihii bee hólǫ́ , áádóó tó dił íidoolíiłgo , índa t'áá ánéiniidzįįh bik'eh bee ach'į' nidahwiilnáanii t'áá ałtso nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ánáyoodlíiłgo bee óhólníihii bee hólǫ́ .
PRED:	In the days of the prophets he will send rain to send rain , and he will give rain , and he will give rain to all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	They have power to shut the sky so that no rain will fall for as long as they prophesy . And they have the power to turn the rivers and oceans into blood , and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they wish .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	Ákohgo álíleego áda'ooł'įįłii éí Féro ádeidííniid , Díí Diyin God bíla' yee át'į́į́ lá , nidi Féro bijéí yítł'isgo doo hwíists'ą́ą' da ; Bóhólníihii ádííniidígi áhoodzaa .
PRED:	The princes said to Pharaoh , “ This is the hand of God , but he refused to listen to Pharaoh , just as the Lord had commanded . ”
GOLD:	“ This is the finger of God ! ” the magicians exclaimed to Pharaoh . But Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He would n't listen to them , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	2397
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee haz'áanii yóó'adeidii'aahii éí diné doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa dahaniih , nidi Diyin God bibee haz'áanii yik'eh dahół'íinii hoł ahaa naakai .
PRED:	Those who love God 's law praise the wicked , but those who obey the law of God are with him .
GOLD:	To reject the law is to praise the wicked ; to obey the law is to fight them .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	Nít'éé' tádiingo aląąjį' naazíinii dajílínígíí tájílt'éego dashdiikaigo da'agizhjį' ahoolzhiizhgo tsé'áán Adálam hoolyéejį' David baa jíkai , áko Filístiya bisiláo dah deínéehii éí Réfeiyim honíteelgi dah yinééł .
PRED:	And when the thirty elders went out , they came to David at the time of the month , and came to meet him in the valley of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Once during the harvest , when David was at the cave of Adullam , the Philistine army was camped in the valley of Rephaim . The Three ( who were among the Thirty — an elite group among David 's fighting men ) went down to meet him there .

ID:	2399
INPUT:	Bíni'dii da'alzhishgo ásaa' yigádígíí índa tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii yee nidaanéego bízhi' yaa dahaniih le' !
PRED:	Let them praise their names , and let them praise their names .
GOLD:	Praise his name with dancing , accompanied by tambourine and harp .

ID:	2400
INPUT:	Áko ánáádí'ní , Danizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God ásht'į́ : Éíbraham biDiyin God áádóó Áízak biDiyin God índa Jéíkab biDiyin God nishłį́ . Áko Mózes hanii' bich'ą́ą́h nizhdeelnii' , háálá Diyin God bik'izhdooghał yę́ę béédzísdzííd .
PRED:	And he said , I am the God of your fathers : I am the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . And Moses stretched out his hand upon them , because God was afraid of them .
GOLD:	I am the God of your father — the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob. ” When Moses heard this , he covered his face because he was afraid to look at God .

ID:	2401
INPUT:	Ámah kin haal'áii ałdó' , áádóó Éífek kin haal'áii índa Rííhob kin shijaa' ; bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił naadiin naakigo kin hadaas'áhígíí Ásher dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And Ramah , and Geba , and Geba ; two cities with their villages , and twenty cities .
GOLD:	Ummah , Aphek , and Rehob — twenty-two towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éego ó'oo'níiłii doo ła' yókeed da índa t'áá aaníinii doo yee agha'dit'áah da ; t'áadoo nídandlíinii yaa dadzólí áádóó dabiyooch'ííd ; ádílááh yééda'niiltsąąhgo doo ákwii é'ét'éii nidayiiłchííh .
PRED:	There is no law for righteousness , and truth ; they have no mercy ; they have given birth to lies , and have given birth to lies .
GOLD:	No one cares about being fair and honest.The people 's lawsuits are based on lies.They conceive evil deedsand then give birth to sin .

ID:	2403
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman éí Ííjip kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Féro iigeh binahjį' yił aha'deet'ą́ągo Féro bitsi' yił ahaa yít'áázh , áádóó David bikin haal'áagi bił ajíí'áazhgo t'áá hó haghan áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inígíí ájíléhígíí ałtso ájiilaajį' ákwii bił haghan .
PRED:	And Solomon made a covenant with Pharaoh 's daughter , and brought him to Pharaoh 's daughter , and brought him to the city of David , and to his own house , and to the house of the Lord , and to all the wall of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Solomon made an alliance with Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and married one of his daughters . He brought her to live in the City of David until he could finish building his palace and the Temple of the Lord and the wall around the city .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	Áko Íífreiyim dine'é Zíkrai éí diné ayóó át'éé léi' nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii Éíhaz biye' Méíyasíyah áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bee bóhólníhígíí Ázrikam índa aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá yikéé' góne' sizínígíí Elkéínah yił neistseed .
PRED:	And there was a great man in Ephraim : and he killed them , Ahaz the son of Ahaz , the son of Ahaz , the son of Ahaz , and the king 's house , and the king 's house , which was in the king 's house .
GOLD:	Then Zicri , a warrior from Ephraim , killed Maaseiah , the king 's son ; Azrikam , the king 's palace commander ; and Elkanah , the king 's second-in-command .

ID:	2405
INPUT:	Chahałheełgóó naałniihii índa ałné'é'áahgo até'éł'į́įgo nida'ałtseedii doo bééníldzid da doo .
PRED:	You will not be afraid of the rain , and in the dark place where they are afraid .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	2406
INPUT:	Shoo , shí éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdę́ę́' nihik'isóó Líívai dine'é nídiinil ; Bóhólníihii bá aa yílyáii át'éego nihaa diní'ą́ , áko níbaal bii' dahozdísinii yindaal'a' doo .
PRED:	Behold , I have taken the Levites from among you , and I have given them a gift to the Lord ; and they shall serve in the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	I myself have chosen your fellow Levites from among the Israelites to be your special assistants . They are a gift to you , dedicated to the Lord for service in the Tabernacle .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , lą'ídi nihaa deeshááł niizį́į́' , nidi shidi'níltł'ago kǫ́ǫ́ hoolzhishígíí nihił béédahózin dooleeł nihósh'ní . Doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó ła' da'oosdląądígi át'éego nihí ałdó' nihitahdóó ła' da'iidoodląął nisin .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , I want to come to you , but you will know that the time is coming . I want you to believe among the Gentiles .
GOLD:	I want you to know , dear brothers and sisters , that I planned many times to visit you , but I was prevented until now . I want to work among you and see spiritual fruit , just as I have seen among other Gentiles .

ID:	2408
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> gi nihił aní'éelgo ákwe'é táá' danihiiską́ .
PRED:	When we arrived there , we arrived there for three days .
GOLD:	Our first stop was Syracuse , where we stayed three days .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , aa a'ááh nínízinii bik' ehgo shaa jiiníbaah ; bee aa a'ááh nínízinii t'óó ahayóígíí bik'ehgo bee haz'áanii héti'ii shá k'éé'íłchxǫǫh .
PRED:	O God , have mercy on me , and have mercy on me according to the multitude of thy mercy .
GOLD:	Have mercy on me , O God , because of your unfailing love.Because of your great compassion , blot out the stain of my sins .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo Bábilan nahós'a'gi náás yideeznil .
PRED:	Then the king gave them up to the land of Babylon .
GOLD:	Then the king promoted Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego to even higher positions in the province of Babylon .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	índa dízdiingo béésh łigaii biih dahasdzą́ągo tsin neheeshjíí' bitł'ááh naaznil doo biniyé ałdó' ánááyiidlaa ; tsin neheeshjíí' t'ááłá'ígo bitł'ááh sinilii naakigo biih dahasdzánígíí t'áá ahedaałt'éego ánááyiidlaa .
PRED:	and forty sockets of silver , for their sockets , two sockets under each side .
GOLD:	with their forty silver bases , two bases under each frame .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	Kéyahgi dine'é éí bee haz'áanii nidayiitíihgo binanit'a'í t'óó ahayóí yileeh łeh , nidi naat'áanii bee ak'i'diitįįhii áádóó ił ééhózin bee hólóonii bik'ehgo diné t'áá kééhat'ínígi át'éego yá'át'éehgo náás yildah doo .
PRED:	The people of the land are many , but the princes of understanding , and knowledge , and knowledge , according to the knowledge of men .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	2413
INPUT:	Bik'é niná'doodléełgo háábidoo'niłii ayóó ábóodziil ; éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii wolyé . Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó k'é náhodoołeeł áádóó Bábilan kéyahgi naho'digháahgo íidoolííł biniyé t'áá niná'deet'įįdjį' bidine'é yá na'ak'íyádoołtih .
PRED:	The Lord of hosts will give him peace , and he will be strong . The Lord of hosts will make peace with him , and he will make his people return to Babylon .
GOLD:	But the one who redeems them is strong.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.He will defend themand give them rest again in Israel.But for the people of Babylonthere will be no rest !

ID:	2414
INPUT:	Áádóó ałtso nida'azhnishgo béeso ch'ínééłna'ígíí aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Jiihóíyada yich'į' deizhjaa' ; éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' beedí chodao'íinii ádayiilaa ; t'áá éí didlidgo náá'iiniihgi áádóó dilidgo łikání halchingo náá'iiniihgi chodao'ínígíí índa kin bii' sohodizin góne' chodao'íinii náádaała' béésh łigaii áádóó óola bee ádaalyaa . Áko nááda'iiłniihgo didlidgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' t'áá áłahjį' Jiihóíyada náá'iiłniihgo nibíiníłką́ .
PRED:	And they took all the money , and brought it to Jehoiada , and the vessels of the king , and the vessels of the house of the Lord , and the vessels of burnt offering , and all the vessels of the house of the Lord , and of the priests , and of the vessels of the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	When all the repairs were finished , they brought the remaining money to the king and Jehoiada . It was used to make various articles for the Temple of the Lord — articles for worship services and for burnt offerings , including ladles and other articles made of gold and silver . And the burnt offerings were sacrificed continually in the Temple of the Lord during the lifetime of Jehoiada the priest .

ID:	2415
INPUT:	Dooda , t'áá aaníí bi'dódziihgo daotsa' doo laanaa nisingo doo bee ádił iisiihgo haasdziih da .
PRED:	No , if he would say that he would die , he would not die .
GOLD:	No , I have never sinned by cursing anyoneor by asking for revenge .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	shíhígíí t'áá ałtso ni , índa nihígíí t'áá ałtso shí , áko éí hwee ayóó ánísht'éego áshi'diilyaa .
PRED:	All that is mine , and all that are mine ; and I am exalted .
GOLD:	All who are mine belong to you , and you have given them to me , so they bring me glory .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	<unk> . 1 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2418
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , Diyin God nílíinii , díldzííł ; dah didiilnííh ; a'ohgo ádaat'éii baa yóónééh lágo .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord God , lift up thy hand , and do not forsake the humble .
GOLD:	Arise , O Lord ! Punish the wicked , O God ! Do not ignore the helpless !

ID:	2419
INPUT:	Áko níyol bidáahjį' łeezhgi át'é daazlį́į'jį' bik'ída'iisíłhaal ; kintah nida'aztiingi łeezh nahjį' ajii łkaad nahalingo nahjį' ahéłkaad .
PRED:	And I cut down the wind before him , and cut it down before him ; and I cast out the dust like the dust .
GOLD:	I ground them as fine as dust in the wind.I swept them into the gutter like dirt .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	Áko naakigo kin haal'áádóó , doodaii' táa'go kin haal'áádóó éí t'ááłáhígo kin haal'áhígóó tó doodlį́įłii yiniyé yah dadikai nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo tó yee hwiih daazlį́į' da , ákondi t'áadoo shich'į' nináhisoohkai da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And when they came into the city , or three cities , they came into the city to drink ; but ye did not return to me , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	People staggered from town to town looking for water , but there was never enough.But still you would not return to me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	Háálá Sálaman éí béésh łitsoii bee wódahdi dah náhást'ą́ągo áyiilaa éí náásee'go tsosts'idóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá áádóó naaniigo tsosts'idóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá índa dego éí dį́į́'dóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá , áko tł'óo'jigo nááhást'ánígíí nahaníi'gi niiní'ą́ ; éí yikáá'dóó yiizį' áádóó Ízrel dine'é áłah nilínígíí t'áá ałtso binááł nitsidinígo'go yá'ąąshjigo dah didiilnii' .
PRED:	For Solomon made twenty cubits high and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and twenty cubits , and the breadth of the house of Israel stood before them .
GOLD:	Now Solomon had made a bronze platform 71/2 feet long , 71/2 feet wide , and 41/2 feet high and had placed it at the center of the Temple 's outer courtyard . He stood on the platform , and then he knelt in front of the entire community of Israel and lifted his hands toward heaven .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' doo yá'áshónígi ánáádáát'įįdgo Béíyalda , Ásh<unk> da , áádóó Síriya dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii , Sáídan dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii , Mó'ab dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii , Áman dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii índa Filístiya dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' . Áko Bóhólníihii éí doo deiniizį́į́'góó doo nidi yich'į' nidahałáa da nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the children of Israel sinned against the Lord , and the children of Ammon , and the god of Ammon , and the gods of Moab , and served the gods of the Philistines , and served the Lord .
GOLD:	Again the Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight . They served the images of Baal and Ashtoreth , and the gods of Aram , Sidon , Moab , Ammon , and Philistia . They abandoned the Lord and no longer served him at all .

ID:	2423
INPUT:	ákondi yiską́ągo kwe'é nahalzhiishgo shá nidaal'a'í nich'į' deesh'aałgo nighan góne' índa ná nidaal'a'í dabighan góne' nida'dooch'ił , áko kót'ée doo , t'áá ha'át'íí shį́į́ ílį́įgo síníłnilígíí éí nits'ą́ą́' nídeididooniłgo adeidoojih .
PRED:	But at that time I will send my servants to you at that time , and in your house , and in your servants 's house , so that they may hear what you have heard .
GOLD:	But about this time tomorrow I will send my officials to search your palace and the homes of your officials . They will take away everything you consider valuable ! ' ”

ID:	2424
INPUT:	2
PRED:	Jesus and the People
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	2425
INPUT:	Chahałheeł bii' yisháałgo áshiilaa , adinídíinjį' éí dooda .
PRED:	He made me go through darkness , and the light does not come to me .
GOLD:	He has led me into darkness , shutting out all light .

ID:	2426
INPUT:	Áko éí deenásts'aa' nihidííłgishgo bitsą́ siláii índa bijáád ałdó' táádadíígis , áádóó nihíníłgizhígíí índa bitsii' t'áá bił t'ááłáhígi nidííniłgo
PRED:	And thou shalt wash the ram , and wash the feet , and the head of thy head , and the hair of thy head ,
GOLD:	Cut the ram into pieces , and wash off the internal organs and the legs . Set them alongside the head and the other pieces of the body ,

ID:	2427
INPUT:	Ha'áłchíní éí diné baa dahojoobá'íígíí yił dahóshǫ́ǫ doo biniyébich'į' hanaalye'é ninádeidiyoodleeł .
PRED:	If his children are poor , they will bring their wealth to the poor .
GOLD:	Their children will beg from the poor , for they must give back their stolen riches .

ID:	2428
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádahodííniid , Aoo' , t'óó nida'diitł'óołgo bílák'ee dandidiit'ááł . Doo dandiyiilyéeł da . Ákohgo tł'óół ániidígíí naakigo yee hweda'aztł'ǫ́ǫgo tségiizhdę́ę́' ch'ídahazlóóz .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Yes , we will deliver you into your hand , and we will not kill you . ” So they led him out of the rock , and led him out of the rock .
GOLD:	“ We will only tie you up and hand you over to the Philistines , ” they replied . “ We wo n't kill you. ” So they tied him up with two new ropes and brought him up from the rock .

ID:	2429
INPUT:	Áádóó béégashii tsosts'idgo dabits'iinígíí índa danichxǫ́ǫ́'ígíí náábíkéédę́ę́' hanáánáskai yę́ę tsosts'id nídoohah lá , áádóó ałdó' tł'oh naadą́ą́' bineest'ą' tsosts'id daniiłna'go ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyol bíí<unk> zígíí éí hodichingo tsosts'id nídoohah , níigo ání .
PRED:	And the seven cows , and the seven years , which came up from the beginning of the seven years , and the seven years of wheat , and the seven years of seven years , saying ,
GOLD:	The seven thin , scrawny cows that came up later and the seven thin heads of grain , withered by the east wind , represent seven years of famine .

ID:	2430
INPUT:	Shijéí bohoníłdzil , Diyin God nílíinii , shijéí bohoníłdzil . Naa hashniihgo nich'į' hashtaał doo .
PRED:	My heart is in my heart , O God ; I will sing to thee .
GOLD:	My heart is confident in you , O God ; my heart is confident.No wonder I can sing your praises !

ID:	2431
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ájíshóonii éí diné doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó yáłti'ii ayóo jíists'ą́ą́' , áádóó hayooch'íidii éí diné bee ádíláahgo yáłti'ii ayóo jíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The mouth of the wicked shall hear the words of the wicked , and the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth .
GOLD:	Wrongdoers eagerly listen to gossip ; liars pay close attention to slander .

ID:	2432
INPUT:	Shikágí shits'íís bik'i nííníłkaad , áádóó ts'in bee ahą́ą́h dashidínínilgo ats'id bee ahídadiniłkad .
PRED:	Thou hast cast my skin upon my flesh , and hast covered my bones with seven bones .
GOLD:	You clothed me with skin and flesh , and you knit my bones and sinews together .

ID:	2433
INPUT:	Áádóó Ítayai éí aláahgo naat'áanii ánéidoo'niidgo ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii hiná áádóó bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii hiná ; ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá tádígháahgi , dadootsaałgi , doodaii' hináagi , ákwii ałdó' ná naal'a'í nishłíinii honishłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Then Abishai answered the king , “ As surely as the Lord lives and my lord the king lives , if he comes , he will live there and live there . ”
GOLD:	But Ittai said to the king , “ I vow by the Lord and by your own life that I will go wherever my lord the king goes , no matter what happens — whether it means life or death . ”

ID:	2434
INPUT:	Kéyahgi Ízrel dine'é nilį́įgo ho'dizhchíinii índa nihitahgi dé'éyóní éí bee haz'áanii t'ááłá'íígíí bik'ehgo hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh níjiil'aah doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt keep the feast of the children of Israel , and a stranger among thy midst , according to the law of one law .
GOLD:	This instruction applies to everyone , whether a native-born Israelite or a foreigner living among you . ”

ID:	2435
INPUT:	Diné ła' bikwá'ásiní éí Ízrel dine'é ła' hanaalte' biniyé jini'įįhgo , doodaii' naalte' biniyé naalyéhígi át'éego haa nahaniihgo éí azhni'įįhígíí hodi'yoolyééł . Kót'éego nihitahdóó doo yá'áshóonii nahjį' kódaoł'į́į doo .
PRED:	If a man is a man of Israel , he shall be put to death as a servant , or a servant , or a servant , he shall be put to death . So you shall cut off from among you .
GOLD:	“ If anyone kidnaps a fellow Israelite and treats him as a slave or sells him , the kidnapper must die . In this way , you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Mó'ab dine'é neeznáadi mííl nideistseed ; éí t'áá ałtso ayóó ádabóodziilii índa ayóó ádaaltahii danilį́į nidi t'áadoo ła' yisdááyáhí da .
PRED:	At that time Moab killed ten thousand men ; there was no one to save them .
GOLD:	They attacked the Moabites and killed about 10,000 of their strongest and most able-bodied warriors . Not one of them escaped .

ID:	2437
INPUT:	Nidi bitah dahoneezgai yę́ędą́ą́' shí éiyá baa yínííł naasháago tł'oh yishbizhii shi'éé' nít'éé' ; shii' sizíinii ádaa hojoolbá'ígo doo ashą́ą́góó í'diishyaa . Nidi bá sodiszinii t'áadoo násdlį́'ígóó t'óó shik'ijį' t'ą́ą́' nináhádleeh ,
PRED:	But when I was sick , my soul was filled with sackcloth ; my soul was turned back to shame . But my prayer turned back to me .
GOLD:	Yet when they were ill , I grieved for them.I denied myself by fasting for them , but my prayers returned unanswered .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	Azhą́ Éíbraham doo nihééhósin da áádóó Ízrel wolyéii doo nihaa ákonízin da nidi , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ni nihiTaa' nílį́ ; nihik'é niná'ídláii nílį́ ; nízhi' hool'áádę́ę́' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	But Abraham does not know his name , but you are our Father , and you are your name forever .
GOLD:	Surely you are still our Father ! Even if Abraham and Jacob would disown us , Lord , you would still be our Father.You are our Redeemer from ages past .

ID:	2439
INPUT:	Háálá niDiyin God bee yisdá'iildéehii beisínínah áádóó Tsé bine' ahiníchéehii doo béénílniih da ; éí bąą k'idíléii ayóó ánóolningo k'idííníláago ch'il t'áá sahdii át'éii bił k'idíínílá ;
PRED:	You do not remember the salvation of your God , and do not remember the rock of your salvation ; therefore you have filled with great understanding .
GOLD:	Why ? Because you have turned from the God who can save you.You have forgotten the Rock who can hide you.So you may plant the finest grapevinesand import the most expensive seedlings .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , hoz wót'áahdi naat'a'ii , ákohgo nídoot'ahígíí bił bééhózin , áádóó hasbídí índa hoz nahalinii tsídii índa táshjizhii , ákohgo nát'ą́ą́' ninádahidoot'ahígíí bił béédahózin , nidi shidine'é éí Bóhólníihii yee nihodii'aahii doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	And they know that the wings of the sky was in the sky : and they saw that the wings of the sky were like a bird , and the birds of a bird , and the birds of a bird , and they saw that the Lord has spoken to my people .
GOLD:	Even the stork that flies across the skyknows the time of her migration , as do the turtledove , the swallow , and the crane.They all return at the proper time each year.But not my people ! They do not know the Lord 's laws .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Pasíyah biye' Jiihóíyada áádóó Besodíyah biye' Miishálam ałk'idą́ą́' dáń'dítį́hí hasht'éyiidlaa ; áah sitáán <unk> deiztsih áádóó dáádílkał ałdó' yąąh dah ni<unk> nil ; bee dáń'dadilkałígíí ałdó' áádóó dáádílkał bich'ą́ą́h dah nídaatį́hígíí ninádeiztsih .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that Jehoiada the son of Jehoiada made the son of Jehoiada , and put the doors of the house , and put the doors thereof , and the doors thereof , and the doors thereof .
GOLD:	The Old City Gate was repaired by Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah . They laid the beams , set up its doors , and installed its bolts and bars .

ID:	2442
INPUT:	áádóó níníł'į́įgo bijéí ba'ahódlíigo nił bééhoozin áádóó bił aha'díínít'ą́ągo Kéínan dine'é , Het dine'é , Ámor dine'é , Píírez dine'é , Jííbas dine'é áádóó <unk> dine'é dabikéyah ha'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii baa didíí'áałgo bee hwiinił'a' índa ádííníniidígi át'éego íinidzaa , háálá t'áá ákogi áánííł .
PRED:	And when thou hast seen the heart of thy heart , and hast made a covenant with thee , and hast made a covenant with the Canaanites , and the Hittites , and the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , and hast commanded thy seed , because thou hast done according to thy righteousness .
GOLD:	When he had proved himself faithful , you made a covenant with him to give him and his descendants the land of the Canaanites , Hittites , Amorites , Perizzites , Jebusites , and Girgashites . And you have done what you promised , for you are always true to your word .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	Nidi diné ła'da díí bee ak'e'ashchíhígíí doo yaa ákonízin dago , éí bíni'dii doo haa ákohwiindzin da doo .
PRED:	But if anyone does not know what is written , let him not be wise .
GOLD:	But if you do not recognize this , you yourself will not be recognized .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	Hó éí iiná ná náás joołt'ih doo ; t'áá hasínítihjį' na'ałtso' doo , háálá nizháá'áád ayóó'ánó'níinii niyáázh tsosts'id dooígíí biláahgo ná yá'át'éehii ashchį́ .
PRED:	He will be life , and you will be well with him , for you will have a good son more than you . ”
GOLD:	May he restore your youth and care for you in your old age . For he is the son of your daughter-in-law who loves you and has been better to you than seven sons ! ”

ID:	2445
INPUT:	Diyin God éí áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii yiTaa' nilį́ áádóó hodiyingo kééhat'į́įgi asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii yá ánihwii'aahii nilį́ .
PRED:	God is the Father of the children , and the widow who dwell in the holy place .
GOLD:	Father to the fatherless , defender of widows — this is God , whose dwelling is holy .

ID:	2446
INPUT:	Éí bikáa'gi deenásts'aa' bikágí daaldzą́ągo deilchii'go táá' góne' atis ahííkaadígíí áyiilaa ; náábíkáa'di índa nahashch'id bikágí daaldzą́ągo dį́į́' góne' atis ahííkaadígíí ánááyiidlaa .
PRED:	And he made the covering of the ram , and the covering of the ram , and the covering of the covering of the covering , and the covering of the covering thereof .
GOLD:	He completed the tent covering with a layer of tanned ram skins and a layer of fine goatskin leather .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	Éíman biye' Josáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' táá'ts'áadah náhááh góne' Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	This is the word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah in the third year of Josiah the son of Josiah , king of Judah .
GOLD:	The Lord first gave messages to Jeremiah during the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah son of Amon , king of Judah .

ID:	2448
INPUT:	Áádóó dashdiiyáago Piinúwel hoolyéhígíí baazhníyáago éí dine'é bich'į' t'áá ákót'éego hanáádzoodzíí' , áko Sákath dine'é ádahodííniidígi át'éego Piinúwel dine'é hanáádaasdzíí' .
PRED:	And he went out and came unto the men of Jabesh , and spake unto his people , and they answered him as the men of Ammon had said unto them .
GOLD:	From there Gideon went up to Peniel and again asked for food , but he got the same answer .

ID:	2449
INPUT:	nidi ádadííniid , Hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh góne' éí dooda , háálá ákódeiidzaago diné hadahodínóołchał .
PRED:	But they said , “ It is not in the feast of the feast , for if the people do so ,
GOLD:	“ But not during the Passover celebration , ” they agreed , “ or the people may riot . ”

ID:	2450
INPUT:	Bisiláo yinéełii shich'į' yiyííł'aad . Łeeyi' da'deezgeedgo ách'ą́ą́h daní'áago ádayiilaa , áádóó shiníbaal yinaagóó nidahaazná .
PRED:	He sent his army to me , and beat it in pieces , and beat it , and set it in the tents .
GOLD:	His troops advance.They build up roads to attack me.They camp all around my tent .

ID:	2451
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii díí ał'ąą ana'í yidziihgo áyiilaa ; éí bee Ízrel dine'é hwééhózíní áhodoolíiłgo na<unk> taah ; Kéínan kéyahgi Ízrel dine'é ła' anaa' baa nida'asdee'ígíí doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	The Lord has made these nations , and he has made them known to pass through the land of Canaan , and they have not known that there is no war in Israel .
GOLD:	These are the nations that the Lord left in the land to test those Israelites who had not experienced the wars of Canaan .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Nihijéí doo binídahaz'áhígíí biniinaa niheda'asdzą́ą́ yóó'adahidoh'aahgo Mózes t'áá yee nihá has'ą́ą́ nít'éé' , nidi hodeeyáádę́ę́' éí doo ákót'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Because of your heart , you love your wives , but Moses was not from the beginning . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Moses permitted divorce only as a concession to your hard hearts , but it was not what God had originally intended .

ID:	2453
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Háíram éí Sálaman haadzí'ígíí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yaa bił nihoozhǫǫhgo ání , Díí jį́ Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih le' ; éí David yę́ę biye' hóyą́ągo yizhchíinii bidine'é ayóó ánéelą́ą'ii yinant'áa doo biniyé beíltį́ .
PRED:	When Hiram heard what Solomon had said , he was glad , and he said , “ Blessed be the Lord , the son of David , the son of David , has given him power over his people . ”
GOLD:	When Hiram received Solomon 's message , he was very pleased and said , “ Praise the Lord today for giving David a wise son to be king of the great nation of Israel . ”

ID:	2454
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béésh łigaii da'asaa' áádóó kǫ' bee niltsésí áádóó łeets'aa' áádóó béésh dilní bee í'dílzoołí índa t'áá ha'át'íhída béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaaígíí , doodaii' óola bee ádaalyaaígíí éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béeso yah aajaa'ígíí doo bee nidahaaznii' da ,
PRED:	But the silver , and silver , and the vessels , and the vessels , and the vessels , and the vessels , and the vessels , and the vessels of gold , and the vessels of the house of the Lord , were not brought into the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	The money brought to the Temple was not used for making silver bowls , lamp snuffers , basins , trumpets , or other articles of gold or silver for the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Herod 's Confusion

ID:	2456
INPUT:	Áko David éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii David bikin haal'áajį' doo doot'áał da nízin , nidi David bíniik'ehgo Gathdóó dine'é Óbed-íídam bighanjį' yít'ą́ .
PRED:	So David did not go to the ark of the Lord , but David went to his house in Gath .
GOLD:	So David decided not to move the Ark of the Lord into the City of David . Instead , he took it to the house of Obed-edom of Gath .

ID:	2457
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Jó , k'ad t'áá shí shíniik'ehgo Bóhólníihii bich'į' hanáánásdziih . Naadiin yik'íníyáagoshą' ? Áko ánáádoo'niid , Naadiin jilt'éego biniinaa doo áhodeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	And he said , Behold , I speak unto the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) , because I am not able to speak unto the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) ? And he said , I will not destroy the thirty .
GOLD:	Then Abraham said , “ Since I have dared to speak to the Lord , let me continue — suppose there are only twenty ? ” And the Lord replied , “ Then I will not destroy it for the sake of the twenty . ”

ID:	2458
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bizaad k'ee'ąą dínéesą́ , áádóó Jerúsalemgi ídahooł'aahii t'áá íiyisí k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizh índa nááda'iiłniihii t'óó ahayóí na'nitin woodláanii yik'eh dahół'íinii daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the word of God was filled with them , and the disciples of Jerusalem began to increase , and many of the priests became a great multitude of faith .
GOLD:	So God 's message continued to spread . The number of believers greatly increased in Jerusalem , and many of the Jewish priests were converted , too .

ID:	2459
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Sálaman bá kin ádeił'íinii índa Háíram bá kin ádeił'íinii áádóó Gííbal kin haal'áádóó dine'é éí kin ádoolnííł biniyé tsin dantsxaazígíí índa tsé hasht'e'niyída'aztséél .
PRED:	So Solomon built the house for Solomon , and for Hiram , and the people of Carmel , and the stones of the city of great stones .
GOLD:	Men from the city of Gebal helped Solomon 's and Hiram 's builders prepare the timber and stone for the Temple .

ID:	2460
INPUT:	Tsásk'eh bik'ídaasti'í ; éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idígíí nidaashch'ąą'ii shibikáá' dah antéhí bik'ídasíłti' , na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idígíí bik'ídasíłti' .
PRED:	I put on my bed on my head ; I cut off the linen cloth , and cut it on my bed .
GOLD:	My bed is spread with beautiful blankets , with colored sheets of Egyptian linen .

ID:	2461
INPUT:	Nidi niyee' iishch'id biyi'dę́ę́' hashííníłtį́ ; shimá yisht'o'dą́ą́' shił chohoo'į́įgo áshiinilaa .
PRED:	But you have brought me out of the womb ; you have made me hope in my mother 's womb .
GOLD:	Yet you brought me safely from my mother 's womband led me to trust you at my mother 's breast .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii kóníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	And the word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2463
INPUT:	Áko Peter biinéé' yééhoosįįdgo bił hóózhǫǫdgo biniinaa dáádílkał t'áadoo ąą ííléhí yah anáálwodgo , Peter tł'óó'dę́ę́' sizį́ , níigo yaa hoolne' .
PRED:	And when Peter saw the voice of Peter , he went not into the door , and told Peter ,
GOLD:	When she recognized Peter 's voice , she was so overjoyed that , instead of opening the door , she ran back inside and told everyone , “ Peter is standing at the door ! ”

ID:	2464
INPUT:	Áko da'iinohdlą́ągo t'áá ha'át'íhída dayínóhkeedgo sodadołzingo , éí nihaa dahalyée doo .
PRED:	If you ask one another , pray for you , and pray for you .
GOLD:	You can pray for anything , and if you have faith , you will receive it . ”

ID:	2465
INPUT:	Dabizhé'é yę́ę dabíla' deíníshtą'go Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íní'eezh yę́ędą́ą́' bił ahada'dinisht'áanii éí doo bik'ehgo da . Azhą́ hahastiin nishłį́į nidi , éí hoł ahada'dinisht'áanii k'ídadzizti' , ní Bóhólníihii ,
PRED:	I brought them out of the land of Egypt , and they did not keep my covenant with their fathers , though I brought them out of the land of Egypt , I am their husband , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	This covenant will not be like the one I made with their ancestors when I took them by the hand and brought them out of the land of Egypt . They broke that covenant , though I loved them as a husband loves his wife , ” says the Lord .

ID:	2466
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Jáshowa áyidííniid , Diné bitah híláahgo nílááh Ámalek dine'é bił da'ahohgą́ ; yiską́ągo shí éí Diyin God bigish dah yishtį́įłgo wók'ą́ągi dah sézį́į doo .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Joshua , “ Go up with the Amalekites , and fight against the Amalekites , and I will stand in the hand of God . ”
GOLD:	Moses commanded Joshua , “ Choose some men to go out and fight the army of Amalek for us . Tomorrow , I will stand at the top of the hill , holding the staff of God in my hand . ”

ID:	2467
INPUT:	Bikin bii' sohodizindę́ę́' níká oolyeed , índa Záíyandę́ę́' nidziilgo ánóle' !
PRED:	Let your strength come out of Zion , and let your strength come from Zion .
GOLD:	May he send you help from his sanctuaryand strengthen you from Jerusalem .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádaat'įįhgo doo yildinii ádaat'é , háálá t'áá ákogi át'éii bee bikáá'dóó nahat'áii bikáá'dóó hoot'áłígíí bohoníłdzilgo ályaa .
PRED:	The kings are wicked , because the throne of righteousness is established .
GOLD:	A king detests wrongdoing , for his rule is built on justice .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	<unk> , nínígíí díí ááhyiłní : bee níhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí Míídiya dine'é índa Pérzha dine'é bá ałts'ádoodzohgo baa didoot'ááł .
PRED:	“ This is what the kingdom says : ‘ The kingdom of Persia and Persia will be given to them . ' ”
GOLD:	Parsin means ‘ divided ' — your kingdom has been divided and given to the Medes and Persians . ”

ID:	2470
INPUT:	Férisii nilíinii índa tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé sidáii
PRED:	The Pharisees and the Pharisees
GOLD:	Parable of the Pharisee and Tax Collector

ID:	2471
INPUT:	Rúfas , éí Bóhólníihii yee alááh hidíízíinii , áádóó bimá , t'áá éí shí ałdó' shimá bidishnínígíí shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	Blessed be the Lord 's soul , and the mother of my mother , who is my mother .
GOLD:	Greet Rufus , whom the Lord picked out to be his very own ; and also his dear mother , who has been a mother to me .

ID:	2472
INPUT:	Ííziyan-gíí<unk> dah náádii'náago Zin honoojí nahós'a'gi t'áá ákwii Kéídesh hoolyéego ákwii ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out and camped in the wilderness of Kadesh , in the wilderness of Kadesh .
GOLD:	They left Ezion-geber and camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	Áko átsé nídízííd binih ła'a jį́į́ góne' diné t'áá ałtso dé'éyóní hweda'asdzą́ą́ daazlį́į'ii ałtso bits'ádajiiskai .
PRED:	On the first day of the first month , all the people departed from him .
GOLD:	By March 27 , the first day of the new year , they had finished dealing with all the men who had married pagan wives .

ID:	2474
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ągo náá'iiłniihii náádoodáałgo kin néidínóoł'įįł ; jó , hont'ahgóó naałniih k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizhgo
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest shall look at the house , and behold , the plague is in the skin ,
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest must return for another inspection . If he finds that the mildew on the walls of the house has spread ,

ID:	2475
INPUT:	Siláo binanit'a'í éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Siiréíyah áádóó bikéé' góne' náá'iiłniihii Zefanáíyah áádóó diné táa'go dáádílkał yaa ádahalyánígíí dah yidii'eezh .
PRED:	And the captain of the captain of the guard took Ezra the priest , and Hananiah the priest , and the three gates .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took with him as prisoners Seraiah the high priest , Zephaniah the priest of the second rank , and the three chief gatekeepers .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	Áádóó ádíshní , Shoo , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ts'ídá la' t'ah doo kót'éego t'óó shaa'ihgo í' díshnéeh da ; t'áá bíni' daaztsáanii áádóó naaldlooshii nibiizhnizhii índa atsį' doo dílzinii éí ashiiké nishłį́į́dą́ą́'dóó díí jį́įjį' ts'ídá t'ah doo ła' yishą́ą da .
PRED:	And I said , Behold , O Lord God , I have not done evil in my hand , neither have I eaten the dead , nor have I eaten the flesh of the dead , nor have I eaten my flesh from this day .
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , must I be defiled by using human dung ? For I have never been defiled before . From the time I was a child until now I have never eaten any animal that died of sickness or was killed by other animals . I have never eaten any meat forbidden by the law . ”

ID:	2477
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'í
PRED:	The Lord 's People
GOLD:	The

ID:	2478
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí diné nidilt'éego kéyah hayíísidígíí ábizhdííniid , Nihílááh , asdzání ałjiłnii bighan góne' yah ooh'aashgo áádę́ę́' bił ch'ínóhkááh ; bik'éí t'áá ałtso t'áá bił bich'į' bee ádee hadoohdzí'ígíí bi'ohłééh .
PRED:	So Joshua said to the two men who had gone out of the land , “ Go out and bring her out of the house of the prostitute , and bring her out of the house of the prostitute . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joshua said to the two spies , “ Keep your promise . Go to the prostitute 's house and bring her out , along with all her family . ”

ID:	2479
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad , Bóhólníihii binááł nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo shidił doonah da , háálá dziłghą́ą́'góó dééłdánii hazhnitáhígi át'éego Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí łééchąą'í biya' haintá nahalingo shíkantá .
PRED:	Now therefore , behold , the blood of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) shall not be forgiven in the sight of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) ; for he hath found me like a dogs , like a dogs .
GOLD:	Must I die on foreign soil , far from the presence of the Lord ? Why has the king of Israel come out to search for a single flea ? Why does he hunt me down like a partridge on the mountains ? ”

ID:	2480
INPUT:	T'ah doo naa nahaniih yę́ędą́ą́' , éí ni nít'éé' ya' ? Naa nahaaznii'dóó bik'ijį' béeso ałdó' bee níhólnííh nít'éé' ya' ? Ha'át'íí biniyé díí íinidzaaígíí bee nijéí bii' bąąh tsídíníkééz ? Doo diné nííní'aa' da , nidi Diyin God nííní'aa' .
PRED:	But when you were still in your heart , did you not remember you ? Why did you think about your heart ? Why did you think that you had done this thing ? You did n't have led him back to him .
GOLD:	The property was yours to sell or not sell , as you wished . And after selling it , the money was also yours to give away . How could you do a thing like this ? You were n't lying to us but to God ! ”

ID:	2481
INPUT:	Nihí ats'íís k'ehgo t'éiyá ándahoyoh'aah , shí éí diné doo ła' bá nihwiish'aah da .
PRED:	You are the judge of the flesh , but I do not judge anyone .
GOLD:	You judge me by human standards , but I do not judge anyone .

ID:	2482
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bikéyah atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihgo nahadlá doo ła' ákót'éego álnééhgóó Diyin God yá halne'ii Sámuel bíiniiłką́ áádóó Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áadoo ła' ákó'iilaa da ; Josáíyah áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é índa Ízrel dine'é ákwii nidaakaígíí áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí ákóda'iilaa .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the days of the sons of Israel , that there was none of the days of Samuel the prophet , and the princes of Israel , and the priests , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the inhabitants of Israel , and the inhabitants of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Never since the time of the prophet Samuel had there been such a Passover . None of the kings of Israel had ever kept a Passover as Josiah did , involving all the priests and Levites , all the people of Jerusalem , and people from all over Judah and Israel .

ID:	2483
INPUT:	Jeremáíyah éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' saad hółǫ́
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Death
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Complaint

ID:	2484
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diyin dabidi'níinii doo ła' nigi át'ée da , índa naanish danilíinii doo ła' ninaanishígi ádaat'ée da .
PRED:	Lord , there is no god like other gods , and there is no one like them .
GOLD:	No pagan god is like you , O Lord.None can do what you do !

ID:	2485
INPUT:	Shibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' ch'iyáán dááchǫ'ígíí náádahoołnii' lá . Índa ádadohní , Haash yit'éego daniilchxǫ' ? Bóhólníihii bibikáá' adání bá nahat'i' , dadohníigo ádaaht'į́į́ lá .
PRED:	You have remembered the altar of food on my altar . You say , “ How do you say , ‘ It is a table of the Lord ? '
GOLD:	“ You have shown contempt by offering defiled sacrifices on my altar. “ Then you ask , ‘ How have we defiled the sacrifices ? ' “ You defile them by saying the altar of the Lord deserves no respect .

ID:	2486
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii átséhígíí bee bóhólníhígíí t'áá binááł t'áá ałtso yee ádínááhólníihgo yaa naaghá . Naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii átséhígíí t'áá bidiyoołhéełgo k'áák'eh nít'ée'go náádzí'ígíí nahasdzáán índa bikáa'gi kéédahat'íinii bich'į' nidahałáago áyósin .
PRED:	And he did all the beast that had been done before him , and served him in the sight of all the beast that had been healed , and served the beast that had been healed , and served the inhabitants of the earth .
GOLD:	He exercised all the authority of the first beast . And he required all the earth and its people to worship the first beast , whose fatal wound had been healed .

ID:	2487
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' David hoos'įįdgo nízhdii'na'go , Bóhólníihii t'áá bí bizaad yee haadzíi'go éí Géed halne'ii nilíinii , t'áá éí David yá náásgóó halne'ii nilį́įgo áyidííniid ,
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when David rose up , that the word of the Lord came to David the prophet , saying ,
GOLD:	The next morning the word of the Lord came to the prophet Gad , who was David 's seer . This was the message :

ID:	2488
INPUT:	Áádóó ła' Béthel hoolyéegi yiyiisį' áádóó náánáła' Dan hoolyéegi yiyiisį' .
PRED:	And he set him in Bethel , and set him in the midst of Dan .
GOLD:	He placed these calf idols in Bethel and in Dan — at either end of his kingdom .

ID:	2489
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí kwe'é diné índa naaldlooshiida doo ła' naagháágóó t'óó dzígaigo haz'ánígi áádóó kin hadaas'áágóó t'áá ałtso ákǫ́ǫ́ dibé yaa ádahalyáanii bilį́į́' háádaalyį́įhgo kénáádahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord of hosts : This man and beast shall dwell in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and in all the cities of the flock shall rest .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : This land — though it is now desolate and has no people and animals — will once more have pastures where shepherds can lead their flocks .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii Riihobówam éí Adóram wolyéii naanish bí'nílchééh yinanit'a'í nilíinii ayííł'a'go Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso tsé yee nídahoneesne'go hoł nidadzisne' , nidi aláahgo naat'áanii Riihobówam bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí tsxį́įłgo yiih yíyáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áágóó anííchą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then King Rehoboam sent messengers , who was in charge of the men of Israel , and they told him all the stones of Israel , but King Rehoboam went to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam sent Adoniram , who was in charge of forced labor , to restore order , but the people of Israel stoned him to death . When this news reached King Rehoboam , he quickly jumped into his chariot and fled to Jerusalem .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	Jó , diné éí asdzání doo bá ályaa da , nidi asdzání éí diné bá ályaa .
PRED:	For the man was not made for a woman , but the woman was made for a woman .
GOLD:	And man was not made for woman , but woman was made for man .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ą́dóó ayóogo bídahólníihii éí Ízrel dadine'é t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ą́dóó ádaat'į́įgo Diyin God bidine'é danilį́įgo t'áá bí t'ááłáhígi áłah nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; diltłish yee nidaabaahii dį́įdi neeznádiindi mííl .
PRED:	And all the people , from all the tribes of Israel , were gathered together together in one tribe , and there were four hundred thousand men .
GOLD:	The leaders of all the people and all the tribes of Israel — 400,000 warriors armed with swords — took their positions in the assembly of the people of God .

ID:	2493
INPUT:	Doo dabidziilii éí dabidziilgo t'áadoo áńdaohdlaa da ; ka deíkáahii éí t'áadoo hadaałt'é áńdaohdlaa da ; nida'niłhodígíí éí azee' yee nídoodzihii t'áadoo bąąh ádaohłaago bá bik'ída'doodiz da ; yóó'adabidi'niiskaadii t'áadoo ninádahishoo'eezh da ; yóó'adahaaskaii éí t'áadoo hadasinootą́ą' da , nidi bída'nołkadgo índa t'áá na'níle'dii bindanoht'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	You did not make them strong , but you did not make them strong . You did n't make them sick . You did n't make them clean . They did n't find them . You did n't find them . You did n't find them .
GOLD:	You have not taken care of the weak . You have not tended the sick or bound up the injured . You have not gone looking for those who have wandered away and are lost . Instead , you have ruled them with harshness and cruelty .

ID:	2494
INPUT:	Shich'į' nááhániihii bidił éí t'ááká díík'ǫsh bił bááh ályaii bił náádahołniih lágo ; shich'į' nááhániihígíí bik'ah abíníjį' doo ła' t'áá sinil da doo .
PRED:	You shall not offer the meat offering of unleavened bread , neither shall any of the oil of the morning be poured out in the morning .
GOLD:	“ You must not offer the blood of my sacrificial offerings together with any baked goods containing yeast . And do not leave the fat from the festival offerings until the next morning .

ID:	2495
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii áhodííniid , Ha'át'íísh dah yítį́į́ł ? Áko ázhdííniid , Gish át'é .
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ What do you go up ? ” And he said , “ It is a rod . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord asked him , “ What is that in your hand ? ” “ A shepherd 's staff , ” Moses replied .

ID:	2496
INPUT:	áko jó'akon , diné ła' łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ą́ą́ léi' haa níyá , áádóó hach'į' nahasáago ání , Bóhólníihii , íinínízin ládą́ą́' nááshididííłááł .
PRED:	And behold , a man of leprosy came to him , and said to him , “ Lord , if you want to heal me , you will heal me . ”
GOLD:	Suddenly , a man with leprosy approached him and knelt before him . “ Lord , ” the man said , “ if you are willing , you can heal me and make me clean . ”

ID:	2497
INPUT:	Áko Jéíkab t'áá íiyisí azdeest'įįd ; halį́į́' áádóó asdzání há nidaalte' áádóó diné há nidaalte' áádóó ghą́ą́'ask'idii índa télii t'óó ahóóyóí .
PRED:	And Jacob became very great . And Jacob became rich . And he became rich , male , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys .
GOLD:	As a result , Jacob became very wealthy , with large flocks of sheep and goats , female and male servants , and many camels and donkeys .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	Áko Jew dine'é bihasht'ehodi'nééh bijínígíí áádóó tséní'ootséél t'áá áyídígo ałdó' biniinaa ákóne' Jesus yóó'ájiilaa .
PRED:	So Jesus buried him because he had prepared for the Jews and his tomb .
GOLD:	And so , because it was the day of preparation for the Jewish Passover and since the tomb was close at hand , they laid Jesus there .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binááł éí kéyahgi kéédahat'ínígíí bik'eh dasidoohdlį́į'go índa nídoohkah , áádóó Bóhólníihii índa Ízrel dine'é binááł doo nihihodiit'i' da doo , áko Bóhólníihii binááł díí kéyah danihíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	If you obey the Lord 's presence , you will go to the land , and you will not be able to stand before the Lord and before the children of Israel , so that we may possess this land .
GOLD:	then you may return when the Lord has conquered the land . You will have fulfilled your duty to the Lord and to the rest of the people of Israel . And the land on the east side of the Jordan will be your property from the Lord .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jiihó'ash éí dabizhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazhgo Samériyagi Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áádóó haye' Jerobówam hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	And Joash died , and was buried in Samaria , and Jeroboam his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Jehoash died , he was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel . And his son Jeroboam II became the next king .

ID:	2501
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Nímshai binálí Jiiháshafat biye' Jííhu éí Jóram yik'ijį' hodeez'ą́ . ( Íídą́ą́' Jóram éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yił Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Házeiyel biniinaa Réímath-gíliyad kin haal'áagi hééshjéé' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that time , that Jehoshaphat the son of Jehoshaphat , the son of Jehoshaphat , the son of Jehoshaphat , the son of Jehoshaphat , the son of Jehoshaphat , the king of Aram , was in Gilead .
GOLD:	So Jehu son of Jehoshaphat , son of Nimshi , led a conspiracy against King Joram . ( Now Joram had been with the army at Ramoth-gilead , defending Israel against the forces of King Hazael of Aram .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	Hágo , łahgo át'éego tsídóhkees , hodoo'niid
PRED:	“ Come , look , ” he said to them ,
GOLD:	Unfaithful Jerusalem

ID:	2503
INPUT:	Diné bił hadlee'ii bik'ihojidlíi doo , háálá badahojoobá'íii ya'ałtso' .
PRED:	Blessed be the man who loves him , for he gives food to the poor .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who are generous , because they feed the poor .

ID:	2504
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh danízinii bich'į' aa a'ááh nínízingo í'díínílzin ; t'áá ákóne' ádaat'į́įgo deíkáahii bich'į' t'áá ákóne' ánít'į́įgo í'díínílzin .
PRED:	You will show mercy to those who do what is right . You will do what is right .
GOLD:	To the faithful you show yourself faithful ; to those with integrity you show integrity .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	Sámlah daaztsą́ągo bitsásk'ehgi Saul éí Riihóbath tooh bibąąhdóó naagháago aláahgo naat'áanii náánídlį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Samson died , and reigned in his place , which is by the river of the river .
GOLD:	When Samlah died , Shaul from the city of Rehoboth-on-the-River became king in his place .

ID:	2506
INPUT:	Ch'il hanoot'ánígíigi át'éego náás níít'į́įłgo ániishłaa , áko dínínísą́ągo níneez sínílį́į́' áádóó asdzání ániid naagháago baa dzólníinii sínílį́į́' ; nibe' hadzíí'á silį́į́' índa nitsii' nineez silį́į́' , nidi t'áá łiníchí'í áádóó t'áadoo nik'ésti'ígóó nanináá nít'éé' .
PRED:	I will make you grow like a grass , and you have long hair , and you have long hair , and your hair have long hair , but your hair have covered your hair and your hair .
GOLD:	And I helped you to thrive like a plant in the field . You grew up and became a beautiful jewel . Your breasts became full , and your body hair grew , but you were still naked .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	Diné doo ak'eh hóół'įįd da
PRED:	The Death of the People
GOLD:	The Man and Woman Sin

ID:	2508
INPUT:	Háálá Sádjusii danilíinii , Da'neeznáádę́ę́' doo náádi'yiijeeh da , áádóó diyingo naal'a'í ádin , índa níłch'i danilínígíí ałdó' ádin , daaní , nidi Férisii danilíinii éí , T'áá aaníí éí dahólǫ́ , daaní .
PRED:	For the Pharisees are not raised up , and there is no angels , and the spirit , but the Pharisees say , “ Yes , the Pharisees are . ”
GOLD:	for the Sadducees say there is no resurrection or angels or spirits , but the Pharisees believe in all of these .

ID:	2509
INPUT:	Díí kódajíít'įįdígíí biniinaa ts'ídá atídahodeeshłííł . Dine'é kót'éii shii' sizíinii t'áá aaníí k'ééhodidoodlííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will punish them because of these things , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Should I not punish them for this ? ” says the Lord. “ Should I not avenge myself against such a nation ?

ID:	2510
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí kin haal'áhígíí baa yáníłti'go ádííníniid yę́ę k'ad Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii yaa yáłti'go kóní , Diltłish bee áádóó hodidoochįįłígíí bee índa naałniih bee éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í baa didoot'ááł .
PRED:	Therefore speak to this city , saying , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : ‘ The sword , the sword , the sword , the pestilence , and the pestilence . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Now I want to say something more about this city . You have been saying , ‘ It will fall to the king of Babylon through war , famine , and disease . ' But this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says :

ID:	2511
INPUT:	Ákwe'é táá' nihee nídeezidóó bik'ijį' éí kéyah táyi' si'ánígi Alezáandriyadę́ę́' tsinaa'eeł ła' ákwe'é bééhai léi' Naakií bidi'nínígíí be'elyaago bidáahjigo dah noot'ááł léi' nihił dah dii'éél .
PRED:	And after three months we sailed into the ship , there was a certain ship , which was there , there was a place called two image , which was before the image of the image .
GOLD:	It was three months after the shipwreck that we set sail on another ship that had wintered at the island — an Alexandrian ship with the twin gods as its figurehead .

ID:	2512
INPUT:	Áko David éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go , íídą́ą́' díí saad bee sin ályaaígíí bee bich'į' hojitaałgo hwe'ana'í t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ąjį' índa Saul yę́ę bits'ą́ąjį' Bóhólníihii yisdáhóółtį́ .
PRED:	David spoke to the Lord at that time , saying , “ At that time , the Lord saved him from all his enemies and from Saul . ”
GOLD:	David sang this song to the Lord on the day the Lord rescued him from all his enemies and from Saul .

ID:	2513
INPUT:	Áádóó tó háálį́į́góó ííyáago áadi áshįįh yiih yiyííłkaadgo ání , Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí tó hadaazlínígíí doo bąąhígóó ánáshdlaa ; éí bits'ą́ą́dóó aniné doo nááhódlǫ́ǫ da doo , índa kéyah doo nínáhodiniichii' da doo .
PRED:	And when he went into the water , he poured it on the waters , and said , Thus saith the Lord : This water is no more , and there shall be no more any more , neither shall there be any more any more than any more than the earth .
GOLD:	Then he went out to the spring that supplied the town with water and threw the salt into it . And he said , “ This is what the Lord says : I have purified this water . It will no longer cause death or infertility . ”

ID:	2514
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí á bee k'ééhodoodǫǫłii doo t'áá ákójínééhgóó ádił adzisiihii há néidiyoołnihgo doo t'áá ákójínééhgóó ádił adzisiihígíí Bóhólníihii binááł há bee k'ééhoodǫǫłii há nááhidoonihgo ádił adzisiihígíí há yóó'anídidoot'ááł .
PRED:	And the priest shall make atonement for him , and he shall make atonement for his sin , and he shall make atonement for the sin of the Lord in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will sacrifice it to purify the guilty person before the Lord , and that person will be forgiven .

ID:	2515
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Parable of the Lamp

ID:	2516
INPUT:	Ákohgo <unk> dooléłígíí halą́ąjį' danéelkaad ; hó éí oonéłígíí t'áá ákwe'é bił dahwiiską́ .
PRED:	And they cast them before the first ; and the assembly was there with them .
GOLD:	So the gifts were sent on ahead , while Jacob himself spent that night in the camp .

ID:	2517
INPUT:	T'áá ákwii oolkiłígíí biyi' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii hodi'dooltsoł ch'ééh daniizį́į́' , nidi diné yéédaaldzid , háálá éí hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' bí baa níjít'į́įgo bee hadzoodzíi'go yaa ákodaniizį́į́' .
PRED:	At that time the teachers of the Law and the chief priests were afraid of him , but they were afraid of him , because they knew that he had spoken this parable .
GOLD:	The teachers of religious law and the leading priests wanted to arrest Jesus immediately because they realized he was telling the story against them — they were the wicked farmers . But they were afraid of the people 's reaction .

ID:	2518
INPUT:	Bíízeiyai ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' .
PRED:	The sons of Hazael , three hundred and three .
GOLD:	The family of Bezai323

ID:	2519
INPUT:	Áádóó tsits'aa' dílzinii tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí éí ch'íní'áago biniinaa wóniidi ts'ídá aláahgo diyingo haz'ánígíí bidááhjígo hodiyingo haz'ánídóó yit'į́ , nidi tł'óó'dę́ę'go éí doo yit'į́į da . Áko éí dííshjį́įjį' t'áá ákót'é .
PRED:	And the ark of acacia wood is before the most holy place , and it is not in the most holy place , but it is today .
GOLD:	These poles were so long that their ends could be seen from the Holy Place , which is in front of the Most Holy Place , but not from the outside . They are still there to this day .

ID:	2520
INPUT:	Nidi diltłish bits'ąą yóó'ádahidínóochéłígíí éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' hááhidoolwołgo Júdah kéyah yiih náhidookahígíí t'áá díkwílt'éhí doo ; áadi índa Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí ádaaníinii daats'í , doodaii' shí ádíshníinii daats'í bohodoolníiłgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	But those who flee from the sword will flee from the land of Egypt , and a few of them will be able to escape , and they will know that I am , or the remnant of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Only a small number will escape death and return to Judah from Egypt . Then all those who came to Egypt will find out whose words are true — mine or theirs !

ID:	2521
INPUT:	Áko Nóah éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' náázhdi'yoołnih biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí ájiilaa , áádóó alį́į́' daadáanii ła' , áádóó nidaat'a'ii daadáanii ła' éí didlidgo nááhániihii bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' náádziisnii' .
PRED:	And Noah built an altar to the Lord , and one of the cattle , and one of the beasts , and the princes , and the princes of the altar , upon the altar .
GOLD:	Then Noah built an altar to the Lord , and there he sacrificed as burnt offerings the animals and birds that had been approved for that purpose .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	Jesus diyoolyéełgo binahast'ą́
PRED:	Jesus ' Death
GOLD:	Jesus Anointed at Bethany

ID:	2523
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , á nidahodii'aahii éí Ízrel dine'é yá nidahodii'aahgo bídeiníłkánígíí áádóó Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é yinanit'a'í nídaadleełii bídeiníłkánígíí biyi' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii ákót'éhígíí t'áadoo dayiił'a' da .
PRED:	And the judges of the tribes of Israel did not serve the Passover in the days of the Passover , and of the princes of Judah , and of Judah .
GOLD:	There had not been a Passover celebration like that since the time when the judges ruled in Israel , nor throughout all the years of the kings of Israel and Judah .

ID:	2524
INPUT:	Áádóó ádííniid , Da' diné shígi át'éiísh yóó'adínóochééł ? Áko diné shígi át'éiísh yisdádínóochééł biniyé hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah adoogááł ? Shí doo yah adeesháał da .
PRED:	And he said , Shall the righteous flee from me ? And the man shall escape into the sanctuary , that I may not go into the sanctuary .
GOLD:	But I replied , “ Should someone in my position run from danger ? Should someone in my position enter the Temple to save his life ? No , I wo n't do it ! ”

ID:	2525
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , T'áá aaníígóó ándishní , Díí jį́ Kéyah Hózhǫ́ǫdi shił honílǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I tell you the truth , this day I will rejoice in the land . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus replied , “ I assure you , today you will be with me in paradise . ”

ID:	2526
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii doo hool'áágóó yóó'i'didoo'áał da ;
PRED:	For the Lord will not forsake them forever .
GOLD:	For no one is abandonedby the Lord forever .

ID:	2527
INPUT:	Ákohgo naat'áanii danilíinii éí Bérak ádeidííniid , Ni áádóó Jeremáíyah nihílááh nídóht'įįh , áádóó diné ła' t'ááká nídooht'į́į'gi bił bééhoozį́į́' yíila' .
PRED:	Then the princes said to Sisera , “ Go to Jeremiah , and do n't know what you have seen . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Jeremiah should both hide , ” the officials told Baruch . “ Do n't tell anyone where you are ! ”

ID:	2528
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul yę́ę biye' Ish-bósheth éí Hííbran kin haal'áadi Ábner daaztsą́ągo yiyíínii'go t'óó bił áhásdįįd áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso niseekai .
PRED:	When Saul heard that Abner the son of Saul was dead in Hebron , he died and destroyed all Israel .
GOLD:	When Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , heard about Abner 's death at Hebron , he lost all courage , and all Israel became paralyzed with fear .

ID:	2529
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Díí baa yáníłti'ígíí bik'ehgo ádeeshnííł , háálá ajooba' bee nich'oha'néego nąąh tsídíkéezgo nízhi' bee nééhasin .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ I will do according to these words , because I have found favor in your name . ”
GOLD:	The Lord replied to Moses , “ I will indeed do what you have asked , for I look favorably on you , and I know you by name . ”

ID:	2530
INPUT:	Doo ákwii át'éii biniinaa diné nidíteehgo atíníł'į́įgo ch'osh ałchozhii ałchozhígíí nahalingo baa bi ł hózhónígíí bits'ą́ą́' ádííłdįįł . T'áá aaníí , diné t'áá ałtso be'iina' t'ááłáhídi ha'oodzolígíí nahalin ! Síilah .
PRED:	You will destroy them because of their wickedness , and you will destroy them like a garment . Yes , all the life of a man will be like a border . Selah .
GOLD:	When you discipline us for our sins , you consume like a moth what is precious to us.Each of us is but a breath.Interlude

ID:	2531
INPUT:	Áko dah diiyáago halgaigóó níyá ; nít'éé' Kííbar tooh bibąąhgóó Bóhólníihii bee bits'ádi'nílíidii yiiłtsáanii ákwii sizį́įgo náánéiłtsą́ , jó'akon , áko tsé'yaa níshjool .
PRED:	And I went up and saw a vision in the field , and behold , the glory of the Lord stood by the river , and behold , I fell upon his face .
GOLD:	So I got up and went , and there I saw the glory of the Lord , just as I had seen in my first vision by the Kebar River . And I fell face down on the ground .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	béeso bideená bik'é doo yá'ádaashóonii ts'ídá t'áá ákwii át'éego yá hadahadziihii índa t'áá ákogi át'éii bá yá'át'éehii nahjį' kódeił'íinii bich'į' doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	Woe to those who do evil , to those who do evil , and to those who do evil .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	Bee nihoot'áníjį' ahoolzhiizhgo nínáádoodáałgo shádi'áahjigo bisiláo yił doonééł , nidi ákóne' náánádzáii doo átséedi níyáhígi át'éego náádoodáał da .
PRED:	When the end comes , he will come to the south , and the army of the south will come to the south , but he will not return .
GOLD:	“ Then at the appointed time he will once again invade the south , but this time the result will be different .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	Abímelek éí Ízrel dine'é binazh'nt'áago táá' nááhai .
PRED:	Abimelech asked Israel for three years .
GOLD:	After Abimelech had ruled over Israel for three years ,

ID:	2535
INPUT:	Háálá kéyah bikáá'góó adilyé t'éí nihinéést'e' . Hóyée'go ha'oodzí'ígíí biniinaa kéyah yínííł nilį́įgo atínídindleeh . Dahonoojíígóó dahootsoígíí nídááltseigo daazgan . Doo yá'át'ééhgóó dahiná , áádóó yee dabidziilii doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'ée da .
PRED:	For the land was full , and the land was filled with sorrow , because of the curse of the curse , because of the curse , and there was no evil in the wilderness .
GOLD:	For the land is full of adultery , and it lies under a curse.The land itself is in mourning — its wilderness pastures are dried up.For they all do eviland abuse what power they have .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	Háálá k'ad nihíighahgóó ch'ínísháahgo , t'óó kónígháníjį' da'a<unk> dooltséłígíísh biniyé haa jígháah doo nisin . Nidi Bóhólníihii shadi'ní'ą́ą́ ládą́ą́' haada nízahjį' nihił naháshtą́ą dooleełgo shił chohoo'į́ .
PRED:	For now I have come near to you , and I have hope for a little while . But if the Lord is with me , I hope for you .
GOLD:	This time I do n't want to make just a short visit and then go right on . I want to come and stay awhile , if the Lord will let me .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' nihił dahóózhǫǫdígíishą' háájí silį́į́' ? Háálá íídą́ą́' nihá shił bééhózingo nihaa hashne' , bohónéedzą́ą́ ládą́ą́' nihináá' nidi hadadoohniłgo shaa dadoohnił nít'éé' !
PRED:	What is your joy ? For if I know that it was time , you would take away your eyes , but if you had seen it , you would take care of me .
GOLD:	Where is that joyful and grateful spirit you felt then ? I am sure you would have taken out your own eyes and given them to me if it had been possible .

ID:	2538
INPUT:	Kintaa hada'iiztiingóó t'áá ałtso hodílzingo nahaz'ánígíí íinilaago índa kintaa da'nítiingóó t'áá ałtso wódahgo nahaz'ánígíí íinilaago bik'é nich'į' ni'doolyéłígíí doo nínízinígíí beego doo ałjiłniigi ánít'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	And thou hast made a sanctuary , and hast made it a sanctuary , and hast made it to all the streets of the city , and hast not been able to give it to her .
GOLD:	You build your pagan shrines on every street corner and your altars to idols in every square . In fact , you have been worse than a prostitute , so eager for sin that you have not even demanded payment .

ID:	2539
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii kóní , Jį́įgo bee adinídíin dooleełii háá'át'áahgo áyósinii , áádóó tł'ée'go bee dahool'in dooleeł biniyé ooljéé' áádóó sǫ' nídadikahgo áyósinii , índa tónteel yił hááhoniłcha'go yilk'oołígíí dadiits'a'go áyósinii , éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii wolyé .
PRED:	For thus saith the Lord of hosts , The light of the night shall be a light by night , and the stars , and the stars , and the stars of the sea , and the stars of the sea , The name of Jehovah of hosts .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who provides the sun to light the dayand the moon and stars to light the night , and who stirs the sea into roaring waves.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and this is what he says :

ID:	2540
INPUT:	Áko Shííkem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii t'áá ałtso áłah silį́į'go Míllo kin yaa áhídóó danilíinii bił dashdiikai , índa Shííkemgi chéch'il áyah nii'áii bíighahgi Abímelek aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And all the inhabitants of Shechem gathered together together , and took him up , and brought him up with the men of Shechem , which is by the tree of Shechem .
GOLD:	Then all the leading citizens of Shechem and Beth-millo called a meeting under the oak beside the pillar at Shechem and made Abimelech their king .

ID:	2541
INPUT:	Wáin deizdidlį́įhii índa tó tsi'na'iiłáii ałtaa nídeídlį́įhii ,
PRED:	wine , wine , wine , wine ,
GOLD:	What sorrow for those who are heroes at drinking wineand boast about all the alcohol they can hold .

ID:	2542
INPUT:	Áko Biizáliyel éí atis ahííkaadígíí ashdla'go ahídayiishcha' áádóó náá'áshdla'go t'áá ákónáánát'éego ahínáádayiishcha' .
PRED:	Then Jehoiada put five loaves on the five ends of the curtain , and they burned them on the other side .
GOLD:	Five of these curtains were joined together to make one long curtain , and the other five were joined to make a second long curtain .

ID:	2543
INPUT:	Áko díí hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní :
PRED:	And he gave them this parable , saying ,
GOLD:	So Jesus told them this story :

ID:	2544
INPUT:	Áko Síírag éí Néíhor há yizhchį́į́dóó bik'ijį' jiináago naakidi neeznádiin honínáánááhaígíí biyi' haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	After he became the father of Shem , he lived two hundred years , and he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Nahor , Serug lived another 200 years and had other sons and daughters .

ID:	2545
INPUT:	Áko yá yi'ííníiłta'go neeznáadi mííl tálent bąąh háá'áhígíí bich'į' niidlóóz ,
PRED:	When he had gone , he brought him to the thousand talents .
GOLD:	In the process , one of his debtors was brought in who owed him millions of dollars .

ID:	2546
INPUT:	Ił dahółyée'ii bił íits'a' doo ; bighangi t'áá ałtsoní bee ída'íízįįdgo atíbidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	The voice of those who hear shall hear ; all things shall be given to him in the house of mourning .
GOLD:	The sound of terror rings in their ears , and even on good days they fear the attack of the destroyer .

ID:	2547
INPUT:	Nít'éé' t'áá áko Sesaríyadę́ę́' diné tált'éego shaa yíl'a'go hooghangi sédáhígi yíkai .
PRED:	Then I sent the three men from Caesarea , and came to the house of the man .
GOLD:	“ Just then three men who had been sent from Caesarea arrived at the house where we were staying .

ID:	2548
INPUT:	Nibe' t'áá áłah éí jádí naakií yizhchíinii nahalin .
PRED:	Your breasts are like two breasts of milk .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle .

ID:	2549
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí aláahgo naat'áanii nihinant'áa doo biniyé Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God néididoołtéełii nídadidoołtééł ; nihik'isóó bitahdę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii nihinant'áa dooleełii nidadoołtééł ; dé'éyóní doo nihinant'á biniyé nídadidoołtéeł da ; jó , éí doo nihik'is nilį́į da .
PRED:	But the Lord your God will set him over you . He will give you king over your brothers . He will rule over you . He will not give you a foreigner . He will not give you his brother .
GOLD:	If this happens , be sure to select as king the man the Lord your God chooses . You must appoint a fellow Israelite ; he may not be a foreigner .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman díí yiyííkeedígíí Bóhólníihii bąą bił hóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	Solomon was glad because of what the Lord had asked .
GOLD:	The Lord was pleased that Solomon had asked for wisdom .

ID:	2551
INPUT:	Nááts'ó'oołdísii naaná'ooghasígi át'éego ał'ąą dine'é doo béédahodzísinii bitahgóó tahonooskaadgo hakéyah t'áá ádzaaí silį́į́' ; ts'ídá doo ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ ch'óoya' át'ée da silį́į́' ; kéyah hózhóní yę́ę t'áá ádzaaí ádajiilaa .
PRED:	As a storm is scattered among the nations , so the nations that are scattered among the nations , so that no one can pass through it ; the land is desolate , and its land is desolate .
GOLD:	As with a whirlwind , I scattered them among the distant nations , where they lived as strangers . Their land became so desolate that no one even traveled through it . They turned their pleasant land into a desert . ”

ID:	2552
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ha'át'íida yá'át'éehii bínashídíłkid ? T'áadoo yá'át'éhí da . Diyin God t'éiyá yá'át'éehii nilį́ . Iiná biih deeshááł nínízingo , Diyin God yee has'áanii bik'eh honíł'į́ .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Why do you ask me good ? It is good . I will come to you . I will come to the law of God . ”
GOLD:	“ Why ask me about what is good ? ” Jesus replied . “ There is only One who is good . But to answer your question — if you want to receive eternal life , keep the commandments . ”

ID:	2553
INPUT:	Géíza kin haal'áadi Sámson yaa naayáii
PRED:	Samson 's Death
GOLD:	Samson Carries Away Gaza 's Gates

ID:	2554
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi diné t'óó ahayóí silį́į'go bitsi'ké nidahaazhchį́ ,
PRED:	Many people were born on the earth , and they were born to his daughters .
GOLD:	Then the people began to multiply on the earth , and daughters were born to them .

ID:	2555
INPUT:	Ayóó'áníínísh'níinii , dooládó' naa dzólníi da , jó'akon . T'áá aaníí , ayóó áníínílnin . Nihitsásk'eh ałdó' hoolcházhí .
PRED:	I love you , my love ! Behold , you are very beautiful ! Your name also is your name .
GOLD:	You are so handsome , my love , pleasing beyond words ! The soft grass is our bed ;

ID:	2556
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jesus éí diné haal'áhígíí índa bídahooł'aahii áyidííniid ,
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the people and to his disciples ,
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples ,

ID:	2557
INPUT:	Díí tó abid wáin bee naagéhígíí ádaaniidígo wáin bii' hadadeelbįįd nít'éé' , shoo , nidahaazdláád , índa doo deeghánídę́ę́' niikaígíí bąą nihi'éé' áádóó nihikee'da ałdó' dadiizhaazh lá .
PRED:	This wine was filled with wine , and behold , the wine was filled with wine , and behold , they were not far away , and their clothes were turned away .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	2558
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii bee de áhooshłaa , áádóó há honít'i'góó k'íhoneezláago áhodeeshłííł ; shikin hadaas'áago ádazhdoolííł , áádóó shits'ą́ą́' daasnáanii nályééh ádingo t'áá jíík'eh béédazhdidoochił , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I have made my righteousness , and I will make a desolation for them , and I will make a desolation for them ; and they shall set waste for me , saith the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	I will raise up Cyrus to fulfill my righteous purpose , and I will guide his actions.He will restore my city and free my captive people — without seeking a reward ! I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2559
INPUT:	Ana'í bidiltłish t'áá ałtsodę́ę'go nihich'į' deidées'á áádóó yéé' t'áá ałtsodę́ę'go hólónígíí biniinaa t'áadoo háajį' dah nidaahkaí índa atiingóó t'áadoo nidaahkaí .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , and do n't go through the streets because of all things that are on the earth .
GOLD:	Do n't go out to the fields ! Do n't travel on the roads ! The enemy 's sword is everywhereand terrorizes us at every turn !

ID:	2560
INPUT:	Áko t'áá aná'át'ááh bik'eh kin haal'áhídóó ch'ééjídááh .
PRED:	And they went out of the city , and went out of the city .
GOLD:	That evening Jesus and the disciples left the city .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	Társhish bitsi' nílíinii , nikéyah biyi'góó tooh nílínígi át' éego wó'ąninééh , háálá t'áadoo t'ą́ą́' kónánódle'í da .
PRED:	O daughter of Tyre , as the rivers of the river ; for there is no end .
GOLD:	Come , people of Tarshish , sweep over the land like the flooding Nile , for Tyre is defenseless .

ID:	2562
INPUT:	Áádóó ánááshidoo'niid , Shik'ijį' yiizįįh , baa nánooshkąąh ; shiyíłhé , háálá yéego ti'hooshníihgo t'ahdii hinishná .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Please let me go , for I am still alive . ”
GOLD:	“ Then he begged me , ‘ Come over here and put me out of my misery , for I am in terrible pain and want to die . '

ID:	2563
INPUT:	yínííł naagháii niidlį́į nidi , t'áá áłahjį' bił hózhóonii niidlį́ ; té'é'į́ niidlį́į nidi , lą'í da'at'į́įgo ádeile'ii niidlį́ ; t'áadoo nihee hólónída nidi , t'áá ałtsoní bee hólóonii niidlį́ .
PRED:	We are always sad , but we are always happy , but we are many , but we are not of all things , but we are all things .
GOLD:	Our hearts ache , but we always have joy . We are poor , but we give spiritual riches to others . We own nothing , and yet we have everything .

ID:	2564
INPUT:	Mt . 15 : <unk>
PRED:	Jesus and John
GOLD:	Yeast of the Pharisees and Herod

ID:	2565
INPUT:	Bíldad éí , Diyin God áníinii doo haada yit'ée da , ní
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Bildad 's First Response to Job

ID:	2566
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí ak'ahígíí bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidiłi' doo , nidi ajéíts'iinígíí éí Éran áádóó biye'ké daabí doo .
PRED:	The priest shall burn the fat on the altar , but Aaron and his sons shall be their sons .
GOLD:	Then the priest will burn the fat on the altar , but the breast will belong to Aaron and his descendants .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání hóyáanii léi' kin haal'áhídę́ę́' yéego haadzíi'go ání , Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , nánihooshkąąh , Jó'ab áháníjį' shich'į' nidoogáałgo bich'į' hadeesdzih .
PRED:	And a certain woman came out of the city , saying , Hear , hear , and hear , I pray thee , and I will speak unto thee .
GOLD:	But a wise woman in the town called out to Joab , “ Listen to me , Joab . Come over here so I can talk to you . ”

ID:	2568
INPUT:	Hwe'oodlą' t'áadoo hats'ą́ą́' niitł'áhí Diyin God yee há nihoní'ánígíí t'áádóo nídí nijólí , áko Diyin God baa hojiniihgo hwe'oodlą' bee hadziil dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	In faith , he was not able to do what God had said , and he became strong in his faith .
GOLD:	Abraham never wavered in believing God 's promise . In fact , his faith grew stronger , and in this he brought glory to God .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' hóyée'go bá haasdziih doo , éí Diyin God doo hóyée'go bá haadzíí'góó ? Ha'át'éegoshą' hóyée'go bá hadeesdzih , éí Diyin God doo hóyée'go bá haadzíí'góó ?
PRED:	Why shall I curse him ? Why shall I speak a curse for God ? Why shall I curse him ?
GOLD:	But how can I curse thosewhom God has not cursed ? How can I condemn thosewhom the Lord has not condemned ?

ID:	2570
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad t'áá aaníinii áádóó t'áádóo nídíii ádeiilyaa danohsingo éí Abímelek aláahgo naat'áanii ádaohłaago áádóó Jerabéíyal índa bighandóó danilíinii yá'át'éhígi bich'į' ádaohdzaago , éí yaa naayáhígíí bik'ehgo baa nisoohkai ládą́ą́' yá'át'éhígi lá ádaohdzaa ni ,
PRED:	Now therefore , if you have made a new thing , and have made Abimelech king , and have done to Abimelech , and to the house of Abimelech , and to the house of his house , as you have done .
GOLD:	Jotham continued , “ Now make sure you have acted honorably and in good faith by making Abimelech your king , and that you have done right by Gideon and all of his descendants . Have you treated him with the honor he deserves for all he accomplished ?

ID:	2571
INPUT:	Áko díí bee ééhózinii níla' bikáa' doo , áádóó bee ééhániihii nítáa'gi bikáa' doo , háálá Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii yee Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' háánihíí'eezh .
PRED:	And this sign shall be upon thy hand , and upon thy hand , and upon thy hand , for the Lord brought thee out of Egypt .
GOLD:	This ceremony will be like a mark branded on your hand or your forehead . It is a reminder that the power of the Lord 's mighty hand brought us out of Egypt . ”

ID:	2572
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Neisíyeelgo baa neiseełígíí shił bééhodoozįįłgi bik'ee nisináshtłi' .
PRED:	The king said to him , “ I know what I do to you , and I will know what I do . ”
GOLD:	he said , “ I have had a dream that deeply troubles me , and I must know what it means . ”

ID:	2573
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi ni éí doo kin shá ádíílíił da , nidi niye' t'áá ni ná yizhchínígíí éí kin íidoolíiłgo bii' shízhi' baa ha'niih doo , níi ni' .
PRED:	But you shall not build a house for me , but you shall build a house for your son , that he may build a house for my name .
GOLD:	but you are not the one to do it . One of your own sons will build the Temple to honor me . '

ID:	2574
INPUT:	nahałtin baa náhwiilzhíishgo níłtsą́ nihaa hidish'aah doo , áko kéyah bikáá'góó nída'nit'į́įh doo , áádóó tsin bineest'ą' bąąh nídahoodleeł doo .
PRED:	I will send rain to you at the appointed time , and the land will produce fruit , and the fruit of the land will bear fruit .
GOLD:	I will send you the seasonal rains . The land will then yield its crops , and the trees of the field will produce their fruit .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	Áyąądą́ą́' diné t'áá háiida t'ááká Diyin God bibee ajooba' t'áadoo shóyoołt'eeh da lágo , baa dahonohsą́ą le' , índa ayi' nahodi<unk> bihétł'óól nihich'į' hodiyółnáałgo nohłą́'í nihółchǫǫh lágo .
PRED:	If you are wise , do n't give the grace of God , give it to them , and he will send it to his net .
GOLD:	Look after each other so that none of you fails to receive the grace of God . Watch out that no poisonous root of bitterness grows up to trouble you , corrupting many .

ID:	2576
INPUT:	K'ad ánísht'éii áádóó baa naasháhígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé Tíkakas , nihik'is ayóó'óó'níinii índa ba'ahódlíigo Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'ígíí t'áá ałtso yee nihił hodoolnih .
PRED:	Now you will know how I am doing , brother , and faithful brother , and faithful in the Lord 's servant .
GOLD:	To bring you up to date , Tychicus will give you a full report about what I am doing and how I am getting along . He is a beloved brother and faithful helper in the Lord 's work .

ID:	2577
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Shoo , doo yá'ádaashóonii díí haz'áníjį' índa ákwii kéédahojit'ínígíí hak'ijį' kódeeshłííł ; éí hóyée'go á hada'iisdzíi'ii t'áá át'é naaltsoos bik'inídaháasdzogo ályaa yę́ę , Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í binááł yéélta'ii hak'ijį' kódeeshłííł .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord : Behold , I will bring upon this evil and upon the inhabitants of this place , and upon all that are written in the book of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	‘ This is what the Lord says : I am going to bring disaster on this city and its people . All the curses written in the scroll that was read to the king of Judah will come true .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel yíká ádííniid
PRED:	The Lord said to Samuel
GOLD:	The

ID:	2579
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bí éí naaldzilgo bíla' dínéesna'jį' Filístiya dine'é neistseed , áko diltłish yidiniiltsood , áko éí bijį́ Bóhólníihii éí ayóó át'éego hwee ak'eh deesdlį́į́' , áko naalye'é bąąh da'oogą́'ígíí t'éiyá biniyé diné hakéé' t'ą́ą́' nákai .
PRED:	And he became strong , and smote the Philistines , and smote them with the sword ; and the Lord struck them on that day , and the spoil of the people followed him .
GOLD:	He killed Philistines until his hand was too tired to lift his sword , and the Lord gave him a great victory that day . The rest of the army did not return until it was time to collect the plunder !

ID:	2580
INPUT:	Áko nááda'iiłniihii éí deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádadííniidgo Ízrel dine'é hadadeeshghaazh . Ákódzaago éí deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí diists'ą́'ígíí deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá áko ayóó át'éego hadadeeshghaazhgo kin haal'áhígíí ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inii naa'adahałdaasgo éí bitis gó'ąą Ízrel dine'é łá'í nítínígo t'áá k'éhézdon yah ííjéé' , áko kin haal'áhígíí deisná .
PRED:	And the priests cried out the trumpet , and the children of Israel cried out , and when they heard the sound of the trumpet , they cried out with a loud voice , and all the cities of Israel went through the city .
GOLD:	When the people heard the sound of the rams ' horns , they shouted as loud as they could . Suddenly , the walls of Jericho collapsed , and the Israelites charged straight into the town and captured it .

ID:	2581
INPUT:	Asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é ádinii t'áadoo bide ádahwíínóhsiní .
PRED:	Do not let a widow , or a widow , or a widow ,
GOLD:	“ You must not exploit a widow or an orphan .

ID:	2582
INPUT:	Yisnááh daniidlį́įgo naadiin ashdla' náhááh góne' t'óó hááhaidóó neeznáágóó yoołkáałgo , kin haal'áagi kééhojit'íinii hak'eh hodeesdlį́į́'dóó bik'ijį' dį́į́'ts'áadah nááhaidi t'áá éí bijį́ Bóhólníihii shik'i diilnii'go áadi shił ní'áázh .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the fifth year of the captivity , in the fifth year of the captivity of the captivity , that the Lord brought me on this day , and the hand of the Lord brought me to me .
GOLD:	On April 28 , during the twenty-fifth year of our captivity — fourteen years after the fall of Jerusalem — the Lord took hold of me .

ID:	2583
INPUT:	Áádóó ánáázhdoo'niid , T'áá shǫǫdí , Bóhólníihii , t'áadoo shá díílnihí , áko t'ááłáhídi hanáádeesdzih . Ákwe'é neeznáá jilt'éego yik'íníyáagoshą' ? Áko ánáádoo'niid , Neeznáá jilt'éego biniinaa doo áhodeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	And he said , “ Please , Lord , do n't let me speak again , and I will speak one word again . How can I find ten ? ” And he said , “ I will not destroy the tenth . ”
GOLD:	Finally , Abraham said , “ Lord , please do n't be angry with me if I speak one more time . Suppose only ten are found there ? ” And the Lord replied , “ Then I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten . ”

ID:	2584
INPUT:	Tł'iish bitsoo' hááhaashchii'ii nahalingo bitsoo' dadeení áádóó biwooshtł'ah góne' tł'iish bik'asda' naaziid . Síilah .
PRED:	The tongue of the mouth of the mouth , and the tongue of the mouth of the tongue , and I believe in the midst of the serpent . Selah .
GOLD:	Their tongues sting like a snake ; the venom of a viper drips from their lips.Interlude

ID:	2585
INPUT:	Áádóó Zedekáíyah haye'ké t'áá hanááł nideistseedgo hó éí hanáá' hadeiznilgo béésh łitsoii da'ahólzha'í yee hoda'aztł'ǫ́ǫgo Bábilangóó hoł daaskai .
PRED:	And Zedekiah killed his sons , and put them on his eyes , and bound him in chains , and led him to Babylon .
GOLD:	They made Zedekiah watch as they slaughtered his sons . Then they gouged out Zedekiah 's eyes , bound him in bronze chains , and led him away to Babylon .

ID:	2586
INPUT:	Bikéyahgóó eda'alyaii ałdó' t'áadoo bee danéelą́'í da ; t'áá bí yindaashnishii yich'į' yaa áńdaat'įįh ; éí t'áá bí ádayiilaa nít'éé' .
PRED:	They did not have many idols in their land ; they bowed down their own hands .
GOLD:	Their land is full of idols ; the people worship things they have madewith their own hands .

ID:	2587
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii kóníłní , Bérak yinílyéii ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says to you , Baruch :

ID:	2588
INPUT:	Adinídíín t'áá aaníinii éí diné ts'ídá t'áá ałtso bá azhdiníłdíin doogo nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' jiníyá ;
PRED:	The light came to all people , and he came to the earth .
GOLD:	The one who is the true light , who gives light to everyone , was coming into the world .

ID:	2589
INPUT:	Áko tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' ahíłnaashiijí nidahaazná . Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ągo ałk'iijée'go Ízrel dine'é éí Síriya dine'é t'áá ni' naajeehígíí t'ááłáhídi míilgo t'áá ła'a jį́ nideistseed .
PRED:	And the children of Israel fought against him seven days . And the children of Aram fought against him for seven days . And the children of Aram killed each day .
GOLD:	The two armies camped opposite each other for seven days , and on the seventh day the battle began . The Israelites killed 100,000 Aramean foot soldiers in one day .

ID:	2590
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' yoołkáłígíí biyi' ídahooł'aahii lą'í yileełgo , Jew dine'é danilíinii Gríik bizaad yee yádaałti'ii saad dahasłį́į'go Hííbrew dine'é yaa nídaast'įįd , háálá bitahdóó asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdígíí t'áá ákwíí jį́ bitaa nída'a'nihii doo baa ádahayą́ą da hazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in those days , that many of his disciples were many of the Jews , and they gave to the Greeks , because they had not given them a few women among the Greeks , because they were not able to eat them .
GOLD:	But as the believers rapidly multiplied , there were rumblings of discontent . The Greek-speaking believers complained about the Hebrew-speaking believers , saying that their widows were being discriminated against in the daily distribution of food .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii bá tsin neheeshjíí' éí shádi'ááhjí naadiingo noolkáal dooígíí ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	You shall make twenty boards for the tabernacle , twenty boards on the south side of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	Make twenty of these frames to support the curtains on the south side of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	Áko Peter tł'óo'di kin binaagi haz'ą́ągo biná'ástł'iní góne' dzizdá . Nít'éé' asdzání naal'a'í kóníigo hach'į' niníyá , Ni la' ałdó' Jesus Gáliliidóóígíí bił nanikai ni' .
PRED:	Peter was sitting in the middle of the court . Then the servant of the woman said to him , “ You also are with Jesus from Galilee . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard . A servant girl came over and said to him , “ You were one of those with Jesus the Galilean . ”

ID:	2593
INPUT:	T'áá háiida diné doo yá'áshóonii yá'át'éehgo yá yáłti'ii áádóó diné t'áá ákogi át'éii baa níjít'íinii t'áá ájíłah Bóhólníihii doo hółdin da .
PRED:	Whoever does what is good , and does not obey the Lord .
GOLD:	Acquitting the guilty and condemning the innocent — both are detestable to the Lord .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	Nibik'ehgo iináanii bee nihá hwiinił'a'go haleebee deíníikáah dooleeł .
PRED:	that we may follow thy precepts , that we may walk in thy precepts .
GOLD:	You have charged usto keep your commandments carefully .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , diníigo handziih , Ííjip dine'é binanit'a'í nílíinii , Féro nik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon ; na'ashǫ́'ii łibáhítsoh táyi' sínítíinii , Náil tooh nílínígíí éí t'áá shí ádá áshłaa , diní .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord God : Behold , I am against Pharaoh , king of Egypt , and I am against the dragon , and I have done to Pharaoh , saying , I have done to the dragon that is in the river .
GOLD:	Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Pharaoh , king of Egypt — you great monster , lurking in the streams of the Nile.For you have said , ‘ The Nile River is mine ; I made it for myself . '

ID:	2596
INPUT:	Jó , nít'éé' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii nideistseed yę́ę ba'áłchíní danohłį́įgo t'áá nihí ádaa dahołne' .
PRED:	For ye are slain by the prophets , and ye are sons of the prophets .
GOLD:	“ But in saying that , you testify against yourselves that you are indeed the descendants of those who murdered the prophets .

ID:	2597
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' Amazáíyah éí Íídam dine'é íísdįįdę́ę́' nádzáago Síyer dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii néiníjaa'go t'áá bí bidiyin danilį́į dooleełgo dah deiznil áádóó nináhá<unk> go yich'į' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááyiiłniih nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , after that Amaziah went up from Edom , that he took the gods of Seir , and set them to their own gods , and set incense upon them .
GOLD:	When King Amaziah returned from slaughtering the Edomites , he brought with him idols taken from the people of Seir . He set them up as his own gods , bowed down in front of them , and offered sacrifices to them !

ID:	2598
INPUT:	Hatahdóó hanáásh'nildóó bik'ijį' baa a'ááh nánísdzin doo , áádóó diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo daabíi'ii índa bikéyah baa náhideesh'ish .
PRED:	I will have mercy on him , and I will show mercy on him , and I will give each man his own land .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	Nidi t'ah doo shi'dichí yę́ędą́ą́' Diyin God ats'áshiníłtį́ , áádóó bibee ajooba' yinahjį' shíká ádííniid . Éí t'áá bí íinízingo
PRED:	But when I was still in my youth , God called me out of the grace of his grace .
GOLD:	But even before I was born , God chose me and called me by his marvelous grace . Then it pleased him

ID:	2600
INPUT:	Łį́į́' bik'i nida'ołt'i' áádóó łį́į́' bikáá' haohjeeh ; béésh ch'ah danihich'ahgo łį́į́' nihił naazį́ ; tsiidétáán bik'i nidazdidlaadgo ádaohłe' áádóó béésh éé' bee hadadohne' .
PRED:	Get up on horses and on horses , and put on their heads , and put them on their spear , and put on them .
GOLD:	Harness the horses , and mount the stallions.Take your positions.Put on your helmets.Sharpen your spears , and prepare your armor .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' David éí Ízrel dine'é binazhnit'áago dízdiin nááhai : Hííbran kin haal'áagi nazhnit'áago tsosts'id nááhai áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nazhnit'áago tádiindóó ba'aan táá' nááhai .
PRED:	And David reigned over Israel forty years in Hebron , and he reigned forty years in Hebron , and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	David had reigned over Israel for forty years , seven of them in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	Azhą́ ádił oodzíí' biniinaa nihits'íís daninée nidi , Christ t'áá aaníí nihiyi' hólǫ́ǫgo , ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádanoht'é ádanihi'diilyaaígíí bąą Níłch'i Diyinii nihii' hólǫ́ǫgo dahinohná .
PRED:	But if you die because of the blood of the blood of Christ , you live in him , because you are righteous in the Spirit .
GOLD:	And Christ lives within you , so even though your body will die because of sin , the Spirit gives you life because you have been made right with God .

ID:	2603
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá nahont'inee éí baa nisíníyá , nidi shí éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso binááł t'áá jį́įgo ákódeeshłííł .
PRED:	For you have kept in secret place , but I will do to all Israel in the sight of all Israel .
GOLD:	You did it secretly , but I will make this happen to you openly in the sight of all Israel . ”

ID:	2604
INPUT:	Háí lá Diyin God nilį́ ? Bóhólníihii lą́ą . Háísh tsé niłdzilii nilį́ ? NihiDiyin God lą́ą .
PRED:	Who is God ? Who is a rock ? Who is our God ?
GOLD:	For who is God except the Lord ? Who but our God is a solid rock ?

ID:	2605
INPUT:	Nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bik'ehgo shiyííłááł , háálá éí baa shił nihoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	He will heal me according to your commandments , because I rejoice in him .
GOLD:	Make me walk along the path of your commands , for that is where my happiness is found .

ID:	2606
INPUT:	Áko Rúben ánááhodoo'niid , Doo bidił doogoh da ; kwe'é halgaigi t'óó a'áán góyaa adahołhan , áko doo atídadoohłíił da ; dabílák'ee hadeeshtéełgo yisdádeeshtééł , áádóó bizhé'é bił baa nídeesht'ash dziniizį́į́' .
PRED:	Reuben said to them , “ You shall not fall in the field , and cast it into the wilderness , and you shall not destroy them ; and I will deliver them into the hand of their father , and I will give him to him . ”
GOLD:	“ Why should we shed any blood ? Let 's just throw him into this empty cistern here in the wilderness . Then he 'll die without our laying a hand on him. ” Reuben was secretly planning to rescue Joseph and return him to his father .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	Jesus Christ éí David bits'ą́ą́dóó oochíiłii nilį́ , áádóó David éí Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́dóó oochíiłii nilį́ . Kót'éego Jesus Christ bizází yę́ę náás da'ahílchį́ .
PRED:	Jesus is the family of David , and the family of David . This is the family of David . This is the family of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	This is a record of the ancestors of Jesus the Messiah , a descendant of David and of Abraham :

ID:	2608
INPUT:	áádóó ákóne' Téímar éí Píírez índa Zíírah , Júdah bá jishchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Píírez éí Hézran há yizhchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Hézran éí Ram há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	After this , she became the father of Simeon , and she became the father of Zerah . He became the father of Zerah .
GOLD:	Judah was the father of Perez and Zerah ( whose mother was Tamar ) .Perez was the father of Hezron.Hezron was the father of Ram .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	Áádóó kin haal'á ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inii bee hadaastł'inii naakits'áadah lá , áko éí bikáa'gi Dibé Yázhí nilíinii bá daal'aadii naakits'áadahgoígíí dabízhi' t'áá da'níł'ąą bee bik'ida'ashchį́ .
PRED:	And twelve cities were twelve cities , and they wrote in the name of the Lamb .
GOLD:	The wall of the city had twelve foundation stones , and on them were written the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb .

ID:	2610
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego yinaha'áhígíí éí diné bi'áháchį' doo yee ła'yidoolíił da .
PRED:	For God will not make a righteous man angry with his anger .
GOLD:	Human anger does not produce the righteousness God desires .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	Ákoshą' hait'é ? Jó , Ízrel dine'é hádaat'íinii t'áadoo shódayoost'e' da . Diyin God atah yiyiizlá'ígíí t'éiyá shódayoost'e' ; łahjį'ígíí éí doo da'diits'a' da daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	What then then ? For the men of Israel had not taken away the remnant of God , but the rest of the rest of them were not heard .
GOLD:	So this is the situation : Most of the people of Israel have not found the favor of God they are looking for so earnestly . A few have — the ones God has chosen — but the hearts of the rest were hardened .

ID:	2612
INPUT:	Nidi dáádiníbaal bine' góne' , doodaii' bikáá' náá'iiniihí doo bich'į' nizhdoogáał da , háálá hąąh dahaz'ą́ , áko éí shihodiyingo nahaz'ánígi doo nihozhdiyoołchxǫǫł da ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo dazhdiyingo áhwíínísin .
PRED:	But they shall not go to the tent of meeting , nor to the altar : for they shall cast it into the sanctuary ; and they shall burn it with fire , and I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Yet because of his physical defect , he may not enter the room behind the inner curtain or approach the altar , for this would defile my holy places . I am the Lord who makes them holy . ”

ID:	2613
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Jesus Clears the Temple

ID:	2614
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii éí yá'át'ééh ááníłígíí áádóó doo ádił ni'iisíihii t'áá ádin .
PRED:	The righteous man is good , and the wicked are no sin .
GOLD:	Not a single person on earth is always good and never sins .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	<unk> dóó dah náádii'náago <unk> kah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out from there , and camped there .
GOLD:	They left Terah and camped at Mithcah .

ID:	2616
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne'é éí nááda'iiłniihii bá haz'ánígíí áádóó nitsaago haz'ánígíí áyiilaa índa bidáádadilkał áyiilaago béésh łitsoii yik'ídeisti' .
PRED:	And the priests made the court , and the court , and put the doors , and covered them with bronze .
GOLD:	He then built a courtyard for the priests , and also the large outer courtyard . He made doors for the courtyard entrances and overlaid them with bronze .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	Nidi dibé yázhí doo át'íínígíí naatseedjį' eedlóozii nahonishłin nít'éé' . Haa'íyee' tsin sikaadígíí bineest'ą' t'áá bił ádadiildįįł ; haa'íyee' dahináanii bitahdóó dadiyiilyééł , áko bízhi' doo bénínááhániih da doo , daaníigo shik'ijį' danilį́įgo shindahazgizígíí doo shił bééhózin da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But I have been like a sheep without a flock , and we have cut off the fruit of the tree ; and they shall kill him from the midst of the living , and they have not known my name .
GOLD:	I was like a lamb being led to the slaughter . I had no idea that they were planning to kill me ! “ Let 's destroy this man and all his words , ” they said . “ Let 's cut him down , so his name will be forgotten forever . ”

ID:	2618
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Éí bąą shá naal'a'í nílíinii Jéíkab , t'áadoo náníldzidí , índa Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , t'áadoo nitsidaohkaí , háálá doo deeghánídę́ę́' yisdánánihideesh'nił , áádóó niha'áłchíní éí kéyah yii' yisnááh danilį́į́dę́ę́' yisdádeeshnił , áádóó Jéíkab nídoodáałgo bił hodéezyéelgo hanályį́įh doo , índa ła'da doo bił yéé' ánáhodoodlíił da , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ Therefore , my servant Jacob , do n't be afraid , and do n't be afraid . I will save you from far away , and I will save you from a far country , and I will save you from the captivity of Jacob , and no one will rest . ”
GOLD:	“ So do not be afraid , Jacob , my servant ; do not be dismayed , Israel , ” says the Lord. “ For I will bring you home again from distant lands , and your children will return from their exile.Israel will return to a life of peace and quiet , and no one will terrorize them .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	Áko Paul índa Bárnabas , éí ayóó át'éego bił ałghadazh'dit'áahgo bił na'ahíyádadzisti' , áko Paul áádóó Bárnabas índa náádaała' éí daal'aadii áádóó da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii Jerúsalemdi naháaztánígíí díí áhodoo'niidígíí baa nídazhdóot'įįł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ jidookahgo nídahodiinil .
PRED:	So Paul and Barnabas went with them with a great crowd , and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and the rest of the church who sat in Jerusalem to judge them .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas disagreed with them , arguing vehemently . Finally , the church decided to send Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem , accompanied by some local believers , to talk to the apostles and elders about this question .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	Áko Heziikáíyah éí hane' nidei'áhí naaltsoos haa deistsoozgo jííłta' , áádóó Heziikáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góde hajiyáago Bóhólníihii bidááhdóó nizhníłtsooz .
PRED:	And Hezekiah wrote a letter to them , and read it ; and Hezekiah went up to the house of the Lord , and put it before the Lord .
GOLD:	After Hezekiah received the letter from the messengers and read it , he went up to the Lord 's Temple and spread it out before the Lord .

ID:	2621
INPUT:	nidi éí t'óó átsééd nahjį' nizhdiní'ą́ , áádóó á naal'a'í ízh'diilyaago nihokáá' dine'é ahoolchíłígi át'éego ho'dizhchį́ .
PRED:	But he took away the covenant , and made a covenant as his servant , as he was born to the earth .
GOLD:	Instead , he gave up his divine privileges ; he took the humble position of a slaveand was born as a human being.When he appeared in human form ,

ID:	2622
INPUT:	Ákódzaago nahałtinígíí áádóó nílótsoh naałtinígíí índa ni'dilch'ilígíí áhodiilzee'go Féro éí bił bééhoozingo t'ah nááyówehígo ádił náá'ásiih ; bí áádóó bá nidaal'a'í bijéí nááyííłtł'is .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the rain and the pestilence stood down and stood before the ground , that the king saw how much more , and the heart of his servants .
GOLD:	But when Pharaoh saw that the rain , hail , and thunder had stopped , he and his officials sinned again , and Pharaoh again became stubborn .

ID:	2623
INPUT:	Doo honíyáanii wóshdę́ę'go dah diinááh . Bee ak'i'diitįįh bee ádinii kwííłní ,
PRED:	“ Go out from the beginning , ” he said to the understanding ,
GOLD:	“ Come in with me , ” she urges the simple.To those who lack good judgment , she says ,

ID:	2624
INPUT:	éí hastóí dahóyáanii dabizhé'é yę́ę bits'ą́ą́dóó yaa nidahasne' , áádóó t'áadoo deidínées'į́į' da .
PRED:	The old men declare the word of their fathers , and they did not look .
GOLD:	And it is confirmed by the reports of wise menwho have heard the same thing from their fathers —

ID:	2625
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad , k'ídinílchíidgo bits'in áádóó bitsį' bidinílchíidgo tídílééh , áko t'áá ninii'jį' níídóodzih .
PRED:	But now take your hand , and put it on his bones , and cut it off , and he will answer you . ”
GOLD:	But reach out and take away his health , and he will surely curse you to your face ! ”

ID:	2626
INPUT:	Jó , Christ t'áá aaníí shiyi'dę́ę́' yáłti'go nihił béédahodoozįįł . Háálá Christ doo adziil yee doo nihich'į' ááníił da , nidi nihitahgóó bibee adziilii yit'íní áyoolííł .
PRED:	For you will know that Christ is speaking in me . He will not come to you , but he will show his power among you .
GOLD:	I will give you all the proof you want that Christ speaks through me . Christ is not weak when he deals with you ; he is powerful among you .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí díí yee atínihidoolííł : nihigod áádóó nihijáád bikáá'góó naałniih łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii índa nihikétł'ááhdóó nihitsiit'áajį' nihaa didoolzhish .
PRED:	The Lord will punish you . He will punish you . He will send disease on your head and on your head .
GOLD:	The Lord will cover your knees and legs with incurable boils . In fact , you will be covered from head to foot .

ID:	2628
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ání , Ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaagóó nááda'jiiłniihii índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadiyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' dazhdiłidii éí Mó'ab kéyahgi ádajídingo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	And the Lord said , I will make the high places of Moab , and burn incense on the high places , and burn incense in the land of Moab .
GOLD:	“ I will put an end to Moab , ” says the Lord , “ for the people offer sacrifices at the pagan shrines and burn incense to their false gods .

ID:	2629
INPUT:	Éí bąą danihidziil le' , t'áadoo nihąą ninádahaka'í , háálá nihinaanish bideená nihik'idahozhdoodliił .
PRED:	So do n't be strong , because your work will be well with you .
GOLD:	But as for you , be strong and courageous , for your work will be rewarded . ”

ID:	2630
INPUT:	Hadásah yineesą́ągo éí hazhé'é yázhígo bitsi' Esther ałdó' wolyé , háálá bizhé'é áádóó bimá neezná . Ch'ikę́ę́h bizhą́ą́ naagháii t'óó dinilgááhí yee' áádóó nizhóní yee' , áko bizhé'é áádóó bimá neezná ; éí bąą Mórdiikai honeesą́ągo t'áá bí bitsi' jílį́įgo áhoolaa .
PRED:	And when she rose up , she called Esther the daughter of her father , the daughter of her father , for she was a young woman and a young woman , and a young woman came out , and she became her father 's daughter , and she became his daughter .
GOLD:	This man had a very beautiful and lovely young cousin , Hadassah , who was also called Esther . When her father and mother died , Mordecai adopted her into his family and raised her as his own daughter .

ID:	2631
INPUT:	Diné anaa' da'ał'íinii danohłíinii t'áá ánółtso , díí kin haal'áhígíí t'ááłáhídi binínáhkah doo . Ákódaaht'į́įgo hastą́ą́h jį́ adooleeł .
PRED:	All ye men of war shall come to one city , and ye shall do this same thing ; and it shall be six days .
GOLD:	You and your fighting men should march around the town once a day for six days .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	Ziilófehad bitsi'ké t'áá aaníígóó hadaasdzíí' ; t'áá aaníí bizhé'é yę́ę bik'is bitahdóó kéyah daahóó' dooígíí hataadidíí'aał , áko bizhé'é yę́ę bikéyah baa dadidíí'ááł .
PRED:	The daughters of Manasseh said to him , “ You shall give the inheritance of his father 's brothers , so that you may give them the land of their father . ”
GOLD:	“ The claim of the daughters of Zelophehad is legitimate . You must give them a grant of land along with their father 's relatives . Assign them the property that would have been given to their father .

ID:	2633
INPUT:	Jó , nidine'é Jéíkab ba'áłchíní yóó'adííní'ą́ , háálá ha'a'aahdę́ę́' doo t'áá aaníígóó nahagháii hwii' hadadeezbin áádóó Filístiya dine'é nahalingo náásgóó áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii danilį́ índa dé'éyóní ba'áłchíní yił da'ahótą' .
PRED:	For thou hast forsaken the house of Jacob , for they are full of truth , and they are full of truth ; and they are a prophet , and a stranger in their hand .
GOLD:	For the Lord has rejected his people , the descendants of Jacob , because they have filled their land with practices from the Eastand with sorcerers , as the Philistines do.They have made alliances with pagans .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	Nidi nihí hak'éí nohłíinii t'áádóo nídí dahodiyoołhééł ; dahodiyoołhééł biniyé nihí alą́ąjį' dahodoohsił áádóó índa diné t'áá ałtso dahodoosił .
PRED:	But you are to kill him , and you will kill him . You will kill him , and all the people .
GOLD:	You must put them to death ! Strike the first blow yourself , and then all the people must join in .

ID:	2635
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Summary of Asa 's Reign

ID:	2636
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' nihinanit'a'í díí saad yee haadzíí' . Ná nidaal'a'í t'áá íiyisí doo ákódaone' át'ée da .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Why have your lord speak these words ? Your servants do not do so . ”
GOLD:	“ What are you talking about ? ” the brothers responded . “ We are your servants and would never do such a thing !

ID:	2637
INPUT:	Adoogishjį' dį́į́' nídeezid hadziih , da' doósh dadohníi da ? Jó , nidi shí ánihidishní , Dadohhaałgo dáda'ak'ehgóó dadóh'į́į́' , háálá da'diigaii , áko k'ad agizhjį' ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	Do n't you say to the four months , ‘ Look , ' but I say to you , ‘ You are looking for yourselves , for the hour has come . ”
GOLD:	You know the saying , ‘ Four months between planting and harvest . ' But I say , wake up and look around . The fields are already ripe for harvest .

ID:	2638
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' nihich'į' hahásdzíí' , nidi bich'į' hoolzhish , hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' doo nihich'į' hanáádeesdzih da , nidi t'áá bééhózínígo aTaa' bee nihił hodeeshnih .
PRED:	I have spoken to you all these parable , but I will not speak to you a parable , but I will tell you the Father .
GOLD:	“ I have spoken of these matters in figures of speech , but soon I will stop speaking figuratively and will tell you plainly all about the Father .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	Háálá nik'i hodii'áanii t'ah naat'áanii bich'į' nił yi'ashgo hazhó'ó bił aha'díí'nít'ą́ągo néididoochił , doodaii' éí ánihwii'aahii yaa nidoolóós , áádóó ánihwii'aahii yah i'iiníiłii yaa nidoołtééł , áko índa yah i'iiníiłii yah andoołt'eeł .
PRED:	For the prince shall bring him to the king , and he shall bring him to the judge , or to the judge , and the judge shall bring him into the house , and he shall bring him into the house .
GOLD:	When you are on the way to court with your accuser , try to settle the matter before you get there . Otherwise , your accuser may drag you before the judge , who will hand you over to an officer , who will throw you into prison .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	Ałtso niyázhníłti'go télii biyaats'iin nahgóó ajiyííłxan . Áko ákwe'é Réí<unk> hai hoolyée doo , jidííniid .
PRED:	When he had finished speaking , he threw him into the head of the donkey . And he called the name of Ramah .
GOLD:	When he finished his boasting , he threw away the jawbone ; and the place was named Jawbone Hill .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	Jiiháshafat éí Ófer kéyahgóó óola bíká dazhdooł'oł biniyé Társhishdóó tsinaa'eeł ál'ínígi át'éego ádajiilaa , nidi t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ dah dazhdiił'éel da , háálá t'áá Ííziyan-gííber kin haal'á binaashiidi tsinaa'eeł hats'ą́ą́' nidahaastǫ' .
PRED:	But Jehoshaphat had made the gold of gold , and they have made them like gold , but they have not gone ; for the ark of the ship was broken , and the ark was broken .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat also built a fleet of trading ships to sail to Ophir for gold . But the ships never set sail , for they met with disaster in their home port of Ezion-geber .

ID:	2642
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́įdi ádidííniił , Bóhólníihii bich'į' ahééh nínízin ; bízhi' yínízhíigo baa honiih ; diné bitahgóó yaa naagháii baa yáníłti'go bízhi' ts'ídá ayóó át'éii baa hólne' .
PRED:	On that day you will say to him , “ Give thanks to the Lord in the morning , praise him in the morning , and tell his great name in the midst of the people .
GOLD:	In that wonderful day you will sing : “ Thank the Lord ! Praise his name ! Tell the nations what he has done.Let them know how mighty he is !

ID:	2643
INPUT:	Kin ál'į́ dayiichįįhígíí índa kin ál'į́ át'é danízinii éí tsé hadahaasnilígíí áádóó kin bá daní'áhígíí índa bita' nidaaz'áhígíí yá tsin neheeshjíí' nideidiyoołnihgo Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii éí kin bąąh nida<unk> xǫ'ígóó hasht'éédeidoodlííł biniyé béeso yaa deiznil .
PRED:	He made the house of anger , and the houses of the house , and the houses of the house , and the houses , and the houses of the house of the king of Judah , to make a money for them .
GOLD:	They hired carpenters and builders , who purchased finished stone for the walls and timber for the rafters and beams . They restored what earlier kings of Judah had allowed to fall into ruin .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' nahadlá dooleełgi bee na'nitin
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	Instructions about Worship

ID:	2645
INPUT:	Áádóó asdzání éí tó hahadleeh hahasdzánígíí yik'é'ésti'go naadą́ą́' haaltseedgo yik'i neisas , áko doo bééhózin da .
PRED:	And the woman had a well covered with her , and she did not know that she had been covered with her .
GOLD:	The man 's wife put a cloth over the top of the well and scattered grain on it to dry in the sun ; so no one suspected they were there .

ID:	2646
INPUT:	Ákondi yóó'adashidoo'ą́ągo diyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' nidahohłáá nít'éé' ; éí bąą doo yisdánáánihideeshnił da .
PRED:	But you turned away from me and served other gods ; therefore I will not save you .
GOLD:	Yet you have abandoned me and served other gods . So I will not rescue you anymore .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	Asdzání jílíinii jidéesxéelgo t'áá aaníí óhojíłníihgo íhwiizhdooł'ááł .
PRED:	And the woman shall speak and speak , and he shall give her authority .
GOLD:	Women should learn quietly and submissively .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	Áko deenásts'aa' hadaałt'éii dibé bitahdę́ę́' nídidíílóosgo bą́ą́h aníłínígíí bik'ehgo doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii át'éego náá'iiłniihii bich'į' kózhdoolííł , áko náá'iiłniihii éí há bee k'énáhoodǫǫłgo nááhániihii t'áadoo baa ákozníziní doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdígíí biniyé há néidiyoołnihgo há yóó'anídidoot'ááł .
PRED:	“ If you bring a ram out of the flock , then the priest shall bring it to the priest , and the priest shall make atonement for him , and the priest shall make atonement for his sin .
GOLD:	For a guilt offering , you must bring to the priest your own ram with no defects , or you may buy one of equal value . Through this process the priest will purify you from your unintentional sin , making you right with the Lord , and you will be forgiven .

ID:	2649
INPUT:	Áko John bá naal'a'í dah nídiit'áazhgo , Jesus éí áłah ílínígíí yich'į' John baa ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní , Ha'át'íishą' dadínóoł'įįłgo honoojíígóó nidasoohkai ? Lók'aa' níyol bighádígíí daats'í ?
PRED:	John 's servant went out and said to Jesus , “ Why do you look at the wilderness ? How did you see the wind ? ”
GOLD:	After John 's disciples left , Jesus began talking about him to the crowds . “ What kind of man did you go into the wilderness to see ? Was he a weak reed , swayed by every breath of wind ?

ID:	2650
INPUT:	bii' tá'ádígisí óola bee ádaalyaii tádiin , bii' tá'ádígisí náánáła' béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaii ałdó' dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan neeznáá áádóó łeets'aa' náádaała' éí daamiilgo ádanéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the sea of gold , thirty silver , and of them that were of silver , four hundred and ten thousand , and of them that were of them .
GOLD:	gold bowls30silver bowls410other items1,000

ID:	2651
INPUT:	Íífreiyim éí béégashiitsa'ii yízhǫǫdígíí nahojílingo oolch'ííh hoł ayóó áhoot'éego bąą hazéédí'déeshtį́į́ł . Íífreiyim azaatł'óól bee nahashło' doo ; Júdah éí nihozhdiyoołdlał ; Jéíkab t'áá bí ádá ak'i ni'dooshoł .
PRED:	Ephraim is like a flock of a flock , and I will scatter the yoke , and I will cut off the yoke of Ephraim , and Ephraim will be broken , and there will be no one there .
GOLD:	“ Israel is like a trained heifer treading out the grain — an easy job she loves.But I will put a heavy yoke on her tender neck.I will force Judah to pull the plowand Israel to break up the hard ground .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	Nidi Diné Silį́į'ii bits'ádi'nílíidgo índa diyingo nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso yił yíkaigo , áadi índa bikáá'dóó nahat'áii bits' ádi'nílíidii yikáá'dóó dah dínóodaał .
PRED:	But the Son of Man shall come with him , and with all his angels , and they shall come from his throne .
GOLD:	“ But when the Son of Man comes in his glory , and all the angels with him , then he will sit upon his glorious throne .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá ádzíłtso Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ááłá'í ch'iyáán dílyinígíí dajííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	All of them ate bread from God .
GOLD:	All of them ate the same spiritual food ,

ID:	2654
INPUT:	Záíyangi Bóhólníihii ayóó át'éii nilį́ . Ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso yiláahgo ayóó át'éii nilį́ .
PRED:	The Lord is great in Zion ; he is greater than all the nations .
GOLD:	The Lord sits in majesty in Jerusalem , exalted above all the nations .

ID:	2655
INPUT:	Éran éí Bóhólníihii binááł bikáá' náá'iiniihí si'áníjį' ch'ééjídáahgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí bá k'ééhoodǫǫłii áńjiil'įįh doo , áádóó dóola yázhí índa tł'ízí bidił ła' náázhdiikáahgo éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bidee' dį́į́'góó deez'áhígíí bąąh áńjiil'įįh doo .
PRED:	And Aaron shall come out before the altar before the Lord , and make atonement for the altar , and he shall make atonement for the bull , and a ram , and the four horns of the altar .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron will come out to purify the altar that stands before the Lord . He will do this by taking some of the blood from the bull and the goat and putting it on each of the horns of the altar .

ID:	2656
INPUT:	Ásher dine'é nilíinii bidine'é náás ahoolchíiłii éí ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí dabizhé'é yę́ę yada'áłchíní danilį́įgo éí dabi'déélta'ii dabízhi' bik'ehgo diné naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso ana'al'į́ yídaneel'áanii
PRED:	Of the tribe of Asher , by their families , by their families , by their fathers ' houses , by their fathers ' houses , according to their names , from twenty years old and twenty years old and upward , all who were able to go up to war .
GOLD:	Asher41,500

ID:	2657
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo bibee até'él'íinii doo yich'į' ninihidiní'ą́ą da , nidi nihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ bee yisdá'iildéehii nihee nidahwiileeh .
PRED:	For God is not able to give us the wrath of his wrath , but we have the salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	For God chose to save us through our Lord Jesus Christ , not to pour out his anger on us .

ID:	2658
INPUT:	doo nidi ła'da ak'i'diitįįh da , doo nidi ła'da Diyin God bééhodeesįįł nízingo háidéez'į́'í da .
PRED:	But no one can understand , but no one will know God .
GOLD:	No one is truly wise ; no one is seeking God .

ID:	2659
INPUT:	Áko tł'óó'dę́ę́' wóne'di dáń'dítį́híjį' náwóne'di ahééhool'áhí góne' naakigo hooghan éí sin yee dahataałígíí bá haz'ą́ ; náhookǫsjí yah a'atiinígíí éí bich'ijígo ła' hooghan , éí shádi'áahjigo ch'é'étiin ; ła' ha'a'aahjí yah a'atiin bíighahgi náhookǫsjigo ch'é'étiin .
PRED:	And the doors of the gate of the gate of the gate of the gate , the gate of the north , and the gate of the gate toward the east side , toward the east side .
GOLD:	Inside the inner courtyard were two rooms , one beside the north gateway , facing south , and the other beside the south gateway , facing north .

ID:	2660
INPUT:	Áádóó dé'éyóní ł a' nihitahgi t'óó átsééd kééhat'į́įgo éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii íidoolíiłgo bik'ehgo hoogáałii t'áá bik'ehgo ádoonííł ; dé'éyóní , doodaii' diné kéyahgi yizhchíinii t'áá aheełt'éego bá bik'ehgo hoogáałii t'ááłá'ígíí nihee hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	And if a stranger dwell among you , he shall keep the Passover of the Lord , according to the commandment of the stranger , or for the stranger that is in the land shall be for you .
GOLD:	And if foreigners living among you want to celebrate the Passover to the Lord , they must follow these same decrees and regulations . The same laws apply both to native-born Israelites and to the foreigners living among you . ”

ID:	2661
INPUT:	Azhé'é danilíinii ch'il na'atł'o'ii dadík'ǫ́zhígíí dayooldéél índa áłchíní biwoo' deidínéestseed , diníigo , díí saad nawólta' Ízrel dine'é bikéyah bee háánídzihígíí , ha'át'íí ááhdiní ?
PRED:	The fathers ate wine , and killed children and children , saying , “ What is the words of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why do you quote this proverb concerning the land of Israel : ‘ The parents have eaten sour grapes , but their children 's mouths pucker at the taste ' ?

ID:	2662
INPUT:	Tónteel índa tó ditáanii néíníłtseígíí ánít'į́ áádóó bik'é niná'ílyáii tónteel ditáanii bii'góó bá ch'ééhonít'i'go íinilaaígíí ánít'į́ .
PRED:	Thou hast made the waters of the sea , and the waters which thou hast made for them , and hast brought them out of the sea , which thou hast made for them .
GOLD:	Are you not the same today , the one who dried up the sea , making a path of escape through the depthsso that your people could cross over ?

ID:	2663
INPUT:	Áko ałk'éí danilíinii daadziihígíí t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo ba'áłchíní bídaóltą'go t'áá sahdii , bida'asdzą́ą́ t'áá sahdii yínííł danilį́įgo atínídadindleeh doo .
PRED:	And all the men of his family shall mourn for him , and for all his wives , and for all his wives .
GOLD:	Each of the surviving clans from Judah will mourn separately , and with the husbands separate from their wives .

ID:	2664
INPUT:	Shikágí éí deijį́į'go nahgóó ahi<unk> ; kǫ' hózhdínił nahalingo shits'in daneezgai .
PRED:	He broke my bones away in the evening , and my bones are like a burning fire .
GOLD:	My skin has turned dark , and my bones burn with fever .

ID:	2665
INPUT:	Nidi ts'ídá ałtso ádadoołdįįł : Het dine'é áádóó Ámor dine'é , Kéínan dine'é áádóó Píírez dine'é , Háíva dine'é índa Jííbas dine'é ákódadoohłííł ; jó , ákót'éego Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihich'į' yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	But you shall destroy it , and you shall destroy it , the Hittites , the Hivites , the Hivites , and the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , as the Lord your God commanded you .
GOLD:	You must completely destroy the Hittites , Amorites , Canaanites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites , just as the Lord your God has commanded you .

ID:	2666
INPUT:	Áko índa tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł ada'doołkał biniyé baa hozhníłtį́ . [ Áko Jesus dayiiłtsoodgo dah deidiilóóz . ]
PRED:	And he brought him to the cross , that he might be crucified . And they led him away .
GOLD:	Then Pilate turned Jesus over to them to be crucified.So they took Jesus away .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	Nilą́ąjį' yisháałgo nidahoneeshtł'iizhii k'ídahodeeshdǫǫł ; béésh łitsoii dáń'dítį́hí nihideeshtih áádóó béésh nitł'izii bee dá'deelkaalígíí k'ídeeshtih ;
PRED:	I will go ahead of you , and I will break the gates of bronze , and I will break the bars of iron , and the bars of iron .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will go before you , Cyrus , and level the mountains.I will smash down gates of bronzeand cut through bars of iron .

ID:	2668
INPUT:	Nizhé'é índa nimá nił nilį́įgo íínísin ; díí bee haz'áanii alą́ąjį' bee nihoot'áanii bił niilyáii át'é ,
PRED:	Give your father and mother ; this law is the first law .
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother. ” This is the first commandment with a promise :

ID:	2669
INPUT:	Áádóó dabíínáłígíí éí níłch'i bida'iiníziinii bii' hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę hadaałt'é násdlį́'ígíí yee ahił dahoolne' .
PRED:	And he told them all that had been healed , that they had been healed .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	2670
INPUT:	Da'diłt'ohii háni' dayiił'a'go hak'ee dadiniihgo dahółt'óóh ,
PRED:	They hate him with their swords , and bow at his feet .
GOLD:	Archers attacked him savagely ; they shot at him and harassed him .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	Áádóó ná naal'a'í éí nidine'é nídininilígíí yitahgi naaghá ; dine'é t'óó ahayóigo doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą' da .
PRED:	And he is among thy servant , among thy people , and there are many people , and there are no number .
GOLD:	And here I am in the midst of your own chosen people , a nation so great and numerous they can not be counted !

ID:	2672
INPUT:	Réíhab , ałjiłnii nilíinii , bi'oodlą' bik'ehgo doo ak'eh dahół'íinii t'áadoo yitah daaztsą́ą da , háálá k'é nídzingo naalchi'í yah ayíí'eezh .
PRED:	She was not dead by faith , prostitute , who did not obey the voice of her , because he brought her into the house .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Rahab the prostitute was not destroyed with the people in her city who refused to obey God . For she had given a friendly welcome to the spies .

ID:	2673
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é daadzíi'ii tábąąhgóó kéyahígíí daabí dooleeł . Éí kéyahígíí yits'ą́ą́dóó da'ayą́ą dooleeł . E'e'áahgo Áshkelan kin haal'áhígi danjah doo . Háálá haDiyin God Bóhólníihii haa áhodool<unk> go yisnááh dajílíinii nahjį' kwíidoolíiłgo daa<unk> nít'éé' yę́ę hóó' nídadoodleełgo íidoolííł .
PRED:	And the remnant of Judah shall possess the border of the sea , and they shall take away from it ; for the Lord their God shall bring away the captivity of the captivity .
GOLD:	The remnant of the tribe of Judah will pasture there.They will rest at night in the abandoned houses in Ashkelon.For the Lord their God will visit his people in kindnessand restore their prosperity again .

ID:	2674
INPUT:	Shí doo hashké nísdzin da ; ch'il da'dishahii áádóó hosh dadeeníinii anadashił'į́įgo bik'i nideeshaałgo adahodideeshk'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	I will not be angry with them ; I will burn my thorns and thorns .
GOLD:	My anger will be gone.If I find briers and thorns growing , I will attack them ; I will burn them up —

ID:	2675
INPUT:	Wóne'é hódahooł'aahii t'áá éí yínináádahódééłkid .
PRED:	And the disciples asked Jesus , saying ,
GOLD:	Later , when he was alone with his disciples in the house , they brought up the subject again .

ID:	2676
INPUT:	Ákódzaago halį́į́' ada'niiltsąądgo , jó'akon , deenásts'aa' daashtłizhígíí áádóó daastł'inígíí áádóó áhánígo daastł'inígíí t'éiyá nináda'niyo'go baa nei<unk> .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when they had conceived , that , behold , the ram was broken , and the wall , and the wall , and the walls thereof .
GOLD:	“ One time during the mating season , I had a dream and saw that the male goats mating with the females were streaked , speckled , and spotted .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' nihijéí daołtł'is ? Jó , Ííjip dine'é áádóó Féro bijéí dayííłtł'is yę́ęgi ádaoht'į́ . Shą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii hatahgóó t'óó bik'eda'ayóii yaa naayáago Ízrel dine'é bééda'dzisnii'go dah diiná .
PRED:	Why do you think that you did n't think about the Egyptians and Egypt ? Do n't you think that the Lord has done miracles among the Israelites .
GOLD:	Do n't be stubborn and rebellious as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were . By the time God was finished with them , they were eager to let Israel go .

ID:	2678
INPUT:	Shá nidahałt'i'iísh doo shináhookah da , índa shá nídahałchįįhiísh doo áłahjį' yish'į́į da ?
PRED:	Do n't I go away from my disease ? Do n't I always be angry ? ”
GOLD:	I am surrounded by mockers.I watch how bitterly they taunt me .

ID:	2679
INPUT:	Áko ats'áho'deet'ání góne' t'áá bik'izhnitéhígíí índa t'áá bik'i názhnídaahígíí t'óó baa'ih neheleeh doo .
PRED:	And he shall be unclean in the midst of the sanctuary , and upon all that he hath poured out , and upon him shall be unclean .
GOLD:	Anything on which the woman lies or sits during the time of her period will be unclean .

ID:	2680
INPUT:	Áko da'jiyą́ągo bááh néidii'ą́ągo yik'i sodoolzingo niyiizti' índa hataiznii'go áhodííniid , Nídahidooh'aahgo daohsą́ ; díí shits'íís át'é .
PRED:	And when they were eating , he took the bread and gave it to them , and gave it to them , saying , Take it , eat , and eat it . This is my body .
GOLD:	As they were eating , Jesus took some bread and blessed it . Then he broke it in pieces and gave it to the disciples , saying , “ Take it , for this is my body . ”

ID:	2681
INPUT:	Bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ą́ą dooleełígíí dį́į'go naanídaaz'áhígóó bee niłdzil dooleełii éí dį́į́' , éí bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ą́ą dooleełígíí bił t'áá ła' bizhi'eego ályaa .
PRED:	The four corners of the four corners were four corners , and the four corners of the four corners of the sea .
GOLD:	There were handles at each of the four corners of the carts , and these , too , were cast as one unit with the cart .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph bik'isóó áyidííniid , T'áá shǫǫdí , shíighahjį' ninohkááh . Áko hwíighahjį' nijíkaigo áhodííniid , Shí , Jóseph nihik'is , Ííjip kéyahjį' nidahisoołnii'ígíí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	Joseph said to his brothers , “ Please come near to me ! ” So they came near and said to him , “ I am your brother Joseph , who is in Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ Please , come closer , ” he said to them . So they came closer . And he said again , “ I am Joseph , your brother , whom you sold into slavery in Egypt .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	<unk> 'ii'níiłgi yiltééháádóó yóó'ábi'diil'įįhgo ła'da yik'i ha'ídées'į́į́' .
PRED:	He has cast out his hand from the hand of a thief , and he has hid his hand from his hand .
GOLD:	When they are carried to the grave , an honor guard keeps watch at their tomb .

ID:	2684
INPUT:	Eltólad , Bét<unk> , Hórmah ,
PRED:	Bethel , Bethel , Bethel ,
GOLD:	Eltolad , Bethul , Hormah ,

ID:	2685
INPUT:	Áko náhookǫsjigo Enshíímesh tó háálį́į́góó nááhodeesdzo , éí áádóó Geláílath haz'ánígóó Adámim báhátis áádóó Rúben biye' Bóhan bitsé si'ání góyaa hodeesdzo ,
PRED:	And the border went up to the north side of Hamath , and the border of Reuben went down to the stone of the Lord , the son of Reuben ,
GOLD:	From En-rogel the boundary proceeded in a northerly direction and came to En-shemesh and on to Geliloth ( which is across from the slopes of Adummim ) . Then it went down to the Stone of Bohan . ( Bohan was Reuben 's son . )

ID:	2686
INPUT:	Áádóó Adonáíjah baa jiiskaígíí t'áá ádzíłtso nídadzisdzííd , áko nízhdiijée'go t'ááłá'í jinítínígo anídajiiskai .
PRED:	And Adonijah was afraid of all that Adonijah had done , and they rose up , and each man went to him .
GOLD:	Then all of Adonijah 's guests jumped up in panic from the banquet table and quickly scattered .

ID:	2687
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii bibi'oh adidilyéehii ch'é'étiingi dah yildohii dah diildogo chérabim bikáa'jį' niildoh .
PRED:	Then the glory of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) went up from the door of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) , and the cherubim lifted up upon them .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord moved out from the entrance of the Temple and hovered above the cherubim .

ID:	2688
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí ił ééhózin yik'i déez'į́į'go yaa áhályą́ , nidi diné nináda'dii'aahii bizaad doo ílį́į́góó áyoolííł .
PRED:	The eyes of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ] makes the way of the wise .
GOLD:	The Lord preserves those with knowledge , but he ruins the plans of the treacherous .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Íífreiyim ba'áłchíní áádóó naakidi nánálígíí jiiłtsą́ ; Manáseh biye' Méíkir wolyéii ba'áłchíní éí Jóseph náhodiyiiłjéé' .
PRED:	Joseph saw two sons of Ephraim , and two sons of Manasseh , the family of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh .
GOLD:	He lived to see three generations of descendants of his son Ephraim , and he lived to see the birth of the children of Manasseh 's son Makir , whom he claimed as his own .

ID:	2690
INPUT:	K'ad Diyin God yá'át'éehii baa nideinohkąąhgo daats'í nihaa jooba' doo . Ákódaat'éii náádahoołnii'ígíí daats'í binahjį' nihaa jooba' doo ? ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Now , if you pray for good to God , will you be kind to you because of these things ? ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	“ Go ahead , beg God to be merciful to you ! But when you bring that kind of offering , why should he show you any favor at all ? ” asks the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	Áko Abáíjam bíyoołkááłdą́ą́' Riihobówam áádóó Jerobówam t'áá áłahjį' yił anaa' hółǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And there was war between Rehoboam and Rehoboam all his days .
GOLD:	There was war between Abijam and Jeroboam throughout Abijam 's reign .

ID:	2692
INPUT:	nidi éí kéyahgóó yisnááh ádaho'diilyaa yę́ędi hajéítł'áahdi łahgo át'éego tsíńdazdookosgo áádóó dahasnánígíí bikéyahdi nich'į' nída'jookąąhgo kódajiníigo , Nida'ayeelzíí' áádóó doo ádahwiilyą́ą́góó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádeiit'įįd ;
PRED:	But if they turn back from the captivity of the captivity of the captivity , and pray to him in the land of the captivity , saying , We have sinned , and have done evil .
GOLD:	But in that land of exile , they might turn to you in repentance and pray , ‘ We have sinned , done evil , and acted wickedly . '

ID:	2693
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , diné léi' bíla' t'ááłáhíjí bąąh dah haz'ą́ą́ léi' ákwe'é naagháá lá . Áádóó , Háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne'ésh nááhodi'doo<unk> go bee haz'ą́ ? daaníigo nidahódééłkid , éí yee hak'i dahodidoo'ááł yiniyé ádaaní .
PRED:	And behold , there was a man who had a hand on the right side of the Sabbath . And they asked him , “ Is there a place for the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	where he noticed a man with a deformed hand . The Pharisees asked Jesus , “ Does the law permit a person to work by healing on the Sabbath ? ” ( They were hoping he would say yes , so they could bring charges against him . )

ID:	2694
INPUT:	Áádóó k'os níyizii hadaaldohgo éí Bóhólníihii yii'jį' hadahóóle'go níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'éédą́ą'gi yiizį'go Éran áádóó Míriyam yíká ádííniid , áko t'áá ájíłah áajį' ch'ízhní'áázh .
PRED:	And when the cloud lifted up their cloud , they went up to the tent of meeting , and called Aaron and Aaron and Aaron , and they went out to meet them .
GOLD:	Then the Lord descended in the pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the Tabernacle . “ Aaron and Miriam ! ” he called , and they stepped forward .

ID:	2695
INPUT:	John haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Diné t'áadoo baa doodiłí da , t'áá hazhó'ó yá'ąąshdę́ę́' t'éí ba'doodił .
PRED:	John answered , “ No one can trust in anyone , but the blood of heaven will be given to him . ”
GOLD:	John replied , “ No one can receive anything unless God gives it from heaven .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	Haa'íyee' Christ bizaad lą'ígo bee ákidaahdláa le' , bee hódzáanii t'áá ałtso bee ahidiníłnáago nida'ahinohtin , índa chánah áda'ahíínółzin , áádóó Diyin God bizaad biyi'dóó sin , áádóó sin bee Diyin God baa ha'niihii , índa ajooba' nihijéí bii' hólǫ́ǫgo Níłch'i Diyinii k'ehgo sin bee Bóhólníihii bich'į' dahohtaał .
PRED:	Let us serve in the word of Christ Jesus , and teach us all wisdom , and fear in the word of God , and in the heart of God , and in the heart of his God , and in the heart of the Spirit of our God .
GOLD:	Let the message about Christ , in all its richness , fill your lives . Teach and counsel each other with all the wisdom he gives . Sing psalms and hymns and spiritual songs to God with thankful hearts .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	Nihí shik'ídahidoohkah , ní Bóhólníihii áádóó yisnááh danohłį́ yę́ędóó nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo danihíí' yę́ę nihíí' nídadoodleełgo ádeeshłííł áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó índa bił dah nahaz'ą́ą́góó yisnááh danohłį́į dooleeł biniyé dah danihidíníiłkaadídóó áajį' áłah ánánihideeshdlííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	You will find me , ” says the Lord , “ and I will bring you away from captivity , and I will bring you back to captivity , and you will be a captivity among the nations .
GOLD:	I will be found by you , ” says the Lord . “ I will end your captivity and restore your fortunes . I will gather you out of the nations where I sent you and will bring you home again to your own land . ”

ID:	2698
INPUT:	Nidi da'iinołch'į́įdgo nihii' nidahodi<unk> ládą́ą́' áádóó ałch'ą́ą́h nidaah'na' ládą́ą́' , t'áadoo ádaa dahoh'niihí , t'áá aaníinii t'áadoo bik'ijį' danihiyooch'ídí .
PRED:	But if you are filled with jealousy , and do n't forget what you say , ‘ Do n't be afraid of the truth . '
GOLD:	But if you are bitterly jealous and there is selfish ambition in your heart , do n't cover up the truth with boasting and lying .

ID:	2699
INPUT:	áádóó náádahidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii ádaat'éego éí béégashii naakigo , deenásts'aa' ashdla'go , tł'ízíchǫǫh ashdla'go , dibé yázhí biką'ii ła' béédááhaii ashdla'go , díí éí Gídiyónai biye' Abáídan nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	and two oxen , five male goats , five male goats , five male goats , five male lambs a year old . This was the offering of Gideon .
GOLD:	For a peace offering he brought two bulls , five rams , five male goats , and five one-year-old male lambs . This was the offering brought by Abidan son of Gideoni .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	Áko Jesus haadzíi'go ání , K'ad Diné Silį́į'ii ayóó át'éii ádoolníiłgo baa hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ Now the Son of Man is near . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Now the time has come for the Son of Man to enter into his glory .

ID:	2701
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus haadzíi'go ashiiké áyidííniid , Yínóhkeedígíí doo nihił bééhózingóó ádóhní . <unk> dlį́įłgo <unk> káanii daats'í doohdlį́įłgo bínooł'ą́ ? [ Áádóó bee shidi'doolzįhii daats'í bee nihidi'doolzįhgo bínooł'ą́ ? ] Áko , Bíniil'ą́ą́ lą́ą , hodííniid .
PRED:	Jesus answered and said to them , “ You do n't know what you ask . Do you want to drink ? ” So he answered , “ We are baptized . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus answered by saying to them , “ You do n't know what you are asking ! Are you able to drink from the bitter cup of suffering I am about to drink ? ” “ Oh yes , ” they replied , “ we are able ! ”

ID:	2702
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' néidiłi' doo ; éí ch'iyáán didlidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii át'ée doo ; ak'ah t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii bí .
PRED:	And the priest shall burn it on the altar ; it shall be an offering made by fire ; all the oil of the Lord shall be holy .
GOLD:	and the priest will burn them on the altar . It is a special gift of food , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . All the fat belongs to the Lord .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	Íílam ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii ła' : Matanáíyah , Zekaráíyah , Jiiháíyel , Ábdai , Jériimath índa Iiláíyah .
PRED:	And of the sons of Elam : Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , and Zechariah .
GOLD:	From the family of Elam : Mattaniah , Zechariah , Jehiel , Abdi , Jeremoth , and Elijah .

ID:	2704
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus áhodííniid , Iiyehii t'ah hoł naakaigo iigehgi nidahaaskaígíísh yínííł danilį́į doo ? Nidi beidoołkááł , iiyehii hats'ą́ą́' nídidooltéełgo índa dahodísingo doo da'ayą́ą da doo .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Do you want to go with those who are with him ? But when the time comes , they will take away their wealth , and they will not eat . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Do wedding guests mourn while celebrating with the groom ? Of course not . But someday the groom will be taken away from them , and then they will fast .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	Áko diné ándaha'áii áłah nilínígíí bits'ą́ą́' dashdiikaigo , Jesus bízhi' biniinaa doo ił ídlį́ bik'ee ti'dahodzooznii'ígi bą́ą́h da'jílį́įgo hąąh tsíhodeeskézígíí baa hoł dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	And the multitude departed from them , and were glad because of the name of Jesus , because of the name of Jesus .
GOLD:	The apostles left the high council rejoicing that God had counted them worthy to suffer disgrace for the name of Jesus .

ID:	2706
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Damáskas kin haal'áádóó dajílíinii táadi , doodaii' dį́įdi bee haz'áanii k'ídajizti'go biniinaa dooshą' léi' t'áadoo atíháshłééh lá , háálá béésh bee ha'altsééd nahalingo Gíliyad dine'é ádajííł'įįd .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish the people of Damascus and Damascus for four sins . I will not punish them because they did to the people of Gilead . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Damascus have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They beat down my people in Gileadas grain is threshed with iron sledges .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	Ná dahalne'í shik'ijį' danilį́įgo ánáádlííł , áádóó shik'ijį' nánáháchįįhígíí t'óó hoonaał ; ana'í ániidiígíí shich'į' ałnáá<unk> nił .
PRED:	Your servants turn again against me , and the fierce anger is at the end of time .
GOLD:	Again and again you witness against me.You pour out your growing anger on meand bring fresh armies against me .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	Dé'éyóní danilíinii t'áá bí shiyaajį' ni'ídii'nííł ; t'áá dashidiits'į́hí shik'eh dahół'į́ .
PRED:	The stranger shall come near to me ; they shall hear me , and hear me .
GOLD:	Foreign nations cringe before me ; as soon as they hear of me , they submit .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	Ch'éénídzííd , Déborah , ch'éénídzííd ! Ch'éénídzííd , sin ła' bee hótaał , ch'éénídzííd ! Nídiidááh , Abínowam biye' Bérak yinílyéii , dasíníłná danilíinii dah dii'éésh .
PRED:	Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! ”
GOLD:	“ Wake up , Deborah , wake up ! Wake up , wake up , and sing a song ! Arise , Barak ! Lead your captives away , son of Abinoam !

ID:	2710
INPUT:	Diné náánáła' bich'į'go ájít'ée dooleełgi bee na'nitin
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Advice about Widows , Elders , and Slaves

ID:	2711
INPUT:	Éí bąągo ádííniid , Doo nihits'ádínéeshkał da , nidi nihooshk'iizh góne' nihaa anída'ajiłígi át'éego hóyée'go nihich'į' nidahwiiłnáa doo , áádóó bidiyin dabidi'níinii łoh nihá nánídlį́įgo bizahohkáah doo .
PRED:	Therefore he said , “ I will not drive you out of your hand , but you will be cursed in your hand , and you will be a trap for your gods . ”
GOLD:	So now I declare that I will no longer drive out the people living in your land . They will be thorns in your sides , and their gods will be a constant temptation to you . ”

ID:	2712
INPUT:	díí dine'é Jerúsalemgi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin biyi' nááda'di'yoołnih biniyé ákóde eekai ládą́ą́' , díí diné łahgo áńdeiniidzį́į'go yídahółníihii Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Riihobówam yikéé' dah nídiisą́ągo shí dashdiyoołhéełgo Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Riihobówam yikéé' dah nínáádidookah .
PRED:	The people of Judah went up to offer sacrifices in Jerusalem to offer sacrifices in the Lord 's temple , and the leaders of Judah followed Rehoboam king of Judah .
GOLD:	When these people go to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices at the Temple of the Lord , they will again give their allegiance to King Rehoboam of Judah . They will kill me and make him their king instead . ”

ID:	2713
INPUT:	Áádóó Áman dine'é éí Síriya dine'é danéechéehgo dayiiłtsą́ągo , bí ałdó' Abísheiyai yits'ą́ąjį' dadínéezhchą́ą'go , kin haal'áajį' yah anídahaazhjéé' . Áko Jó'ab éí Áman dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ą́ą́' dah nízhdiikaigo Jerúsalemgi níjíkai .
PRED:	When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled from them , they fled from them , and fled from the city . So Joab returned from the Ammonites .
GOLD:	And when the Ammonites saw the Arameans running , they ran from Abishai and retreated into the city . After the battle was over , Joab returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	2714
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bí'ídadínóołnánígíí łá'í nootínígo díí jį́ dahinohná .
PRED:	But every man that ye shall do unto the Lord thy God , that ye may do this day .
GOLD:	But all of you who were faithful to the Lord your God are still alive today — every one of you .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é ábidiní , Nihí t'áá háiida , doodaii' niha'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii éí diné bits'íís daaztsą́ągo yee ádoolchxǫ'go , doodaii' háájída nízaadgóó naagháago éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii t'áá íidoolííł .
PRED:	And the children of Israel said unto them , If any man die , or thy seed shall be unclean , or of his house shall he make the Passover unto the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : If any of the people now or in future generations are ceremonially unclean at Passover time because of touching a dead body , or if they are on a journey and can not be present at the ceremony , they may still celebrate the Lord 's Passover .

ID:	2716
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii báháchįįhgo náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí biyi' nahodi'ni'go ánínígíí nahalin , nidi yee ach'ooníinii éí dahtoo' ch'il bąąh haleehígíí nahalin .
PRED:	As a king 's anger is like a lion , but his friend is like the morning .
GOLD:	The king 's anger is like a lion 's roar , but his favor is like dew on the grass .

ID:	2717
INPUT:	nidi t'ááłá'í nootínígo diné nihinaalte' índa asdzání nihinaalte' danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę shónídeisołt'e'go nihinaalte' áńdaohdlaago shits'ą́ąjį' noojée'go shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó ádaohłaa . Éí ádeinízinígíí bik'ehgo béédadoochid nít'éé' , nidi k'ad éí nihik'eh náádahół'į́į dooleeł biniyé nihinaalte' ánáádaohdlaa .
PRED:	But when all of you were slaves and female slaves and female slaves , you sent them away from me . But now you did what you have done . But now you would obey my name .
GOLD:	But now you have shrugged off your oath and defiled my name by taking back the men and women you had freed , forcing them to be slaves once again .

ID:	2718
INPUT:	T'áá éí bijį́ nizhdilt'éego Eméíyas hoolyéego kin sinilígóó joo'ash , éí Jerúsalemdóó tsosts'idi daats'í tsin sitą́ ánízah ,
PRED:	And it came to pass on that day , that he went up to the city , that was in Jerusalem , seven hundred cubits .
GOLD:	That same day two of Jesus ' followers were walking to the village of Emmaus , seven miles from Jerusalem .

ID:	2719
INPUT:	Héímath kin haal'áádóó índa Árpad kin haal'áádóó dabidiyinii éí háájí ? Séfarvéíyim kin haal'áádóó dabidiyinii éí háájí ? Da' éísh Samériya kéyah shighadeideest'ą́ ?
PRED:	Where is the people of Hamath and the people of Hamath ? Is it the land of Samaria ?
GOLD:	What happened to the gods of Hamath and Arpad ? And what about the gods of Sepharvaim ? Did any god rescue Samaria from my power ?

ID:	2720
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Jesus éí Christ nilį́įgo joodlánígíí Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó bi'dizhchíinii jílį́ . T'áá háiida azhé'é ayóó'ájó'nínígíí ba'áłchíní ałdó' ayóó'ájó'níi doo .
PRED:	Whoever is born of Christ Jesus is the father of God . Whoever loves his father will love his children .
GOLD:	Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has become a child of God . And everyone who loves the Father loves his children , too .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	Christ bee chánah danohłį́įgo , éí ayóó'ánihó'níigo bee nihik'i dahata'go , Níłch'i Diyinii bił ahił danohdlį́įgo , ahaa a'ááh danohsingo ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níigo ,
PRED:	Love , love , love , and love ,
GOLD:	Is there any encouragement from belonging to Christ ? Any comfort from his love ? Any fellowship together in the Spirit ? Are your hearts tender and compassionate ?

ID:	2722
INPUT:	Ákohgo Áriyak éí ts'ídá tsxį́įłgo aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó Daniel bił nizhní'áazhgo ájíní , Júdahdóó diné yisnááh nilíinii bik'íníyáago aláahgo naat'áanii yaa nayiizyeelígíí ááhyiłníinii yił yééhodoosįįł .
PRED:	Then Daniel brought him before the king , and said , “ If he find the captivity of Judah , he will know the king 's dream . ”
GOLD:	Arioch quickly took Daniel to the king and said , “ I have found one of the captives from Judah who will tell the king the meaning of his dream ! ”

ID:	2723
INPUT:	Ákódaat'íinii dabizaad naałdzid nahalingo idadééłní . Haimeníyas áádóó Failíítas éí áájí atah nilį́ .
PRED:	And they cried out like a pestilence , saying , Thy brother Abimelech is a friend and a friend .
GOLD:	This kind of talk spreads like cancer , as in the case of Hymenaeus and Philetus .

ID:	2724
INPUT:	Áko ání , Asdzání ha'niyóodii nohłíinii , Hííbrew asdzání nida'iiłchíihgo ííshją́ą́ hadaohsíidgo ashkiigo éí nidaałtseed doo ; at'ééd nilį́įgo t'áá dahináa doo .
PRED:	He said , “ You women , you women , who are a young woman who are born to the Hebrew women . They will kill you . They will live .
GOLD:	“ When you help the Hebrew women as they give birth , watch as they deliver . If the baby is a boy , kill him ; if it is a girl , let her live . ”

ID:	2725
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é éí Gílgalgi Jáshowa yaa yíkai áádóó Jiifáneh éí Kíínez dine'é nilínígíí biye' Kéíleb éí Jáshowa áyidííniid , Nił bééhózingo , Bóhólníihii Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó diné jílíinii Mózes áyidííniidígíí , éí shí índa ni ałdó' ádínihídéélt'i'go Kéídesh-barníyadi kódííniid ni' .
PRED:	The people of Judah came to Joshua at Gilgal , and Caleb the son of Caleb , the son of Caleb , the son of Caleb , said to Joshua , “ You know that the man of the Lord God has commanded Moses , and you are counted . ”
GOLD:	A delegation from the tribe of Judah , led by Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite , came to Joshua at Gilgal . Caleb said to Joshua , “ Remember what the Lord said to Moses , the man of God , about you and me when we were at Kadesh-barnea .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	Yah a'atiinígi tsin yadaa'áhígíí bíighahgóó hooghan si'ą́ ; éí bich'é'étiin hólǫ́ ; ákwii didlidgo náádahaniihii tánínádaagis .
PRED:	The entrance of the gate was at the entrance of the gate , and the door of the burnt offering were washed with water .
GOLD:	A door led from the entry room of one of the inner gateways into a side room , where the meat for sacrifices was washed .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	Áko tsxį́įłgo ákǫ́ǫ́ jíkaigo , Mary áádóó Jóseph índa awéé' éí béégashii yii' nída'alchoshígíí yii' sitį́įgo bik'íjíkai .
PRED:	So they went down quickly and found Mary , Joseph , and the child lying in the table .
GOLD:	They hurried to the village and found Mary and Joseph . And there was the baby , lying in the manger .

ID:	2728
INPUT:	nidi kéyah danihíí' dooleeł biniyé bich'į' disoonánígíí éí deílk'idgóó áádóó deíldzisgóó nahałtinígíí t'éí bee nínáháltłoh .
PRED:	But the land you have given to your inheritance , and the hills and the hills .
GOLD:	Rather , the land you will soon take over is a land of hills and valleys with plenty of rain —

ID:	2729
INPUT:	Áko éí haz'ánígi Másah índa Méribah hoosye' , háálá ákwe'é Ízrel dine'é nidaalteeh nít'éé' , áádóó ałdó' Bóhólníihii yídaneeztą́ą'go ádaaní , Da' Bóhólníihiísh nihitahgi hólǫ́ , dooda daats'í ?
PRED:	And the son of Man was at Kadesh , because they had rebelled against Israel , and they asked the Lord , “ Have n't the Lord among us ? ”
GOLD:	Moses named the place Massah ( which means “ test ” ) and Meribah ( which means “ arguing ” ) because the people of Israel argued with Moses and tested the Lord by saying , “ Is the Lord here with us or not ? ”

ID:	2730
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	David 's Thirty Mighty Men

ID:	2731
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é yá nihwii'aahii nílíinii , díldzíiłgo diné ádaa daha'niihii k'éédahodídle' !
PRED:	Arise , O judge of the earth , and make the proud .
GOLD:	Arise , O Judge of the earth.Give the proud what they deserve .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	háálá Éíbraham shizaad yik'eh hóół'įįd ; éí bich'į' yíł'aadígíí áádóó shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó bee nihoyí'áanii índa shibee nahaz'áanii yik'eh hóół'įįd .
PRED:	For Abraham obeyed my words , and obeyed my commandments , and my statutes , and my statutes , and my statutes .
GOLD:	I will do this because Abraham listened to me and obeyed all my requirements , commands , decrees , and instructions . ”

ID:	2733
INPUT:	Áko Paul , t'áá át'į́į́ łehígi át'éego hoł yah ííyáago , táadi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́'ígíí biyi' Diyin God bizaad bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí hoł yeiníst'įįd .
PRED:	And Paul went into the pit , as they were cast into the pit , and he gave them the third day .
GOLD:	As was Paul 's custom , he went to the synagogue service , and for three Sabbaths in a row he used the Scriptures to reason with the people .

ID:	2734
INPUT:	Íídam dine'é a'ohgo ábi'didoolnííł
PRED:	Edom and Edom
GOLD:	Edom 's Judgment Announced

ID:	2735
INPUT:	áádóó niyi'di kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá bił ni'jį' andi'yoolghą́ą́ł , índa tsé t'ááłá'í nidi doo ałk'i dah si'ą́ą́góó ádeidoolíłígíí éí bił neidoołkááł , háálá Diyin God naa níyáhígíí t'áadoo baa ákoninizį́į' da .
PRED:	and he will bring him into the ground , and he will bring him into one stone , and he will put him to death , because you did not know what God has done .
GOLD:	They will crush you into the ground , and your children with you . Your enemies will not leave a single stone in place , because you did not recognize it when God visited you . ”

ID:	2736
INPUT:	Paul éí kéyah táyi' si'ánígíí Málta hoolyéegi naaghá
PRED:	Paul and the island of the island
GOLD:	Paul on the Island of Malta

ID:	2737
INPUT:	Nidi Ízrel dine'é doo dashíists'ą́'ígíí bąą doo daníists'ą́ą' da doo ; Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso shich'į' nidaalteeh áádóó shich'į' bijéí dantł'iz .
PRED:	But the people of Israel would not listen to me , because they would not listen to me , and they would not listen to me .
GOLD:	But the people of Israel wo n't listen to you any more than they listen to me ! For the whole lot of them are hard-hearted and stubborn .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , t'óó báhádzidgo bee até'ésh'íinii bee atíhodeeshłííł yę́ę t'ą́ą́' kónáshdlaago ał'ąą dine'é binááł ch'íhoní'eezh yę́ę éí dabinááł shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó doo bee hadazdoodzihígíí biniyé baa atíít'įįd .
PRED:	But I did this because of my wrath , so that I would punish the nations that I had brought them out before my name .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , I withdrew my judgment against them to protect the honor of my name before the nations that had seen my power in bringing them out of Egypt .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	2740
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá ákót'éego hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , T'áá háiida díí diné jiisxíinii éí ákót'éego hach'ohodoo'niił .
PRED:	The people answered and said , “ Whoever touches this man will be found in his sight . ”
GOLD:	And these men gave David the same reply . They said , “ Yes , that is the reward for killing him . ”

ID:	2741
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii ayóó áníínílninígíí yidánoolníi doo . NiBóhólníihii nilínígíí bąą bich'į' hodíínísin .
PRED:	And the king shall call thy glory , and thou shalt fear him because thou hast spoken unto the Lord .
GOLD:	For your royal husband delights in your beauty ; honor him , for he is your lord .

ID:	2742
INPUT:	áádóó doo t'áá éí t'éiyá bąą hodeel'a' da , nidi Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih doo biniyé , índa yá'át'éehgo bee íiniidzinii ííshjání dooleeł biniyé da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii díí ajooba'go áká a'alyeedii baa neiit'aashgóó nihił nijikai doo biniyé nidahastį́ .
PRED:	and not only because of the sake of the church , but for the glory of the Lord , so that we may be given to us , that we may be glorified by the grace of the Lord .
GOLD:	He was appointed by the churches to accompany us as we take the offering to Jerusalem — a service that glorifies the Lord and shows our eagerness to help .

ID:	2743
INPUT:	Lk . 8 : 4-8
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Wheat and Weeds Explained

ID:	2744
INPUT:	Épafras éí Níłch'i Diyinii bee ayóó'áda'íínóh'níigo yee nihił náhoolne' .
PRED:	Timothy , my dear friends , told you about the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	He has told us about the love for others that the Holy Spirit has given you .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	Tónteel éí ayóó át'éego yilk'oołgo bikáá' ha'naa łį́į́' nił niikai .
PRED:	For the sea was covered with the sea , because of the sea .
GOLD:	You trampled the sea with your horses , and the mighty waters piled high .

ID:	2746
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bich'į' ahééh hasin , éí t'áá áłahjį' Christ bee ak'eh diidlį́įgo nihoo'ish , áádóó łikání halchinígíigi át'éego Christ bee béého'dílzinii t'áá ałtsogóó nihee náás shoogish .
PRED:	But I give thanks to God always . He will always give us the same way of Christ . He will always give us the same way . He will always give you everything that is holy .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has made us his captives and continues to lead us along in Christ 's triumphal procession . Now he uses us to spread the knowledge of Christ everywhere , like a sweet perfume .

ID:	2747
INPUT:	Tónteel bíígháán t'óó báhádzidgo náádadiidáahii bi<unk> 'ígi át'éego t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádajit'į́ ; sǫ' wót'áahdi hidijeehígíí hool'áágóó ts'ídá diłhiłgo chahałheeł bee bá nahaz'ánígíigi ádajít'é .
PRED:	They are like the sea , like the stars of the sea ; the stars of the sky are like the light of darkness .
GOLD:	They are like wild waves of the sea , churning up the foam of their shameful deeds . They are like wandering stars , doomed forever to blackest darkness .

ID:	2748
INPUT:	Háálá nihił béédahózingo danihizhé'é yę́ę bi'é'él'į' t'áadoo nánídlínígóó yee nidanihineestą́'ígíí bits'ą́ąjį' náádanihi'diiznii' . T'áadoo le'é áádįįłii , béésh łigaii , doodaii' óolada éí doo bee náádanihi'diiznii' da ,
PRED:	For we have heard that our ancestors taught us by the commandment of our fathers , which we have not received , silver , silver , silver , or gold .
GOLD:	For you know that God paid a ransom to save you from the empty life you inherited from your ancestors . And it was not paid with mere gold or silver , which lose their value .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	Áádóó hane' yiní'ánígíí David áyidííniid , T'áá aaníí diné nihik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' ; kin haal'áádę́ę́' halgaijį' nihich'į' ch'ídahaazhjéé' , áádóó kin haal'á bił yah a'atiinjį' t'ą́ą́' anídaniilkaad .
PRED:	He said to David , “ We have defeated the people , and we have gone out of the desert , and cast them back to the city . ”
GOLD:	“ The enemy came out against us in the open fields , ” he said . “ And as we chased them back to the city gate ,

ID:	2750
INPUT:	NihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ bibee ajooba' yee nihik'ijidlíi doo . [ T'áá ákót'ée doo . ]
PRED:	May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you . Amen .
GOLD:	May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit .

ID:	2751
INPUT:	Diné doo ła' t'áá ádííghahígo hináa da , índa diné doo ła' t'áá ádííghahígo daatsaah da .
PRED:	“ If you do not want to live , you will live , and no one will be sick .
GOLD:	For we do n't live for ourselves or die for ourselves .

ID:	2752
INPUT:	Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yę́ę dabizaad díí t'áá yił aheełt'éego halne' . Kóníigo bee ak'e'ashchį́ :
PRED:	This is the word of the prophets . It is written :
GOLD:	And this conversion of Gentiles is exactly what the prophets predicted . As it is written :

ID:	2753
INPUT:	Mk . 8 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Peter 's Declaration about Jesus

ID:	2754
INPUT:	Nidi háádaas<unk> dóó bik'ijį' ninááł doo yá'áshónígi ánáádáát'įįd ; éí bąą hoda'ana'í t'áá biyaa dziznilgo áhwiinilaa , áko éí hwee ádídahólnííh nít'éé' , nidi nich'į' dah nídahidiikaigo áádóó nídanooskango yá'ąąshdę́ę́' dahodisíníts'ą́ą́' índa haa a'ááh nínízinígíí bik'ehgo lą'ídi yisdáhwííníjaa' ,
PRED:	But they did evil in the sight of their enemies ; therefore they were delivered to their enemies , and they came to them , but they cried out to them , but they fled from heaven , and saved them according to their mercy .
GOLD:	“ But as soon as they were at peace , your people again committed evil in your sight , and once more you let their enemies conquer them . Yet whenever your people turned and cried to you again for help , you listened once more from heaven . In your wonderful mercy , you rescued them many times !

ID:	2755
INPUT:	Éí ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí índa aláahgo naat'áanii ayóó ádaat'éii íísdįįd ni' .
PRED:	He destroyed many nations and many kings .
GOLD:	He struck down great nationsand slaughtered mighty kings —

ID:	2756
INPUT:	Áádóó Gíírar kéyah nahós'a' binaagóó kin hadaas'áhígíí t'áá át'é atídayiilaa , háálá Bóhólníihii yik'ee bił yéé' dahazlį́į́' áádóó kin hadaas'áágóó t'áá át'é adayiizyį́ , háálá yisnááh t'áá íiyisí t'óó ahayóí .
PRED:	And they destroyed all the cities of the land of Goshen , because they were afraid and afraid of the Lord , because they were very many of them .
GOLD:	While they were at Gerar , they attacked all the towns in that area , and terror from the Lord came upon the people there . As a result , a vast amount of plunder was taken from these towns , too .

ID:	2757
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bidził naaznilgóó díní'į́į'go ábidi'doolníłígíí bee bik'ijį' handziihgo
PRED:	Son of man , look upon the mountains of Israel , and prophesy against them ,
GOLD:	“ Son of man , turn and face the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them .

ID:	2758
INPUT:	Konanáíyah ałdó' áádóó bik'is Shiiméíyah áádóó Niithániyel áádóó Hashabáíyah áádóó Jáíyel índa Jázabad , díí Líívai dine'é yiląąjį' naazíinii éí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii nááhidoonih biniyé ashdladi mííl dibé yázhí áádóó tł'ízí yázhí índa ashdladi neeznádiin dóola éí Líívai dine'é yaa deiznil .
PRED:	And they gave them to the priests , Shemaiah , and Shemaiah , and Shimei , and Shimei , and Shimei , and for the Levites , and for the Passover , and for the Levites , five hundred lambs , and five hundred bulls .
GOLD:	The Levite leaders — Conaniah and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel , as well as Hashabiah , Jeiel , and Jozabad — gave 5,000 lambs and young goats and 500 cattle to the Levites for their Passover offerings .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	Náás oochííł dooleełgóó díí bee bá ak'e'doochííł , áko diné nináádahidoochíłígíí éí Bóhólníihii yaa dahaniih doo .
PRED:	It will be written to the generations , that the generation of your generations may praise the Lord .
GOLD:	Let this be recorded for future generations , so that a people not yet born will praise the Lord .

ID:	2760
INPUT:	Áko hak'ee dadiniihii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáhóónil índa ana'í bílák'eedę́ę́' nááhwiisnii' .
PRED:	And he saved them from their hand , and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies .
GOLD:	So he rescued them from their enemiesand redeemed them from their foes .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'éego á ha'iidziih bineest'ą'
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Faith Brings Joy

ID:	2762
INPUT:	Shide ádahósinii bits'ą́ąjį' hááshíłteeh , áko nibik'ehgo iináanii bik'eh honish'į́į doo .
PRED:	Turn me from those who hate me , and I will obey your precepts .
GOLD:	Ransom me from the oppression of evil people ; then I can obey your commandments .

ID:	2763
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bá bikáá' náá'iiniihí tsé doo hasht'e'nibí'ílne'ii bee ádadoohłííł , áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náádahidoołnih .
PRED:	You shall build an altar for the Lord your God , a stone of stone , and offer a burnt offering to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	Jesus ádeidííniid , Na'nitiní , díí asdzání adiléé lágo habi'deel'į́į́' .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Teacher , he has hidden this woman and has given it to her . ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , ” they said to Jesus , “ this woman was caught in the act of adultery .

ID:	2765
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéfthah éí Gíliyad dine'é t'áá ałtso áłah áyiilaago Íífreiyim dine'é yił ałk'iijéé' . Áko Gíliyad dine'é éí Íífreiyim dine'é yik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' , háálá ádaaní , Gíliyad dine'é nohłíinii , Íífreiyim dine'é áádóó Manáseh dine'é bitahgóó kéédahoht'íinii áłt'ąą la' Íífreiyim dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó yóó'adahaazhjée'ii dasoolį́į́' .
PRED:	Then Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead , and they fought against Ephraim . And the men of Ephraim said , “ Come from the hand of Ephraim , and Ephraim , and Ephraim . ”
GOLD:	The people of Ephraim responded , “ You men of Gilead are nothing more than fugitives from Ephraim and Manasseh. ” So Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead and attacked the men of Ephraim and defeated them .

ID:	2766
INPUT:	Jó , naaki shitsi' t'ah doo diné bee haleeh da ; t'áá shǫǫdí , shíni'dii éí nihich'į' ch'ídeesh'ish ; t'áá nihí danohsinígi ádadoohłííł , áko díí diné doo ádadoohłíłí da , háálá shighan góne' yah íí'áázh .
PRED:	For I have two daughters , and let me bring them out to you , and do not let this man go into my house , because they have gone into my house .
GOLD:	Look , I have two virgin daughters . Let me bring them out to you , and you can do with them as you wish . But please , leave these men alone , for they are my guests and are under my protection . ”

ID:	2767
INPUT:	Bá da'diłt'ohii shináshzhiizh . Doo áá sísįįhgóó shitsą́ áshk'azhí ałtáiniiłgizh ; shitł'izh ni'jį' náálį́įgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	You have broken me , and you have seen me ; you have cut me down to the ground .
GOLD:	and now his archers surround me.His arrows pierce me without mercy.The ground is wet with my blood .

ID:	2768
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	2769
INPUT:	Diyin God atah yiyiizláa'go ba'áłchíní daazlį́į'ii háishą' t'áadoo le'é yee yik'i hodidoo'ááł ? Diyin God yee' ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego bá hahadziih !
PRED:	Who is he who has chosen a little children ? Who is the God of righteousness ?
GOLD:	Who dares accuse us whom God has chosen for his own ? No one — for God himself has given us right standing with himself .

ID:	2770
INPUT:	Haa'íshą' kééhat'ínígi yah adiikah ; bibikáá' dah adées'eezí si'ą́ągi nidahodiidlaał !
PRED:	Let 's go into the house , and set up the table under it .
GOLD:	Let us go to the sanctuary of the Lord ; let us worship at the footstool of his throne .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán éí diné doo yá'ádaashóonii baa deet'ą́ ; nihokáá'góó ándahwii'aahii dabinii' yik'íná'áłtih , áko bí doo át'į́į́góoshą' háí ákót'į́ ?
PRED:	The earth has been given to the wicked ; he has covered the judge of the earth , and who is it ?
GOLD:	The whole earth is in the hands of the wicked , and God blinds the eyes of the judges.If he 's not the one who does it , who is ?

ID:	2772
INPUT:	Jó , doo yá'áshóonii nik'ijį' kódeeshłííł áádóó nits' ą́ą́dóó diné deíchíhígíí t'áá éí Ízrel kéyahdóó diné daadziihígíí ałtso Éíhab bits'ą́ą́dóó áhodeeshdįįł ,
PRED:	For I will bring evil against Ahab , and I will destroy all the remnant of Israel .
GOLD:	So now the Lord says , ‘ I will bring disaster on you and consume you . I will destroy every one of your male descendants , slave and free alike , anywhere in Israel !

ID:	2773
INPUT:	Diné hanaagóó kéédahat'į́įgo hak'ee dadiniihii éí t'áá ałtso há beinísht'į́įgo ákwii t'áadoo hainít'ínígóó kéédahojit'į́į doo ; ákwii kin nidazhdoonił , áádóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii deíl'áago ádazhdoolííł ; ákwii t'áadoo hainít'ínígóó kéédahojit'į́į doo , áko índa haDiyin God Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And they shall dwell in it , and they shall dwell in it ; and they shall dwell in it , and they shall dwell in it , and they shall know that I am the Lord God .
GOLD:	They will live safely in Israel and build homes and plant vineyards . And when I punish the neighboring nations that treated them with contempt , they will know that I am the Lord their God . ”

ID:	2774
INPUT:	Áádóó Ísakar dine'é ahoolchíiłii ła' Aháíjah biye' Béíyasha éí Néídab yihodeez'ą́ągo Gíbiithan éí Filístiya dine'é bikin haal'áagi yiyiisxį́ , háálá Néídab áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é Gíbiithan yizénáshzhiizh .
PRED:	And some of the sons of Issachar , Abijah the son of Abijah , killed him in the city of the Philistines , because they were at Gibeon .
GOLD:	Then Baasha son of Ahijah , from the tribe of Issachar , plotted against Nadab and assassinated him while he and the Israelite army were laying siege to the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	T'áá áko tsinaa'eeł t'áá ákǫ́ǫgo hazhé'é bits'ą́ą́' dashdii'áázh , áádóó Jesus bikéé' jiní'áázh .
PRED:	And he left the boat , and followed his father , and followed Jesus .
GOLD:	They immediately followed him , leaving the boat and their father behind .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso aheełt'éego bich'į' áhoonííł : diné t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó doo yá'áshóonii , diné yá'át'éehii áádóó yá'át'éehgo bii' honít'i'ii índa nichǫ́'ígo bii' honít'i'ii , diné náá'iiłniihii áádóó diné doo náá'iiłniihígíí t'áá aheełt'éego bich'į' áhoonííł ; diné yá'át'éehiigi át'éego , bąąhági ááníiłii ałdó' t'áá ákót'é , áádóó ádee hahididziihii , índa ádee ha'didziih yits'ąą yisti'ii t'áá ákót'éego bich'į' áhoonííł .
PRED:	And it shall be done to all that is good , good , evil , evil , evil , evil , and evil , and evil , and evil , and evil , and to the priest , and to the people that are evil , and to all men .
GOLD:	The same destiny ultimately awaits everyone , whether righteous or wicked , good or bad , ceremonially clean or unclean , religious or irreligious . Good people receive the same treatment as sinners , and people who make promises to God are treated like people who do n't .

ID:	2777
INPUT:	Tónteel bibąąhgóó kéyah danohłíinii , shidááhdóó dadínółhéelgo bíni'dii diné yee dabidziilii ániidí nídaadleeh ; bíni'dii áháníjį' nihekáahgo bíni'dii yádaałti' ; aa hwiinít'įįhjį' áháníjį' ahididiikah .
PRED:	Be glad , O sea , and let the strength of men come near , and let them come near , and let them come near , and let us return to the end .
GOLD:	“ Listen in silence before me , you lands beyond the sea.Bring your strongest arguments.Come now and speak.The court is ready for your case .

ID:	2778
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdgo áádóó hashké niidzį́į'go índa ts'ídá ayóó át'éego báháchį'go hakédaayahdóó hahoniiskaadgo náánáła' kéyahgóó ahoniiskaad ; dííshjį́į́góó ákót'é .
PRED:	And the anger of the Lord was angry , and his anger was poured out of the land , and cast them out of the land , even to this day .
GOLD:	In great anger and fury the Lord uprooted his people from their land and banished them to another land , where they still live today ! '

ID:	2779
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí náádi'yoołnihgo t'ááłá'ígo ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áádóó ła'ígíí éí didlidgo nááhániihii át'éego néidiyoołnih ; kót'éego náá'iiłniihii éí asdzání bidił bighánílį́įgo doo bi'didééhgóó biniinaa Bóhólníihii binááł yá k'ééhodoołdǫǫł .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer one sin offering , and the other for a sin offering , and the other for a burnt offering ; and the priest shall make atonement before the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . Through this process , the priest will purify her before the Lord for the ceremonial impurity caused by her bleeding .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii dadiyin doo
PRED:	The priests and the priests
GOLD:	Instructions for the Priests

ID:	2781
INPUT:	Éí bąą haa'íshą' bee k'é náhoodleełii áádóó t'áá áníiltso ahidiníłnáago danihidziil ánihidoolíiłii hádeiit'į́į doo .
PRED:	So let us make peace and all who live in one another , and let us make us strong .
GOLD:	So then , let us aim for harmony in the church and try to build each other up .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	Díí saad éí hodéét'i'go Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' , Ch'ikę́ę́h Záíyan bich'é'é nilíinii niz'įįdgo áádóó neiidlohgo ná nahast'i' ; Jerúsalem bich'é'é nilíinii nich'į' bitsiits'iin yiyíígháád .
PRED:	This is the word of the Lord , saying , “ The daughter of Zion has despised us , and he has broken your head against you , daughter of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord has spoken this word against him : “ The virgin daughter of Ziondespises you and laughs at you.The daughter of Jerusalemshakes her head in derision as you flee .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í hak'i hoole'go Bóhólníihii bits'ádi'nílíidii bee hanaagóó i'díídláád , áko t'áá íiyisí nídadzisdzííd .
PRED:	And the angel of the Lord came upon him , and the glory of the Lord came upon them , and they were afraid .
GOLD:	Suddenly , an angel of the Lord appeared among them , and the radiance of the Lord 's glory surrounded them . They were terrified ,

ID:	2784
INPUT:	Mo<unk> dóó dah náádii'náago Bé<unk> yakan hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out from there , and camped at Alush .
GOLD:	They left Moseroth and camped at Bene-jaakan .

ID:	2785
INPUT:	Nidi kin haal'áhídóó łid hahagháahgo hakéé'dę́ę́' Bénjamin dine'é t'ą́ą́' nídadéét'į́į́' nít'éé' ; shoo , kin haal'áhídóó yót'ááhgóó łid hahagháahgo dayiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	But when the smoke came out of the city , the men of Benjamin looked , and behold , there was a smoke from heaven .
GOLD:	But when the warriors of Benjamin looked behind them and saw the smoke rising into the sky from every part of the town ,

ID:	2786
INPUT:	Áko shída , shik'i<unk> da , shá nidaal'a'ída , diné hada'asíidii shikéé' naakaígíida , t'áadoo nihi'éé' hadadii'nil da , t'áá hazhó'ó nidadiibeełgo t'éí háádadii'nił nít'éé' .
PRED:	And I was not able to serve me , but my servants , who followed me , who followed me , were not clothed with clothes .
GOLD:	During this time , none of us — not I , nor my relatives , nor my servants , nor the guards who were with me — ever took off our clothes . We carried our weapons with us at all times , even when we went for water .

ID:	2787
INPUT:	Áádóó Damį́įgo abínígo t'ah chahałheełgo , Mary Mágdaliin tséní'ootséelgi jiníyáá nít'éé' tsé dáádeelmááz nít'é'ígíí nahjį' eelmáazgo jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , in the morning , in the morning , that Mary , who had come to the tomb , and saw the stone of the tomb .
GOLD:	Early on Sunday morning , while it was still dark , Mary Magdalene came to the tomb and found that the stone had been rolled away from the entrance .

ID:	2788
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Design of the Ephod

ID:	2789
INPUT:	Dooda , shinanit'a'í shííníłts'ą́ą́' ; kéyahígíí áádóó biyi' tséníhoodzánígíí ałdó' t'óó naa dideesh'ááł ; shidine'é ba'áłchíní dabinááł naa dideesh'ááł , áko nąąh daaztsánígíí ákwii yóó'ádíílííł .
PRED:	“ No , my lord , listen to me ! I will give you the land and the first in the rock . I will give you to my people , and I will forgive you there . ”
GOLD:	“ No , my lord , ” he said to Abraham , “ please listen to me . I will give you the field and the cave . Here in the presence of my people , I give it to you . Go and bury your dead . ”

ID:	2790
INPUT:	Ąąh niiníláhígíí t'áá e'e'ááh bik'eh baa náhíł<unk> doo , áko yee nánítéehgo naahaniih doo ; éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí t'áá ákogi áhát'íinii át'éego nihaa nitsíkees doo .
PRED:	He will make his mercy in the evening , and he will cast it down , and the Lord your God will judge you .
GOLD:	Return the cloak to its owner by sunset so he can stay warm through the night and bless you , and the Lord your God will count you as righteous .

ID:	2791
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá íídą́ą́' ła' ats'áhaaskaigo Séítan yikéé' aheeskai .
PRED:	For there went out of the same time , Satan followed him .
GOLD:	For I am afraid that some of them have already gone astray and now follow Satan .

ID:	2792
INPUT:	Diné doo dahóyáanii , t'áá aaníí doo béédaho'dílzinii ba'áłchíní dajílį́įgot'áadoo biniyéhígóó nidajikai nít'éé' ; éí nahjį' kódaho'diilyaa .
PRED:	But the wise men went out to the house of the foolish , but they were taken away from them .
GOLD:	They are nameless fools , outcasts from society .

ID:	2793
INPUT:	Áadi dichin dzizlį́į'go ajóyą́ą́' laanaa jiniizį́į́' , nidi t'ahdii ch'iyáán ádeiléehgo hoł áhát'į́įgo
PRED:	When he was hungry , he wanted to eat , but when he was still hungry , he ate food .
GOLD:	and he was hungry . But while a meal was being prepared , he fell into a trance .

ID:	2794
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii hool'áágóó kéyah bíí' dadooleeł , áádóó ákwii hool'áágóó kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	The righteous shall possess the land for ever , and the land shall dwell forever .
GOLD:	The godly will possess the landand will live there forever .

ID:	2795
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Belsházar nant'áago táá' náhááh góne' shí , Daniel yinishyéii , átsé shił áhoodzaa áádóó shił ánááhoodzaa .
PRED:	In the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar , I was Daniel , and my heart was made known to me .
GOLD:	During the third year of King Belshazzar 's reign , I , Daniel , saw another vision , following the one that had already appeared to me .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	Háálá dé'éyóní shich'į' nídahidiikai , diné ade ádeinízinii shida'niiłhį́ ; éí Diyin God doo bilą́ąjį' hólǫ́ǫgo ádayósin da . Síilah .
PRED:	For the foreigners have gone up against me , and kill me ; they have not known God . Selah .
GOLD:	For strangers are attacking me ; violent people are trying to kill me.They care nothing for God.Interlude

ID:	2797
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán biishch'id bii'dę́ę́' tónteel deesh<unk> go<unk> háí t'ą́ą́' áyósin dooleełgo bidáń'da'ditį́įhii yich'ą́ą́h dádeideeztą́ ?
PRED:	Who hath set up the gates of the earth , and cast them out of the sea ?
GOLD:	“ Who kept the sea inside its boundariesas it burst from the womb ,

ID:	2798
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodííniid , T'áá shił síníkéego t'óó ahayóí yidoołkááł ; t'áadoo ałjiłnii nílíní doo , doo nidi diné ła' nínáádidííłtéeł da . Áko shí ałdó' ákónísht'ée doo .
PRED:	And he said unto him , Be many days with me , and thou shalt not take a prostitute ; but I also will also be with thee .
GOLD:	Then I said to her , “ You must live in my house for many days and stop your prostitution . During this time , you will not have sexual relations with anyone , not even with me . ”

ID:	2799
INPUT:	Áko Féro éí Éíbram hágo yidííniidgo ání , Díishą' haa shiinilaa lá ? Ha'át'éegoshą' díí ne'asdzą́ą́ nilį́įgo t'áadoo bee shił hwíínílne' da ?
PRED:	Then Pharaoh called Abram and said , “ What have you done to me ? Why do you not tell me this wife ? ”
GOLD:	So Pharaoh summoned Abram and accused him sharply . “ What have you done to me ? ” he demanded . “ Why did n't you tell me she was your wife ?

ID:	2800
INPUT:	Zébyulan dine'é nilíinii bidine'é náás ahoolchíiłii éí ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí dabizhé'é yę́ę yada'áłchíní danilį́įgo éí dabi'déélta'ii dabízhi' bik'ehgo diné naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso ana'al'į́ yídaneel'áanii
PRED:	Of the tribe of Zebulun , by their families , by their families , by their fathers ' houses , according to the names of their fathers ' houses , from twenty years old and twenty years old and upward , all the people who were able to go up to war .
GOLD:	Zebulun57,400

ID:	2801
INPUT:	Ákondi doo da'oodlání na'ageh yee tsi'naaldeehii , doodaii' adádanoolníinii , doodaii' t'áá ádzaagóó nidahagizii , doodaii' e'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáii doo bił ałtaołdeeh da dooleełígíí doo ááhdishníi da , háálá nihokáá'dóó hahidoohkahgo doo bohónéedzą́ą da .
PRED:	But I do not say to you , “ You must not make a covenant with you , or with any other gods , or with them . You must not go with them . You will not go with them . ”
GOLD:	But I was n't talking about unbelievers who indulge in sexual sin , or are greedy , or cheat people , or worship idols . You would have to leave this world to avoid people like that .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	K'é ha'níinii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Greetings from Paul

ID:	2803
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' ahééh hasin náádahołniih áádóó t' áá aaníí ádadohníigo Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii bich'į' bee ádee hadadoohdzíi'ii bida'dohłííł .
PRED:	Give thanks to God , and make an oath to the Most High .
GOLD:	Make thankfulness your sacrifice to God , and keep the vows you made to the Most High .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	Nít'éé' éí tsits'aa' bii' béeso t'óó ahayóí lágo dayiiłtsą́ągo , aláahgo naat'áanii binaaltsoos ííł'íní éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii yił ní'áazhgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béeso yiyííłta'go azis yiih yiyíínil .
PRED:	When the ark saw many money , the king brought them to the priest and put them in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Whenever the chest became full , the court secretary and the high priest counted the money that had been brought to the Lord 's Temple and put it into bags .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	Háálá ániit'éhígíí bił bééhózin ; łeezh niidlį́įgo yénálniih .
PRED:	For he knows what we are . He knows what we say .
GOLD:	For he knows how weak we are ; he remembers we are only dust .

ID:	2806
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í nishłíinii ninii' bee shik'i di'niłdíín , áádóó bee nihoyíní'áanii bínashiníłtin .
PRED:	Thy servant is light upon me , and teach me thy statutes .
GOLD:	Look upon me with love ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	2807
INPUT:	Azhą́ diné dahináanii bitahdi yił nidahoołyéé' nít'éé' nidi , Mííshek dine'é áádóó Túbal dine'é índa bidine'é dah yinééł nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso ałdó' áadi , áko t'áadoo bąąh náhineeshgizhii danilíinii diltłish bee nidaaztseedgo hanaagóó yóó'ádaalyaa .
PRED:	But they were afraid among the living men , but all the host of the people were afraid , and all the host of the people , and they fled by the sword .
GOLD:	“ Meshech and Tubal are there , surrounded by the graves of all their hordes . They once struck terror in the hearts of people everywhere . But now they are outcasts , all slaughtered by the sword .

ID:	2808
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bąą doo nił hats'íid da ? Áádóó ha'át'íí lá bąą ádił nitsééníltłi' ? Diyin God bee nił chohoo'į́ , háálá shíká análwo'go shił hózhǫ́ǫgo ánáshoodlíłígíí éí shiDiyin God baa nááhásh'niih doo .
PRED:	My soul , why are you sick ? Why are you afraid ? Why are you afraid ? For I will praise my God , for I will praise my God .
GOLD:	Why am I discouraged ? Why is my heart so sad ? I will put my hope in God ! I will praise him again — my Savior and my God !

ID:	2809
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2810
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo kóbidiní , Ła' t'áadoo baa ákozníziní ádił adzisiihgo , éí Bóhólníihii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii doo ádoolníił da , nínígíí ájiilaago , éí t'ááłáhígo haz'ą́ dziz'įįdígíí bee ádihozhdiilt'i'go ,
PRED:	“ Speak to the children of Israel , saying , ‘ If anyone does not know the commandment of the Lord , he has not done the commandment of the Lord ,
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . This is how you are to deal with those who sin unintentionally by doing anything that violates one of the Lord 's commands .

ID:	2811
INPUT:	áádóó nidashinitinígíí doo bik'eh honish'į́į da nít'éé' , índa nidashinitinii doo yínísts'ą́ą' da nít'éé' !
PRED:	I would not obey my words , and I would not listen to my words .
GOLD:	Oh , why did n't I listen to my teachers ? Why did n't I pay attention to my instructors ?

ID:	2812
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné t'ááłá'í sizínígíí éí hádą́ą́' shį́į́ daaztsą́ nahalin nidi bits'ą́ą́dóó ba'áłchíní náás da'ahideeshchį́ , éí yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' t'óó ahayóigi ánéelą́ą'go índa tónteel bibąąhgóó séí doo jóołta'ígi ánéelą́ą'go ba'áłchíní náás da'ahideeshchį́ .
PRED:	Therefore , I will give birth to one man , but his children , as many as the stars of heaven , and as the sand of the sea , and as the sand of the sea .
GOLD:	And so a whole nation came from this one man who was as good as dead — a nation with so many people that , like the stars in the sky and the sand on the seashore , there is no way to count them .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i Diyinii éí Gídiyan bik'i hoole' go deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádííniidgo Éíbiyíízer dine'é hakéé' dah diiná .
PRED:	But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon , and he called the trumpet , and the trumpet followed him .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of the Lord clothed Gideon with power . He blew a ram 's horn as a call to arms , and the men of the clan of Abiezer came to him .

ID:	2814
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí tsosts'idiindi mííl yilt'éego hééł nideiyéhígíí índa tseebídiindi mííl dziłdi da'atseełígíí bá nidaalnish nít'éé' ;
PRED:	Solomon had seven hundred thousand men and eight thousand servants in the mountains .
GOLD:	Solomon also had 70,000 common laborers , 80,000 quarry workers in the hill country ,

ID:	2815
INPUT:	Áádóó ání , Nantł'ago la' í'dííníkeed , ákót'ée nidi , ííshją́ą́ nits'ą́ą́' náshi'diiltį́įgo shiiniłtsą́ą́ ládą́ą́' t'áá ná ákódoonííł , nidi dooda ládą́ą́' , éí doo ákódooníił da .
PRED:	He said , “ If you want me to do this , but if you have taken me away from you , if you have taken me away from me , it will not be done . ”
GOLD:	“ You have asked a difficult thing , ” Elijah replied . “ If you see me when I am taken from you , then you will get your request . But if not , then you wo n't . ”

ID:	2816
INPUT:	Áko ni , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , doo ákwii ádahat'ínígíí baa ákonínízingo háishą' yíníłdzil doo ?
PRED:	And thou , O Lord , that thou mayest know the iniquity of iniquity ?
GOLD:	Lord , if you kept a record of our sins , who , O Lord , could ever survive ?

ID:	2817
INPUT:	Nídiidáahgo ásaa' ííł'íní bighangóó dínááh ; áadi shizaad didííts'į́į́ł .
PRED:	Arise , go into the house of the potter , and hear my words .
GOLD:	“ Go down to the potter 's shop , and I will speak to you there . ”

ID:	2818
INPUT:	Áko nich'į' hashké niisdzį́į'go áádóó t'áá íiyisí nandishteehgo atínísh'į́įgo ał'ąą dine'é ninaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí binááł t'óó ná nahat'i'ii áádóó nee adlohodichíii , áádóó bee i'ílnii'ii índa t'óó bik'e'ayóii nílį́į doo . Bóhólníihii nishłíinii kót'éego haasdzíí' .
PRED:	I was angry with you , and I was very angry with you , and I was angry with you in the sight of the nations that dwell in the sight of the nations , in the sight of the nations , and in the sight of the nations , and in the sight of the Lord I have spoken .
GOLD:	You will become an object of mockery and taunting and horror . You will be a warning to all the nations around you . They will see what happens when the Lord punishes a nation in anger and rebukes it , says the Lord .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	Áko níbaal bii' hodílzinii nihidoogéełgo Líívai dine'é éí ninádei'dii'áah doo , índa nináádoot'áałgo Líívai dine'é éí ninádei'áah dooleeł , índa t'áá háiida doo Líívai dine'é nilíinii níbaal bii' hodílzinii yíighahjį' deeyáii éí bidi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	And the Levites shall fight against the tabernacle , and the Levites shall fight against them ; and the Levites shall be put to death by the tabernacle .
GOLD:	Whenever it is time for the Tabernacle to move , the Levites will take it down . And when it is time to stop , they will set it up again . But any unauthorized person who goes too near the Tabernacle must be put to death .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	K'ad nidi tsin bihétł'óól biniyé tsénił si'ą́ , áko tsin t'áá ałtso bineest'ą' doo yá'át'ééhgóó bąąh nídahadleehígíí k'ídahalne'go kǫ' biyi' góne' adahaltł'iid .
PRED:	But now I have set the roots of the tree , and every tree that does not bear good fruit , and cast it into the fire .
GOLD:	Even now the ax of God 's judgment is poised , ready to sever the roots of the trees . Yes , every tree that does not produce good fruit will be chopped down and thrown into the fire . ”

ID:	2821
INPUT:	Honoojíígóó tó naazką́ągo áyoolííł . <unk> gango haz'ą́ągi tó hadaazlį́įgo áyoolííł .
PRED:	He will dry up the desert , and the waters will be dried up , and the waters will be dried up .
GOLD:	But he also turns deserts into pools of water , the dry land into springs of water .

ID:	2822
INPUT:	Nidi nihí Bóhólníihii dah nihidii'eezh áádóó kǫ' bits'á honigahii bii'dóó hanihíí'eezh ; t'áá Ííjip kéyahgi kǫ' bit'ááh dahalchxíi'ii bii'dę́ę́' hanihíí'eezhii ; díí jį́ t'áá bí bidine'é bíí' dooleełii danohłį́į doo biniyé tánihidi'éésh .
PRED:	But the Lord took you out of the midst of the fire , and brought you out of the furnace of Egypt , to be his inheritance today .
GOLD:	Remember that the Lord rescued you from the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt in order to make you his very own people and his special possession , which is what you are today .

ID:	2823
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Paul éí Ananáíyas áyidííniid , Iná'ástł'inii łigaigo yishdléezhii nílíinii , Diyin God atínidoolííł ! Bee haz'áanii bik'ehgo shaa nídíít'įįłgo dah sínídáa nidi , da' ákoósh bee haz'áanii doo bídéét'i'góó shi<unk> doolts'į́įłgo bee hwiinił'a' ?
PRED:	Then Paul said to Festus , “ O garden , do you judge me according to the law ? Have you not sent me to hear the law ? ”
GOLD:	But Paul said to him , “ God will slap you , you corrupt hypocrite ! What kind of judge are you to break the law yourself by ordering me struck like that ? ”

ID:	2824
INPUT:	Nidi dasétsą́ągo Ííjip kéyahdóó ch'íshidííłtéełgo dashizhé'é yóó'ádaalyaa yę́ędi yóó'áshidíílííł . Áko áhozhdííniid , T'áá ádínínígi ádeeshnííł .
PRED:	But when they saw me , take me out of the land of Egypt , and buried me in the place of my fathers . And he said to him , “ I will do as you have said . ”
GOLD:	When I die , please take my body out of Egypt and bury me with my ancestors. ” So Joseph promised , “ I will do as you ask . ”

ID:	2825
INPUT:	NihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ nihaa a'ááh nízingo iiná doo ninít'i'ii nihaididoo'áłígíí bíká dadínóh'į́į'go Diyin God bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' bii' dahonohłǫ́ǫgo áda'díí'nółzin .
PRED:	If you look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ , you will love in your hearts .
GOLD:	and await the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ , who will bring you eternal life . In this way , you will keep yourselves safe in God 's love .

ID:	2826
INPUT:	Éí bąą Ben-héídad bá hane' nidei'áhígíí ábijiní , Shinanit'a'í , aláahgo naat'áanii bił dahołne' , Áłtséédą́ą́' ná naal'a'í biniyé bich'į' nisíníł'a' yę́ę éí t' áá át'é ádeeshnííł , nidi díí éí doo ádeeshníił da . Áko hane' nidei'áhígíí dah nídiikaigo Ben-héídad hane' yaa nídeiz'ą́ .
PRED:	Therefore he said to them , “ My lord , tell the king what I have sent to your servant the first time , but I will do to you , but I will not do it . ” So they went and gave it to Ahab .
GOLD:	So Ahab told the messengers from Ben-hadad , “ Say this to my lord the king : ‘ I will give you everything you asked for the first time , but I can not accept this last demand of yours . ' ” So the messengers returned to Ben-hadad with that response .

ID:	2827
INPUT:	Ísakar éí télii bidziilii hééł naakiígíí bita'gi dziztíinii jílį́ ,
PRED:	The man of Issachar was between a donkey and a donkey .
GOLD:	“ Issachar is a sturdy donkey , resting between two saddlepacks .

ID:	2828
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip kéyahgóó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' diné nihinéést'e'go tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz bits'ásk'ehgi behégod áłah ánáádajidle' .
PRED:	And the whole land of Egypt was full of wheat , and they gathered together together in the midst of wheat .
GOLD:	So the people scattered throughout the land of Egypt in search of stubble to use as straw .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	Bá ííyah danii'áii naadiingo áádóó bitł'ááh naaznilígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí ałdó' naadiingo béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaa , nidi ííyah danii'áii bąąh hada'azhahígíí índa bita'ndaaz'áhígíí éí béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	The pillars and their pillars were twenty pillars , but the pillars of the pillars of the pillars were of silver .
GOLD:	They were held up by twenty posts set securely in twenty bronze bases . He hung the curtains with silver hooks and rings .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	Nidi David éí Abísheiyai áyidííniid , Doo atídíílíił da , háálá Bóhólníihii ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'iishą' háí atíjiilaago doo ádihozhdiilt'i' da doo ?
PRED:	But David said to Abishai , “ Do n't do anything . For who is the one who anointed the Lord 's anointed ? ”
GOLD:	“ No ! ” David said . “ Do n't kill him . For who can remain innocent after attacking the Lord 's anointed one ?

ID:	2831
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Zedekáíyah índa naat'áanii danilíinii éí ana'í danilíinii áádóó hazéé'deidoot'įįłgo hádaat'íinii índa Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo bikéyahgóó anídahaas'náanii baa hodideesh'ááł .
PRED:	And I will give them into the hand of Zedekiah king of Judah , and the princes of his mouth , and the princes of his mouth , and the princes of Babylon , and the inhabitants of the land of the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ I will hand over King Zedekiah of Judah and his officials to the army of the king of Babylon . And although they have left Jerusalem for a while ,

ID:	2832
INPUT:	Shikin bii' sohodizin haníi'gi hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫgo ał'ąą dine'é éí shí Ízrel dine'é diyingo ádaashłaago bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	Then the nations will know that I have made my sanctuary forever and ever .
GOLD:	And when my Temple is among them forever , the nations will know that I am the Lord , who makes Israel holy . ”

ID:	2833
INPUT:	Tsxį́įłgo ádee ha'diidziihii éí doo áháyą' át'é
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	2834
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní biDiyin God nílíinii , hasht'éénihídlééh áádóó ayóó ánít'éii bee i'díłdlaadgo yisdánihidi'doo'nił !
PRED:	Give us victory , O God of hosts , and let us be saved .
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O God of Heaven 's Armies.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	2835
INPUT:	Áádóó Ábner áhodííniid , Ninish'náajigo , doodaii' ninishtł'ajigo hanilyeed , áko tsíłkéí ła' yiisiłgo yee naabaahii bighaní'nííł . Nidi Éísahel t'áá hakéé' yilwoł .
PRED:	Abner said to him , “ Come on your right hand or on your left , and take one of the young men with his weapons . ” But they followed him .
GOLD:	“ Go fight someone else ! ” Abner warned . “ Take on one of the younger men , and strip him of his weapons. ” But Asahel kept right on chasing Abner .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	Diyin God Bóhólníihii nilíinii éí yádiłhił áyiilaago k'íísts'ǫ́ǫdii áádóó nahasdzáán áádóó biyi' hólóonii yił k'íísts'ǫ́ǫdii áádóó bikáa'gi diné nídídzihgo índa níłch'i yee hináago áyiilaii ání ,
PRED:	The Lord your God made heaven , and put it on the earth , and covered it with the spirit , and with the spirit of man , saying ,
GOLD:	God , the Lord , created the heavens and stretched them out.He created the earth and everything in it.He gives breath to everyone , life to everyone who walks the earth.And it is he who says ,

ID:	2837
INPUT:	Áádóó <unk> kin haal'áagi Diyin God bizaad bee yájííłti'go Ataláíya góyaa jiní'áázh ,
PRED:	And when he had finished speaking the word of God , he went down into the city ,
GOLD:	They preached the word in Perga , then went down to Attalia .

ID:	2838
INPUT:	Áko abínígo adideezdládígíí nahalingo idi'dííłdlał áádóó bee nąąh dahaz'áanii bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ahaa'go yá'át'ééh nídíídleeł índa nit'áá ákogi át'éii nilą́ąjį' hólǫ́ǫ doo ; Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii éí yee nik'iiní'į́į' doo .
PRED:	And the light of the morning shall be like a cup , and from thy law , and thy righteousness shall be before thee ; and the glory of the Lord shall be upon thee .
GOLD:	“ Then your salvation will come like the dawn , and your wounds will quickly heal.Your godliness will lead you forward , and the glory of the Lord will protect you from behind .

ID:	2839
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Béíyasha nant'áago Jerobówam ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii t'áá át'é ałtso neistseed ; Bóhólníihii kóníigo bá naal'a'í Sháíloh kin haal'áádóó diné Aháíjah wolyéii yee yich'į' haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo Jerobówam yits'ą́ą́dóó danilíinii nabi'diztseedjį' doo ła' ch'ééyáa da ,
PRED:	And Baasha smote all the house of Jeroboam , and smote all the house of Jeroboam , according to the word of the Lord , which he commanded by the hand of Jeroboam his servant , and he did not go out of Shiloh .
GOLD:	He immediately slaughtered all the descendants of King Jeroboam , so that not one of the royal family was left , just as the Lord had promised concerning Jeroboam by the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh .

ID:	2840
INPUT:	Áádóó David bá nidaal'a'í hach'į' ayííł'a'go hoł nídaaskai áádóó bił yah ajííyáago hoł biiską́ . Jó , ąądii bits'ą́ą́dóó ho'díídee' , áádóó haghangóó anídzoodzá .
PRED:	David sent messengers to his servants , and brought him in to him , and he went in with him , and he was unclean in the morning , and he returned to his house .
GOLD:	Then David sent messengers to get her ; and when she came to the palace , he slept with her . She had just completed the purification rites after having her menstrual period . Then she returned home .

ID:	2841
INPUT:	Adláanii nahalingo nidazhnit'i áádóó naanídazhnéekaad índa t'áadoo ánáádajó'ne'é da .
PRED:	They will become like a drink , and they will run away like a drink , and they will not hate them .
GOLD:	They reeled and staggered like drunkardsand were at their wits ' end .

ID:	2842
INPUT:	Áko Jerabéíyal biye'ké tsosts'idiinígíí yich'į' t'óó báhádzidígi ádáát'įįd áádóó hak'isóó naaztseedii bidiłígíí Abímelek hak'i didoot'ááł , índa Shííkem dine'é háká ííjée'go hak'isóó neistseedígíí ałdó' yik'i deididoo'ááł .
PRED:	And he did evil against the seven sons of Gideon , and against his brethren , and against Abimelech his brethren , and they shall put their hand upon the men of Shechem .
GOLD:	God was punishing Abimelech for murdering Gideon 's seventy sons , and the citizens of Shechem for supporting him in this treachery of murdering his brothers .

ID:	2843
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii niDiyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó bee ééhózinii bííníkeed ; ch'į́įdiitahgóó , doodaii' yá'ąąshgóó bee ééhózinii yíníkeed .
PRED:	You ask for a sign from the Lord your God , and ask for a sign or wonders .
GOLD:	“ Ask the Lord your God for a sign of confirmation , Ahaz . Make it as difficult as you want — as high as heaven or as deep as the place of the dead . ”

ID:	2844
INPUT:	Nidaalteehii t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii yiih níídee' , áko t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá shí dadideeshteh .
PRED:	The wicked are full of evil , and I will rebuke all .
GOLD:	You have dug a deep pit to trap them at Acacia Grove.But I will settle with you for what you have done .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	Shich'į' nahwii'náago yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' shaatįįh yíná , nidi Bóhólníihii bee nisdzil nít'éé' .
PRED:	I was in trouble , but the Lord was my strength .
GOLD:	They attacked me at a moment when I was in distress , but the Lord supported me .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Ákǫ́ǫ́ dínáahgo nínaaíké áádóó dibé baa nidíníítaał ; nínaaíké índa dibéda daats'í yá'ádaat'ééh . Áko áádę́ę́' hane' shaa nídíí'ááł . Ákohgo Hííbran honíteeldóó dahozhdiił'a'go Shííkem nahós'a'di jiníyá .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Go , and sing unto thy brethren , and for thy brethren , and for thy brethren , and for thy brethren . And he sent me out of the valley of Hebron . And he went to Shechem .
GOLD:	“ Go and see how your brothers and the flocks are getting along , ” Jacob said . “ Then come back and bring me a report. ” So Jacob sent him on his way , and Joseph traveled to Shechem from their home in the valley of Hebron .

ID:	2847
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad nílááh , náálwoł ; jó , ayóó át'éego ił nílį́įgo ándeeshłííł nisin nít'éé' , nidi ił ídlį́ bits'ą́ąjį' Bóhólníihii t'ą́ą́' ánóhsin nít'éé' .
PRED:	Now therefore , return , and behold , I will make thee great glory , but ye have turned back from the Lord .
GOLD:	Now get out of here ! Go back home ! I promised to reward you richly , but the Lord has kept you from your reward . ”

ID:	2848
INPUT:	Tł'oh yishbizh shi'éé' áshłaago shi'ana'í yá nidahałt'i'ii sélį́į́' .
PRED:	I put sackcloth on sackcloth , and my enemies have become a reproach .
GOLD:	When I dress in burlap to show sorrow , they make fun of me .

ID:	2849
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Ádam bítsą́ą́' hayíítánígíí yee asdzání áyiilaa , áádóó Ádam yich'į' yił ní'áázh .
PRED:	And the Lord God made a woman in the middle of Edom , and brought him to Edom .
GOLD:	Then the Lord God made a woman from the rib , and he brought her to the man .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Bóhólníihii bił hólǫ́ , áádóó diné bohónéedzáanii dzizlį́į́' , áko Ííjip diné honanit'a'í nilíinii bighan góne' kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Joseph was with him , and he became wise , and he lived in the house of the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	2851
INPUT:	Ákohgo tsosts'id nídízííd binih Iilíshama biye' Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí aláahgo naat'áanii bidine'é ahoolchíiłii áádóó biyaa sinilii agháago naat'áanii ła' nilį́įgo éí diné neeznált'éego yił Mízpah kin haal'áadi Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah yaa yíkai ; áadi t'ááłáhíjį' da'jííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the seventh day of the seventh month , that Ishmael the son of Ishmael , the son of Ishmael , and his princes , and ten men , and ten men , and they came to Mizpah , and they ate at Mizpah .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family and had been one of the king 's high officials , went to Mizpah with ten men to meet Gedaliah . While they were eating together ,

ID:	2852
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Kót'éego Máíkah shá ádzaago bik'é shich'į' ni'iiléego bináá'iiłniihii sélį́į́' .
PRED:	So he said to them , “ This is what Micah did to me , and I became the priest . ”
GOLD:	He told them about his agreement with Micah and that he had been hired as Micah 's personal priest .

ID:	2853
INPUT:	Háálá nihí ałdó' łah doo dahoniidzą́ą da nít'éé' , doo ak'eh dahoniil'į́į da nít'éé' , yóó'adanihidi'niit'ááh nít'éé' . Adáhonooníinii índa honeeni ał'ąą ádaat'éii binaalte' daniidlį́į́ nít'éé' . Áká nideiit'áago índa da'iilch'į́įdgo , nihik'eda'diniihgo índa ak'edadinii'niihgo nihídayéełkaah nít'éé' .
PRED:	For we did not obey him , but we did not obey him , but we did not obey him . We served him in the wilderness , in the wilderness , in the wilderness , and in the days of famine , and in our days .
GOLD:	Once we , too , were foolish and disobedient . We were misled and became slaves to many lusts and pleasures . Our lives were full of evil and envy , and we hated each other .

ID:	2854
INPUT:	Áádóó Bérak nideídééłkidgo ádaaní , Díishą' haa yit'éego saad t'áá át'é bee ak'e'shíníłchį́ ? <unk> tihgoósh bik'e'shíníłchį́ ?
PRED:	They asked him , “ What do you read all these words ? Have you written in the book ? ”
GOLD:	“ But first , tell us how you got these messages . Did they come directly from Jeremiah ? ”

ID:	2855
INPUT:	Nidi ha'át'íí shį́į́ bich'į́įdii át'į́ danízingo hak'ee tsídadoolyizgo bił yéé' dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	But they were afraid of the dead , and were afraid .
GOLD:	But the whole group was startled and frightened , thinking they were seeing a ghost !

ID:	2856
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2857
INPUT:	Áko shoo , ła' diné biye' nilíinii nahalingo shidaa' yideelchid , nít'éé' shizéé' ąą ádzaago yáshti'go shidááhdę́ę́' sizínígíí ábidishní , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shił áhoodzaaígíí t'áá íiyisí yínííł bik'e'íyée'ii shik'i hoole' , áko shitah doo hwiiłna' da .
PRED:	And behold , a man opened his mouth like a man , and opened my mouth , and opened my mouth , and said unto me , O Lord , the vision is upon me , and my hand is not broken .
GOLD:	Then the one who looked like a man touched my lips , and I opened my mouth and began to speak . I said to the one standing in front of me , “ I am filled with anguish because of the vision I have seen , my lord , and I am very weak .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	Díí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii bee haz'áanii át'é : éí ts'ídá aláahgo dílzinii át'é .
PRED:	This is the law of the sin offering : it is most holy .
GOLD:	“ These are the instructions for the guilt offering . It is most holy .

ID:	2859
INPUT:	Áádóó tsé bee adzoolne' ánízahjį' bits'ázhníyáago , áadi nitsizhdinígo'go sozdoolzingo ájíní ,
PRED:	And when she had gone out from among them , she fell down and prayed ,
GOLD:	He walked away , about a stone 's throw , and knelt down and prayed ,

ID:	2860
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro áádóó diné eel'áago yinant'áhígíí ábidiní , Ayóó ádanoht'éego háí lá bił ahąąh ninihideeshnił lá ?
PRED:	“ Son of man , son of man , the king of Egypt , and the man who was sitting in the house of Egypt , saying , ‘ Who will I make you great ? '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give this message to Pharaoh , king of Egypt , and all his hordes : “ To whom would you compare your greatness ?

ID:	2861
INPUT:	Ts'ídá ákohgo , diné doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą́'góó áłah silį́į'go t'áá hazhó'ó ałk'i na'asdee' , áko hódahooł'aahii áłtsé bich'į' ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní , Férisii danilíinii bidíík'ǫsh bee taos'nii' niilyółí bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ , éí t'óó áhodi'į́ át'é .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that there was a multitude of multitude , that there was a multitude of multitude , that the disciples said unto him , Take heed to the disciples , Take heed of the Pharisees .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the crowds grew until thousands were milling about and stepping on each other . Jesus turned first to his disciples and warned them , “ Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees — their hypocrisy .

ID:	2862
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus t'áadoo ha'di'ní'ą́ą́góó kóhodííniid , Nílááh , nighangóó nik'éí bich'į' nídídáahgo ayóó ádaat'éii Bóhólníihii ná yaa naayáhígíí índa yee naa joozba'ígíí bee bił dahólne' .
PRED:	But Jesus said to them , “ Go to your house , and tell the great things that the Lord has done for you . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No , go home to your family , and tell them everything the Lord has done for you and how merciful he has been . ”

ID:	2863
INPUT:	Nihi'ana'í bich'į' nihíká anilyeed , háálá diné t'éiyá áká iilwo'go t'áadoo nádleehí da !
PRED:	help your enemies , for no one can help them .
GOLD:	Oh , please help us against our enemies , for all human help is useless .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	Ch'ikę́ę́h éí diné ła' bił ahaazhdoot'ash biniyé bił ahazhdeet'ą́ągo , nít'éé' diné ła' hak'íníyáago hoł neezhtéezhgo ,
PRED:	And the virgin took a covenant with her , and she found a man , and found him , and found him .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man meets a young woman , a virgin who is engaged to be married , and he has sexual intercourse with her . If this happens within a town ,

ID:	2865
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , nániisiskan , háálá shich'į' ééhodíísįįł ; shich'į' dah díníit'aahgo ádíshnínígíí diits'į́į́h .
PRED:	I call to you , O God , for you will answer me ; listen to my prayer .
GOLD:	I am praying to you because I know you will answer , O God.Bend down and listen as I pray .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' anáázh'niiltsąądgo ashkii náájíshchį́ , áko ázhdííniid , K'ad lá índa shahastiin bił hinish'náa doo ni , háálá táadi haye' há shéłchį́ , áko díí bąą ashkii Líívai bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	Then she conceived and bore a son again . He said , “ Now , my husband and my husband will live , for I have given him three sons , and this child named him Levi . ”
GOLD:	Then she became pregnant a third time and gave birth to another son . He was named Levi , for she said , “ Surely this time my husband will feel affection for me , since I have given him three sons ! ”

ID:	2867
INPUT:	Áádóó ánihidishní , Ha'a'aahdę́ę́' índa e'e'aahdę́ę́' diné lą'í nidahidookah , áádóó yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ądi Éíbraham áádóó Áízak índa Jéíkab yił da'dooyį́į́ł biniyé yił dah dínóobįįł ,
PRED:	And I tell you , many men will come from the east and west , and they will sit with Abraham , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	And I tell you this , that many Gentiles will come from all over the world — from east and west — and sit down with Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob at the feast in the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	Tsin deíl'áhígíí éí bineest'ą' bąąh nídahoodleeł doo , nahasdzáán éí bits'ą́ą́dóó nínáda'nt'į́įh doo áádóó bikéyahgi háádę́ę'da doo baa hwiinít'į́į́góó nida'nt'ą' doo ; hazéédadéetání há nidaháti'go índa ana'í dahasnáago binaa'nil dajílíinii bighááhonish'nilgo , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And the trees of the trees shall bear fruit , and the land shall not come out of the land of the earth , and the yoke of the earth shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	The orchards and fields of my people will yield bumper crops , and everyone will live in safety . When I have broken their chains of slavery and rescued them from those who enslaved them , then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2869
INPUT:	Óola biisdííłtóolii nahalingo náhookǫsdę́ę́' ayóó ánóolninii hahwiileeh ; Diyin God éí t'óó bik'e'ayóigo binaagóó haz'ą́ .
PRED:	The north is like gold , and the north is like gold ; God is in the midst of wonders .
GOLD:	So also , golden splendor comes from the mountain of God.He is clothed in dazzling splendor .

ID:	2870
INPUT:	Éí bąą Féro bidziilii bee nihaa yádahodoosįįł áádóó Ííjip dine'é bine' dadoohdzih baa da'íínóhłíhígíí nihił dahodoo<unk> .
PRED:	Therefore you will be ashamed of Pharaoh 's power , and you will speak to Egypt .
GOLD:	But by trusting Pharaoh , you will be humiliated , and by depending on him , you will be disgraced .

ID:	2871
INPUT:	Ákót'éego yishááł nít'éé' Damáskas t'áá áhání hadziihgo , ts'ídá hanii shį́į́ ałní'ní'ą́ągo , t'áadoo hooyání yá'ąąshdę́ę́' t'áá íiyisí ayóó át'éego shinaagóó łe'díídláád .
PRED:	When I came to Damascus , he said , “ It is a great light from heaven . ”
GOLD:	“ As I was on the road , approaching Damascus about noon , a very bright light from heaven suddenly shone down around me .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hak'isóó índa hazhé'é ba'áłchíní t'áá ałtso ábizhdííniid , Féro bich'į' deesháałgo bił hodeeshnihgo ábidideeshniił , Shik'isóó índa shizhé'é ba'áłchíní t'áá ałtso Kéínan kéyahdi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'é'ígíí shaa níná .
PRED:	Joseph said to his brothers and his father , “ I will go to Pharaoh and say to him , ‘ My brothers , and all my father 's family who live in the land of Canaan . '
GOLD:	And Joseph said to his brothers and to his father 's entire family , “ I will go to Pharaoh and tell him , ‘ My brothers and my father 's entire family have come to me from the land of Canaan .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bizéé'dę́ę́' áádóó dóola da'ałchinii bidee' bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshíłteehgo shich'į' ééhonísįįh !
PRED:	Hear me from the mouth of lions , from the mouth of the young lions , and from the lions .
GOLD:	Snatch me from the lion 's jawsand from the horns of these wild oxen .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	Kodi ałtádiisghaas , dííniidgo , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , aa a'ááh nínízinii bee de áshíínísin .
PRED:	And when they say , O Lord , Thou hast lifted up thy mercy upon me , O Lord .
GOLD:	I cried out , “ I am slipping ! ” but your unfailing love , O Lord , supported me .

ID:	2875
INPUT:	Áko Tííman kin haal'áádóó Élifaz wolyéii ánááhodoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	Then Bildad the Bildad answered and said ,
GOLD:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied to Job :

ID:	2876
INPUT:	Áko álíleego áda'ooł'įįłii beda'álííl yee t'áá ákónááda'iidlaa , áko Ííjip kéyahjį' ch'ał nááníłnii' .
PRED:	And they also did the same thing with their dreams , and the frogs brought them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	But the magicians were able to do the same thing with their magic . They , too , caused frogs to come up on the land of Egypt .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	t'áá dichin danilį́įgo hooghangóó béé'ayéłnii'go hooghan t'áá yi'oh dahidínóołnah , háálá ła' nízaadę́ę́' nidaakai .
PRED:	I have sent them hungry , and I have sent them away from their house , because they are far away from a distance .
GOLD:	If I send them home hungry , they will faint along the way . For some of them have come a long distance . ”

ID:	2878
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	one male goat for a sin offering ;
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	Áko éí ayóó íits'a'go hadoolghaazhgo ání , Tsin sikaadii k'íníłne' índa bits' ádaoz'a' bąąh híłne' ; bit'ąą' bąąh hi<unk> <unk> áádóó bineest'ą' yóó'ahíłkaad ; háni'dii naaldlooshii éí tsin sikaadii yiyaa hahajeeh áádóó tsin bits'ádaoz'a' bąąhdóó tsídii nídahidiit'ááh , ní .
PRED:	And he cried out with a loud voice , saying , Take away from the tree , and cut off the branches of the tree , and cast out the branches of the forest , and the birds of the forest , and the birds of the forest .
GOLD:	The messenger shouted , “ Cut down the tree and lop off its branches ! Shake off its leaves and scatter its fruit ! Chase the wild animals from its shadeand the birds from its branches .

ID:	2880
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí tónteel bikáa'jigo dah didiilnii' áádóó hayííłką́ągo tónteel ałch'į' kónádzaago nídiilkǫ' , áko Ííjip dine'é éí tónteel biyi' tsístł'aaskai , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é bik'ijį' tó ahinéidiiłk'olgo íísdįįd .
PRED:	And Moses stretched out his hand upon the sea , and it came to pass , and it came to pass , and the Egyptians divided them into the sea , and the Lord divided them up against the Egyptians .
GOLD:	So as the sun began to rise , Moses raised his hand over the sea , and the water rushed back into its usual place . The Egyptians tried to escape , but the Lord swept them into the sea .

ID:	2881
INPUT:	David hwe'asdzą́ą́ nidilt'éhígíí ałdó' yisnááh ályaa lá . Ahínowam éí Jézriyeldóó naaghá , Ábigeil bąąh áhásdįįdii Néíbal be'asdzą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę éí Kármeldóó naaghá .
PRED:	David 's two wives were taken away from Jezreel , Nabal 's wife was Nabal 's wife .
GOLD:	David 's two wives , Ahinoam from Jezreel and Abigail , the widow of Nabal from Carmel , were among those captured .

ID:	2882
INPUT:	kózhdoonííł ; jó , ádił adzisiihgo bee ádihozhdiilt'i'go t'áá na'níle'dii agha'yídláhígíí , doodaii' ina'adlo' bee shójoost'e'ígíí , doodaii' hąąh ni'níláhígíí , doodaii' yóó'eeldéelii nízhdiiláhígíí béé'áhozhdilyáahgo éí ákódziidzaaígíí bąą ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	If he has sinned against him , or if he has sinned against him , or if he has sinned against him , then he shall make him clean .
GOLD:	If you have sinned in any of these ways , you are guilty . You must give back whatever you stole , or the money you took by extortion , or the security deposit , or the lost property you found ,

ID:	2883
INPUT:	Jórdan tooh nílíní ha'a'aahjígo táa'go kin haal'áii áádóó Kéínan kéyah bii' táa'go kin haal'áii éí Líívai dine'é baa dadidooh'ááł ; éí kin hadaas'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichééh biniyé nihá át'ée doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt give three cities unto the east side of the Jordan , three cities , and three cities : and the cities shall be for us .
GOLD:	three on the east side of the Jordan River and three on the west in the land of Canaan .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	Áádóó níbaal bii' hodílzinii bá tsin neheeshjíí' náhookǫsjí nool<unk> dooígíí naadiingo ánáádadoohdlííł ,
PRED:	And thou shalt make twenty boards for the north side of the tabernacle ,
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , make another twenty frames ,

ID:	2885
INPUT:	ázhdííniid , ShiBóhólníihii , nihił nishłį́į́ ládą́ą́' nihinaal'a'í t'ááká bits'ą́ą́' dah doohkááh yíila' , t'áá shǫǫdí .
PRED:	He said , “ Lord , if I am with you , do n't turn away from your servant . ”
GOLD:	“ My lord , ” he said , “ if it pleases you , stop here for a while .

ID:	2886
INPUT:	Diné ła' yíighahgóó hidikáahgo , shoo , ats'íís atiingóó sitį́įgo áádóó náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ats'íís yíighahgóó sizį́įgo dayiiłtsą́ , áko kin haal'áadi Diyin God yá halne'ii haastihígíí kééhat'į́įdi yíkaigo yaa dahoolne' .
PRED:	And when a man passed by by by by the road , behold , there was a lion standing by the road , and they came to the city , and told the prophet who dwelt in it .
GOLD:	People who passed by saw the body lying in the road and the lion standing beside it , and they went and reported it in Bethel , where the old prophet lived .

ID:	2887
INPUT:	Azhą́ bíká aashwod índa bidziilgo áńdeishdlaa nidi , t'ahdii t'óó shik'ijį' nidaha'á .
PRED:	Even though I had made my strength and my strength , yet my enemies were still still still turned against me .
GOLD:	I trained them and made them strong , yet now they plot evil against me .

ID:	2888
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David yę́ę áádóó siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í Jó'ab yę́ę dabizhé'é yę́ę bikéé' áhásdįįdgo éí Ííjip kéyahgi Héídad yiyíínii'go Féro ííłní , T'áá shí shikéyahgóó nídeeshdááł biniyé sha'di'ní'aah .
PRED:	When David heard that Joab and the army of Joab and the army of the army had been destroyed , he said to Pharaoh , “ Please let me go back to my own land . ”
GOLD:	When the news reached Hadad in Egypt that David and his commander Joab were both dead , he said to Pharaoh , “ Let me return to my own country . ”

ID:	2889
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áshidííniid , Díí dine'é nísh'į́įgo , shoo , díí diné t'áá íiyisí doo nibída'didzilii danilį́ .
PRED:	And the word of the Lord came unto me , saying , Behold , I see this people , and they are a mighty man .
GOLD:	“ The Lord also said to me , ‘ I have seen how stubborn and rebellious these people are .

ID:	2890
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Háájíshą' ne'asdzą́ą́ Sárah ? Áko ázhdííniid , Níbaal yii' sidá .
PRED:	And they said unto him , Where is Sarah 's wife ? And she said , Thou shalt dwell in the tent .
GOLD:	“ Where is Sarah , your wife ? ” the visitors asked. “ She 's inside the tent , ” Abraham replied .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	Áádóó Miirárai bits'ą́ą́dóó Málai dine'é índa Múshai dine'é ahidideeshchį́ ; díí Miirárai dine'é bada'áłchíní ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	And of the sons of Merari , and of the sons of Merari , these are the families of Merari .
GOLD:	The descendants of Merari were composed of the clans descended from Mahli and Mushi .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	Ákoshą' Jew dine'é jílíinii ha'át'íí bee t'ah atisídi haa nitsáhákees ? Doodaii' ąąh náhinilgishshą' ha'át'íí bee ílį́ ?
PRED:	What is the Jews ? How do you think that you are circumcised ? Or what do you want to be circumcised ?
GOLD:	Then what 's the advantage of being a Jew ? Is there any value in the ceremony of circumcision ?

ID:	2893
INPUT:	Shoo , Bóhólníihii éí áłchíní aa yiinííł , iishch'id bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ineest'ą' hach'į' nahalyéii át'é .
PRED:	Behold , the Lord is like a child in the womb of the womb .
GOLD:	Children are a gift from the Lord ; they are a reward from him .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	Kíídesh , Édriyai , <unk> zor ,
PRED:	He said , “ If you do n't want to live at Mizpah ,
GOLD:	Kedesh , Edrei , En-hazor ,

ID:	2895
INPUT:	Diné léi' hatsijį' ayííł'a' ; éí Jóseph naalte' dooleełgo nahaaznii'ii
PRED:	A man sent a servant to Joseph ,
GOLD:	Then he sent someone to Egypt ahead of them — Joseph , who was sold as a slave .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Ha'át'íida nahasdzáán bikáa'gi bee a'di'noo'ánígíí , t'áá éí yá'ąąshdi bee a'deet'ą́ą doo , áádóó ha'át'íida nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo bee a'di'noo'ánígíí , t'áá éí yá'ąąshdi ałdó' doo bee a'deet'ą́ą da dooleeł .
PRED:	I say to you , ‘ What kind is given to you on earth , it will be given to them in heaven , and it will not be given in heaven . '
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven .

ID:	2897
INPUT:	Nidi ni ánít'į́į́ lá ; diné t'áá bił ahinisht'éii , bił tádísh'aashii , shik'is nílíinii , ni ánít'į́į́ lá ;
PRED:	But you are my brother , and you are my friend , and you are my friend .
GOLD:	Instead , it is you — my equal , my companion and close friend .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	Ish-bósheth bi'diisyį́
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	The Murder of Ishbosheth

ID:	2899
INPUT:	Háálá nihí łah doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ádaat'ínígi ádaaht'į́į́ nít'éé' , baa'ihgo tsi'nidaahkai nít'éé' , adádanoołníí nít'éé' , wáin daahdlą́ą́ nít'éé' , adlą́ nihił dahoneełni nít'éé' , t'áá na'níle'dii nida'soohdlą' , índa e'elyaii doo daaldinii bich'į' nidahohłáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	For ye had done evil things , and ye had drink wine , and drink wine , and drink , and served idols , and served other gods .
GOLD:	You have had enough in the past of the evil things that godless people enjoy — their immorality and lust , their feasting and drunkenness and wild parties , and their terrible worship of idols .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yidááhdóó dahataał le' , háálá nahasdzáán yaa nídóot'įįł biniyé yíghááh . T'áá ákogi át'éii yee nahasdzáán yaa nídóot'įįł ; nihokáá' dine'é t'áá aheełt'éego baa nízh<unk> įįł .
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , for he is coming to judge the earth . He will judge the earth with righteousness , and he will judge the earth .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with fairness .

ID:	2901
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá danół'į́ ; t'áá daats'í bí bikéyahjigo Beth-shíímesh kin shijaa'góó nídoodleeł , áádóó índa ayóó át'éego atínihiilaii éí bí át'į́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł , nidi doo bí át'į́į́góó bí doo atínihiilaagóó nihił béédahoozingo éí t'óó nihich'į' ákóhóót'įįd dooleeł .
PRED:	And look at them , and they shall go to Beth Ekron , and we shall know that he has done great things , and we shall know that he has done to us , but we have done it .
GOLD:	If they cross the border of our land and go to Beth-shemesh , we will know it was the Lord who brought this great disaster upon us . If they do n't , we will know it was not his hand that caused the plague . It came simply by chance . ”

ID:	2902
INPUT:	Áko Gálgatha hoolyéegi yíkaigo éí tsiits'in si'ání jiníigo óolyé ,
PRED:	And when they came to the place of the place of which is called the place of the place of the place ,
GOLD:	And they went out to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó ał'ąą dine'é doo daaldinii yaa naakaigo ch'íniiníłkaadii t'áá éí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa naayá .
PRED:	And the Lord did evil in the sight of the nations , and did evil in the sight of the Lord , according to all the nations which he had brought out from before the Lord .
GOLD:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , following the detestable practices of the pagan nations that the Lord had driven from the land ahead of the Israelites .

ID:	2904
INPUT:	Ákohgo Héíman éí naat'á éé' nizhóníii ła' néidiinil áádóó łį́į́' ałdó' néidiilóozgo Mórdiikai ééh jííłtį́ áádóó łį́į́' bikáá' dah bizneesdáago kintah ha'diitiingóó łį́į́' bił jinílóozgo ájíní , Aláahgo naat'áanii diné yaa bił nihoozhǫǫhgo bił nilíinii ákót'éego áhodoolííł .
PRED:	So Haman took a robe , and put it on Mordecai , and put him on the horses , and put him on the road , and brought him to the city , saying , “ This is what the king will do . ”
GOLD:	So Haman took the robes and put them on Mordecai , placed him on the king 's own horse , and led him through the city square , shouting , “ This is what the king does for someone he wishes to honor ! ”

ID:	2905
INPUT:	Iiláíjah áádóó Zárefathdóó asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii
PRED:	Elijah and Elijah
GOLD:	The Widow at Zarephath

ID:	2906
INPUT:	Bizaad éí Jéíkab dine'é yił ííshjání ííł'į́ ; yee nihwiiz'áanii índa bik'eh hoogáałii Ízrel dine'é yee yił halne' .
PRED:	He has revealed his word to Jacob , his statutes , his statutes , and his statutes .
GOLD:	He has revealed his words to Jacob , his decrees and regulations to Israel .

ID:	2907
INPUT:	Háálá yóó'adashideez'ą́ áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii deidiłid ; t'áá bí ádayiilaii t'áá át'é yee shá dahodoołchįįł yiniyé ádaat'į́ . Éí bąą díí kéyah nahós'a'ígíí bik'ijį' bee hashké niisdzį́į'ii yeideeshxéełgo doo dínóoltsis da .
PRED:	For they have forsaken me , and burn incense to other gods , to burn incense upon me ; therefore I will pour out my wrath upon this land .
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will be poured out on this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	2908
INPUT:	Háálá Jéíkab dine'é bitahgi bee bééhániihii hasht'eyiilaa , áádóó Ízrel dine'é bitahgi bee haz'áanii niinílá . Éí danihizhé'é yę́ę bada'áłchíní bił béédahózingo ádayoolíił doo , yiłníigo yich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	For he has prepared a sign in Jacob , and has made a law in Israel ; for he commanded our fathers to know it .
GOLD:	For he issued his laws to Jacob ; he gave his instructions to Israel.He commanded our ancestorsto teach them to their children ,

ID:	2909
INPUT:	Deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí áníigo jidiizts'ą́ą́' bee ho'ílnii'ígíí éí t'áadoo bi'jiilaa da , áko ho'diisyínígíí t'áá hó hadił bee hohodiit'i' doo . Nidi bee ho'ílnii'ígíí bi'jiilaago éí jidoodzih nít'éé' .
PRED:	When he heard the sound of the trumpet , he did not take away his sin . But when he heard it , he would be guilty .
GOLD:	They heard the alarm but ignored it , so the responsibility is theirs . If they had listened to the warning , they could have saved their lives .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	Hánnah biyiin
PRED:	Hannah 's Death
GOLD:	Hannah 's Prayer of Praise

ID:	2911
INPUT:	Áko táá' daats'í , dį́į́' daats'í tsin sitą́ ánízahgóó da'jíł'eełgo Jesus táłkáá'góó tsinaa'eeł yich'į' yigáałgo dajiiłtsą́ . Áko bik'ee hoł yéé' dahazlį́į́' ,
PRED:	And they saw three or three trees coming to Jesus on the sea , and they were afraid .
GOLD:	They had rowed three or four miles when suddenly they saw Jesus walking on the water toward the boat . They were terrified ,

ID:	2912
INPUT:	áko Jesus yich'į' nitsidinígo'go yich'į' ahééh niizį́į́' . Éí Samériya dine'é jílį́įgo ájít'į́ .
PRED:	And he fell down before Jesus , and gave thanks to him . And he was a man of Samaria .
GOLD:	He fell to the ground at Jesus ' feet , thanking him for what he had done . This man was a Samaritan .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	Áko David éí Saul áyidííniid , Shoo , ha'át'éegoshą' saad yee hadahadziihgo yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , David atínídoolííł , daniłní ?
PRED:	David said to Saul , “ Why do you hear the words of Saul ? Why do you say to David ? ”
GOLD:	Then he shouted to Saul , “ Why do you listen to the people who say I am trying to harm you ?

ID:	2914
INPUT:	Áko díí áhóót'įįdígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł danízingo Jesus yaa haazhjée'go diné biyi'dę́ę́' níłch'i bida'iiníziinii hahaazhjé'ígíí bi'éé' hólǫ́ǫgo índa bintsíkees yá'át'éehgo Jesus yíighahgi sidáago bik'íjíkai , áko t'áá ádzíłtso béédadzisdzííd .
PRED:	And when they saw what had happened , they went down to Jesus , and found him sitting by the evil spirits , and all were afraid .
GOLD:	People rushed out to see what had happened . A crowd soon gathered around Jesus , and they saw the man who had been freed from the demons . He was sitting at Jesus ' feet , fully clothed and perfectly sane , and they were all afraid .

ID:	2915
INPUT:	Nízhi' ayóó át'éii índa t'áá íiyisí bits'ąą hasti'ii yee danózhíigo naa dahaniih le' ! Háálá hó jidiyin !
PRED:	Let them praise thee in thy name , and in thy great name : for he is holy .
GOLD:	Let them praise your great and awesome name.Your name is holy !

ID:	2916
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bidiltłish há hashk'aazhii
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The

ID:	2917
INPUT:	Éí bąągo ch'į́įdiitah ayóo aldeeł áádóó bizéé' doo bí'nól'ąąh áníłtsogóó yee aldeeł , áádóó yee ayóó ádaat'éii áádóó bidine'é deíl'áhígíí áádóó yee ayóó ádaat'é ída'dólzinii índa t'áá háiida baa hoł hózhóonii éí jishcháá' góne' ajiikáah doo .
PRED:	Therefore they will go into the pit of the dead , and the glory of death , and the glory of his people , and the glory , and the glory of his people , and the pit of the pit .
GOLD:	The grave is licking its lips in anticipation , opening its mouth wide.The great and the lowlyand all the drunken mob will be swallowed up .

ID:	2918
INPUT:	Áádóó ánááshidi'ní , Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é ayóó át'éego doo yildinígi át'éego yaa nidaakaigo biniinaa shikin bii' sohodizin doo deeghánígóó bits'ádeesháłígíísh yíní'į́ ? Nidi náánáłahjigo náádínít'į́į́' . Díí biláahgo t'áá íiyisí doo daaldinii yaa nidaakaigo néidííłtsééł .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Son of man , look at my temple because of the great things of Israel . Do you look at my temple , because they are greater than these things ? ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ do you see what they are doing ? Do you see the detestable sins the people of Israel are committing to drive me from my Temple ? But come , and you will see even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	2919
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo binanit'a'í nilíinii éí naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá yił yisnááh dadooleeł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And the king shall take away the princes of captivity , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	And their king and his princes will go into exile together , ” says the Lord .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	Ákondi t'áá shí bee ayóó ánísht'ée dooleełii doo hásht'į́į da ; t'áá łashdilt'éhí t'éí bee ayóó ánísht'éii hoł nilį́įgo hájít'į́ , áko éí á nihojii'aah doo .
PRED:	But I do not want to do this because I do not want to do anything wrong . If anyone is a great man , then he will judge him .
GOLD:	And though I have no wish to glorify myself , God is going to glorify me . He is the true judge .

ID:	2921
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii éí dóola yázhí nááyiisnii' yę́ęgi át'éego náá'iiłniihii ákó'doolííł ; kót'éego náá'iiłniihii éí há bee k'ééhodoodǫǫłii há nááyiisnii'go ádił nida'dziisí'ígíí há yóó'anídidoot'ááł .
PRED:	As a sin offering , so the priest shall make atonement for him , so the priest shall make atonement for him for his sins .
GOLD:	just as he does with the bull offered as a sin offering for the high priest . Through this process , the priest will purify the people , making them right with the Lord , and they will be forgiven .

ID:	2922
INPUT:	Diné badahojoobá'íii t'áadoo le'é yaa yiinííł , t'áá aaníí , hojooba' nahas'áanii yaa jooba'go t'áadoo le'é yich'į' kódeile' .
PRED:	The poor give gifts to the poor ; yea , the poor are kind to them .
GOLD:	She extends a helping hand to the poorand opens her arms to the needy .

ID:	2923
INPUT:	Áko tóhígíí ałch'į' kónádzaago tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí índa łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii áádóó Féro bisiláo t'áá ałtso tónteel biyi' góne' hakéé' íínáago tó bik'i diilkǫ' ; t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' yidzíi' da .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the waters had gone after him , chariots , chariots , and all the army of Pharaoh , and all his army followed him in the sea , and there was none of them .
GOLD:	Then the waters returned and covered all the chariots and charioteers — the entire army of Pharaoh . Of all the Egyptians who had chased the Israelites into the sea , not a single one survived .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	Éí Diyin God bee bits'ádi'nílíidii bee bits'ádi'nílíidgo , bits'ádi'nílídígíí tsé ílíinii bik'i nizdidlaadígíigi át'é , jásper wolyéhígíí nahalingo , tséghádi'nídíniigi át'éego niłtólí .
PRED:	And the glory of God is like the glory of the glory of the glory , as the appearance of the rock , and as the waters of the rock .
GOLD:	It shone with the glory of God and sparkled like a precious stone — like jasper as clear as crystal .

ID:	2925
INPUT:	Bíni'dii naa hashniih doo , háálá bee nihoyíní'áanii bínashiníníłtą́ą́' .
PRED:	Let me praise thee , for thou hast taught me thy statutes .
GOLD:	Let praise flow from my lips , for you have taught me your decrees .

ID:	2926
INPUT:	Niizáíyah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Hatáífa ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii .
PRED:	the sons of Amaziah , the sons of Ahab , the sons of Ahab ,
GOLD:	Neziah , and Hatipha .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	Tsídii wódahgo nidaat'a'ígíí danół'į́ : éí doo k'ééda'didléeh da , doo nidi nída'agish da , índa doo nooh nída'ałchíih da , ákondi nihiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii ba'ałtso' . Da' nihíísh doo éí biláahgo da'nohłį́į da ?
PRED:	You shall not sow the birds of the birds , nor eat the grass , nor the grass , but you shall eat the Father of heaven ?
GOLD:	Look at the birds . They do n't plant or harvest or store food in barns , for your heavenly Father feeds them . And are n't you far more valuable to him than they are ?

ID:	2928
INPUT:	Kin bii' nahadláii éí Dáíban hoolyéegi dah daask'id bighą́ą'di ádaalyaaígóó dadoochah yiniyé eekai ; Mó'ab dine'é éí Nííbo áádóó Médiiba kin haal'áii yaa chaał hadahoyiinííh ; dabitsii' ałtso ádídayoolzhéé' áádóó dabidághaa' ałtso dayííshéé' .
PRED:	They went up to the high places of Heshbon , which is in the hill of the hill country of Heshbon , Moab and Sidon fell down to the head of Lebanon , and the hair of his head fell down , and cut off his head .
GOLD:	Your people will go to their temple in Dibon to mourn.They will go to their sacred shrines to weep.They will wail for the fate of Nebo and Medeba , shaving their heads in sorrow and cutting off their beards .

ID:	2929
INPUT:	Kódaadzaadóó bik'ijį' Jew dine'é hodílzingo áłah nída'ałeeh baa honíyá , áko Jerúsalem góde Jesus jiníyá .
PRED:	After this , Jesus went down to the feast of the Jews , and he went up to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Afterward Jesus returned to Jerusalem for one of the Jewish holy days .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	Díí índída nihidadziiznáago Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo dashdiiná .
PRED:	These are the living creatures that the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	When the people set out for the first time , following the instructions the Lord had given through Moses ,

ID:	2931
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binááł dahináanii bitahdi yisháał doo .
PRED:	I will walk among the living in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	And so I walk in the Lord 's presenceas I live here on earth !

ID:	2932
INPUT:	Áko índa bich'į' nidahwii'náago Bóhólníihii nídayooskan , áko tsístł'adahaaskaii yits'ą́ąjį' yisdáyíínil .
PRED:	Then they cried out to the Lord in distress , and he saved them from their distress .
GOLD:	“ Lord , help ! ” they cried in their trouble , and he rescued them from their distress .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Jesus hach'į' haadzíí'dóó bik'ijį' yá'ąąsh góde anáhóóle'go Diyin God binish'náájí dah neezdá .
PRED:	After the Lord had spoken to Jesus , he went up to heaven and sat on the right hand of God .
GOLD:	When the Lord Jesus had finished talking with them , he was taken up into heaven and sat down in the place of honor at God 's right hand .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel áyidííniid , Haash nízáágóó Saul baa yínííł nílį́į doo ; shą́ą́' , nináałgo Ízrel dine'é binanit'a'í jílį́į́ nít'éé' nidi doo honiizį́į' da ? Ak'ah ni'adee' bii' hadíłbin , áádóó Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó diné nilíinii Jésii bighangóó nideesh'aał , háálá éí biye'ké bitahdóó ła' aláahgo naat'áanii dooleełgo ádá nídiishtį́ .
PRED:	The Lord said to Samuel , “ How long will you look for Saul ? You will not be king over Israel , but you will be filled with oil , and I will send you out of the house of Jesse the son of Jesse . ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord said to Samuel , “ You have mourned long enough for Saul . I have rejected him as king of Israel , so fill your flask with olive oil and go to Bethlehem . Find a man named Jesse who lives there , for I have selected one of his sons to be my king . ”

ID:	2935
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul éí bá nidaal'a'í binaagóó naazínígíí áyidííniid , Bénjamin dine'é nohłíinii , da'íísínółts'ą́ą́' , da' t'ááłá'í nootínígo kéyah índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'éédílyéeh doogi Jésii biye' wolyéiísh nihaa hodidoo'ááł índa da' t'áásh ánółtso siláo miilgo binanit'a'í danohłį́įgo índa siláo neeznádiingo binanit'a'í danohłį́įgo ánihidoolííł ?
PRED:	Saul said to his servants , “ Listen , Benjamin , all you men of Benjamin ! Do you want to destroy the land and destroy the fruit of Jesse ? Will you make you a captain of his army ? ”
GOLD:	“ Listen here , you men of Benjamin ! ” Saul shouted to his officers when he heard the news . “ Has that son of Jesse promised every one of you fields and vineyards ? Has he promised to make you all generals and captains in his army ?

ID:	2936
INPUT:	Éí bada'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii dabízhi' naaltsoos bikáá' ádaalyaaígíí hazhó'ó naaskáa'go háí ádaat'ínígíí doo hózhǫ́ bééhózin da . Éí bąą doo dazhdiyingóó haa nitsáhákeesgo nááda'iiłniihii t'áadoo bił dahodéélta' da .
PRED:	And so that they do not know that they are written in the book of the sons of their families , and they were not counted with the priests .
GOLD:	They searched for their names in the genealogical records , but they were not found , so they were disqualified from serving as priests .

ID:	2937
INPUT:	Sámuel éí Saul áyidííniid , Shí náásgóó ádahodooníiłii yaa halne'ii nishłį́ . Nílááh , aláahgo yanáalk'id bikáa'jį' shilą́ąjį' hasínááh , háálá díí jį́ nił adeeshį́į́ł , áádóó yiską́ągo néé'níshníihgo índa baa nitsíníkeesígíí t'áá át'é bee nił hodeeshnih .
PRED:	Samuel said to Saul , “ I am the prophet . Go ahead of the high place where I will eat with you today , because I will give you all your thoughts . ”
GOLD:	“ I am the seer ! ” Samuel replied . “ Go up to the place of worship ahead of me . We will eat there together , and in the morning I 'll tell you what you want to know and send you on your way .

ID:	2938
INPUT:	T'áá háiida díí bee haz'áanii t'áá aaníígóó áníinii doo bik'eh ájít'éégóó éí hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	Cursed be he that does not obey the law , and all the people shall say , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who does not affirm and obey the terms of these instructions . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	2939
INPUT:	T'áá Christ ayóó'ánihó'nínígi át'éego ayóó'ó'ó'ní bee dayínóhkááh . Jó , Christ nihá niná'ádeet'ą́ągo łikání halchingo nááhániihii nilį́įgo Diyin God yich'į' náá'ádiisnii' .
PRED:	As Christ loved you as he loved you , so you offer a burnt offering to God .
GOLD:	Live a life filled with love , following the example of Christ . He loved us and offered himself as a sacrifice for us , a pleasing aroma to God .

ID:	2940
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí niba' ádaat'éhígíí doo ła' t'óó baa yáhásinígi ábi'dil'į́į da le' , nidi t'áadoo biniinaanígóó shindahaz'áanii ádaa yádahiniizįįh le' .
PRED:	No one will be ashamed , but the law of the law will be ashamed .
GOLD:	No one who trusts in you will ever be disgraced , but disgrace comes to those who try to deceive others .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Rábshakeh yiizį'go ayóó íits'a'go Jew k'ehjí chánahgo yee haadzíi'go ání , Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ayóó át'é nanit'a'í nilíinii yee hahaasdzí'ígíí dadoohts'į́į́h .
PRED:	Then the captain stood and cried out in a loud voice , saying , Hear the words of the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Then the chief of staff stood and shouted in Hebrew to the people on the wall , “ Listen to this message from the great king of Assyria !

ID:	2942
INPUT:	Kót'éego Líívai dine'é bee Ízrel dine'é náádabi'diiznii'ii ba'aan dzidínéezdee'ii béeso hak'é naalyáhígíí Mózes yaa deiznil .
PRED:	So they gave Moses the Levites the money of the children of Israel , the money that was twenty and twenty and twenty years old .
GOLD:	So Moses collected the silver for redeeming the firstborn sons of Israel who exceeded the number of Levites .

ID:	2943
INPUT:	Diné yíl'áhígíí ałdó' ábizhdííniid , E'e'aah biyaají k'os haleehgo daołtséehgo , t'áá áko ádadohniih , Nahodoołtį́į́ł lá , áko t'áá ákót'įįh .
PRED:	He also said to the crowd , “ When you see the cloud in the clouds , you will see it , and you will understand it . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to the crowd and said , “ When you see clouds beginning to form in the west , you say , ‘ Here comes a shower . ' And you are right .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	Haa nízáagishą' díí doo yá'áshónígi ádaat'į́įgo dah yinéłígíí shik'ijį' danilį́įgo saad dahółǫ́ǫ doo ? Ízrel dine'é shik'ijį' danilį́įgo saad dahółǫ́ǫgo shik'ijį' yádaałti'go diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	How long will these evil things come against me ? I have heard the words of Israel against me ?
GOLD:	“ How long must I put up with this wicked community and its complaints about me ? Yes , I have heard the complaints the Israelites are making against me .

ID:	2945
INPUT:	Béésh łitsoii naneesdizígíí áádóó da'ahól<unk> go náhineests'ee'go éí béésh łitsoii íí'áa dooígíí bílátah dah doo'niłígíí biniyé áyiilaa ; éí dah doo'niłígíí yá tsosts'idgo , náánáła'ígíí ałdó' yá tsosts'idgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he made the bronze , and the other pillars thereof , and the rest thereof , and the rest of the seven .
GOLD:	Each capital was decorated with seven sets of latticework and interwoven chains .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	Áádóó Líívai dine'é yádaałti'go Ízrel dine'é hastóí danilíinii t'áá ałtso ayóó íits'a'go yich'į' hadadoodzih :
PRED:	And the Levites shall speak with a loud voice unto all the elders of Israel , saying ,
GOLD:	“ Then the Levites will shout to all the people of Israel :

ID:	2947
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii índa bá kót'éego daaníinii áádóó bikéédę́ę́' naat'áanii danilíinii índa Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso ákwii nidaakaii éí béésh łigaii áádóó óola índa beedí chodao'íinii nihiDiyin God bikin biniyé adayiiznilii dah dahidiilo'go bitaa sénii' .
PRED:	And he took the king , and the princes , and the princes , and the vessels of Israel , and the vessels of thy God , and the vessels of the house of our God .
GOLD:	to be in charge of transporting the silver , the gold , the gold bowls , and the other items that the king , his council , his officials , and all the people of Israel had presented for the Temple of God .

ID:	2948
INPUT:	Aró'er kin shijaa'di kééhót'íinii , atiin bąąhdóó sínízį́įgo ha'ísíidgo diné noochéełii índa asdzání yisdágháahii , Haa hóót'įįd , diníigo nidabídíłkid .
PRED:	“ How long will we say , ‘ You are standing by the road , who lives by the road , a man and a woman who is saved ? ' ”
GOLD:	You people of Aroer , stand beside the road and watch.Shout to those who flee from Moab , ‘ What has happened there ? '

ID:	2949
INPUT:	Daneeshjoolgo t'áá ła' yaa ádaadzaa , áko hééł deidooyéełgi yi'oh daneel'ą́ , nidi t'áá bí ałdó' dabidisná .
PRED:	They bowed down on their faces , and they are able to kill them , but they also have taken away .
GOLD:	Both the idols and their owners are bowed down.The gods can not protect the people , and the people can not protect the gods.They go off into captivity together .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad Diyin God binááł shich'į' ádee hadídziihgo t'áadoo shina'ílo'í doo ; shiye' ałdó' dooda , shinálí ałdó' dooda ; naa jooshba'ígi át'éego ni ałdó' shich'į' t'áá ákónít'ée doo , áádóó kéyah bikáá' níínínánígi ałdó' bich'į' ákónít'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	Now therefore , if you swear before God , do not let my son also , my son also , I will also do to you , and I will also do to you as you have done to me .
GOLD:	“ Swear to me in God 's name that you will never deceive me , my children , or any of my descendants . I have been loyal to you , so now swear that you will be loyal to me and to this country where you are living as a foreigner . ”

ID:	2951
INPUT:	Diyin God éí dził nahjį' kóyiił'įįhgo doo hoł béédahózin da ; báháchįįhgo dził nídeidiyeenił .
PRED:	God makes the mountain known , and they do not know that it is in his anger .
GOLD:	“ Without warning , he moves the mountains , overturning them in his anger .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihóíyakim éí kóbididííniił , Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí naaltsoos yisdisii dííníłidgo kódíní , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé díí naaltsoos yisdisii kót'éego bikáá' bik'e'shíníłchį́įgo kódííníniid , Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í doonéełgo díí kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' yidoołchxǫǫł , áádóó bikáa'gi diné kéédahat'íinii índa naaldlooshii nahjį' kwíidoolííł ?
PRED:	“ Thus says the king of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord says : ‘ Why have you written in this book , saying , ‘ Why do you write this book in the book of the book of the king of Babylon , and destroy all the people of the land ? '
GOLD:	Then say to the king , ‘ This is what the Lord says : You burned the scroll because it said the king of Babylon would destroy this land and empty it of people and animals .

ID:	2953
INPUT:	Ex . 23 : <unk>
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Festival of Shelters

ID:	2954
INPUT:	Shí éí t'áá ałtsoní shoosánígo ádííniid , Ts'ídá doo nahjį' kóshidoolíłí da .
PRED:	He said to me , “ I will not take away from me . ”
GOLD:	When I was prosperous , I said , “ Nothing can stop me now ! ”

ID:	2955
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí baa nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihił dahózhǫ́ , háálá yá'ąąshdi ayóó át'éii nihaa dahidoolyééł , háálá t'áá ákót'éego Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yę́ę t'áá nihítséedi atídayííł'įįd .
PRED:	Be glad with joy , because the great things of heaven will be given to you , because the prophets did before him .
GOLD:	Be happy about it ! Be very glad ! For a great reward awaits you in heaven . And remember , the ancient prophets were persecuted in the same way .

ID:	2956
INPUT:	Ayóó'ánósh'níinii , tsį́įłgo ánít'į́ , áádóó ch'il łikání dahalchinígíí spáis wolyéii dził bił ní'áagi jádí , doodaii' bįįhką' naagháhígíigi ánít'éego shił yí'ash .
PRED:	My dear love , come quickly , and I have gone with me like a garden of spices , like a garden , or like a garden .
GOLD:	Come away , my love ! Be like a gazelleor a young stag on the mountains of spices .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Líyah bijijoodláago bił bééhózin , áko jooltsą́ągo áhoolaa , nidi Réíchel éí doo ałchíi da .
PRED:	The Lord saw that Leah had faith with Leah , and he saw it , but Rachel did not have any other .
GOLD:	When the Lord saw that Leah was unloved , he enabled her to have children , but Rachel could not conceive .

ID:	2958
INPUT:	Honoojíidi nihwéédahaas<unk> gíí
PRED:	The Death of the wilderness
GOLD:	Remembering Israel 's Wanderings

ID:	2959
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá ałkéé' hasnilígíí bik'ehgo Christ ts'ídá áłtsé náádiidzáii éí átsé , áadi índa t'áá bí náánádzáá góne' daboodlą́ągo daabíhígíí náábidi'dooljah .
PRED:	But the first will come first first , and the first will be raised , and those who believe in him will be raised again .
GOLD:	But there is an order to this resurrection : Christ was raised as the first of the harvest ; then all who belong to Christ will be raised when he comes back .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus kóníigo hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yee hach'į' hanáánáádzíí' ,
PRED:	Jesus told them this parable :
GOLD:	Jesus also told them other parables . He said ,

ID:	2961
INPUT:	Ła' shį́į́ doo yil'aadii nishłį́įgo shaa nitsídaakees da , nidi nihí éí nihich'į' yil'aadii nishłį́įgo shaa nitsídaahkees . Háálá yil'aadii nishłį́įgo Bóhólníihii bá dahinohnánígíí bee shá bee ééhózinii danohłį́ .
PRED:	If any of you think I am a apostles , but I am a judge . You are a sign to the Lord .
GOLD:	Even if others think I am not an apostle , I certainly am to you . You yourselves are proof that I am the Lord 's apostle .

ID:	2962
INPUT:	Áádóó joo'ash nít'éé' , jó'akon , aa ádahalyáanii ła' kin haal'áagi yíkaigo , ádahóót'įįdígíí t'áá ałtso aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii yee yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	And when he went , behold , there came some of the prophets in the city , and they told the priests all that had done .
GOLD:	As the women were on their way , some of the guards went into the city and told the leading priests what had happened .

ID:	2963
INPUT:	éí díí k'ad hoolzhishígíí biyi' hwee hólónígíí lą'ídi ahą́ą́h nániiláago haa nídoolyééł , áádóó łahgo náhodeesdzáago iiná doo ninít'i'ii hwee hodooleeł .
PRED:	Now in this time he will receive many times , and he will give eternal life to eternal life .
GOLD:	will be repaid many times over in this life , and will have eternal life in the world to come . ”

ID:	2964
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hólǫ́ǫgi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God náhodidoo'áłígi ákwii daohsą́ą doo ; ni áádóó niye' áádóó nitsi' áádóó diné ná naal'a'í áádóó asdzání ná naal'a'í índa Líívai dine'é nilíinii t'áá nighangi nił yah e'etiingóó nił kééhat'íinii Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hólǫ́ǫgi baa nidaahkaígíí t'áá ałtso baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	But you shall eat it in the place which the Lord your God is with you , and you , your son , your son , your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , and the Levites , and all the house of the Lord your God is with you .
GOLD:	You must eat these in the presence of the Lord your God at the place he will choose . Eat them there with your children , your servants , and the Levites who live in your towns , celebrating in the presence of the Lord your God in all you do .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	Diné ba'ahódlíii éí bee bik'ihojidlíii t'óó ahayói doo , nidi diné adoot'įįłígíí yaa tsxį́į́ł niizį́į'ii éí t'áá atíbidi'doolníłí .
PRED:	Blessed is a faithful blessing , but a man who lies in his feet shall be put to shame .
GOLD:	The trustworthy person will get a rich reward , but a person who wants quick riches will get into trouble .

ID:	2966
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , <unk> dahałt'i'go áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó shindaha'áago t'áá ałtso disíníts'ą́ą́' ;
PRED:	Hear , O Lord , and hear all their wickedness ;
GOLD:	Lord , you have heard the vile names they call me.You know all about the plans they have made .

ID:	2967
INPUT:	Diyin God bits'os nineezígíí nik'íidoołtih áádóó bit'a' biyaajį' yisdádínííchééł . Yee ba'ahódlíii éí naagé índa béésh téél ách'ą́ą́h dah yit'áałii nihá nilį́ .
PRED:	He will cut off the wings of God , and he will deliver them from his wings ; he is a faithful shield and a shield .
GOLD:	He will cover you with his feathers.He will shelter you with his wings.His faithful promises are your armor and protection .

ID:	2968
INPUT:	Áko díí diné bidił yę́ę bee Jó'ab bihodiit'i' doo áádóó ha'áłchíní ahoolchíłígíí ałdó' bihodiit'i'go ahool'áa doo , nidi David áádóó ba'áłchíní áádóó ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii índa bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' bee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'go ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	And the blood of Joab shall be for ever and for ever , but for David and his children , and for his throne , and for ever .
GOLD:	May their blood be on Joab and his descendants forever , and may the Lord grant peace forever to David , his descendants , his dynasty , and his throne . ”

ID:	2969
INPUT:	Nidi yee hach'į' haadzí'ígíí doo bik'izh'diitą́ą da .
PRED:	But the word which he commanded , did not understand .
GOLD:	But they did n't understand what he meant .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	Áko Ábsalam éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kééhat'į́įgo naaki nááhai índa aláahgo naat'áanii doo yił ahoot'į́į da .
PRED:	Absalom lived in Jerusalem two years in Jerusalem , and he did not find the king .
GOLD:	Absalom lived in Jerusalem for two years , but he never got to see the king .

ID:	2971
INPUT:	Diné baa nijigháii bits'ázhdoogááłáádóó ádaa hoji'niihígíí doo ajít'ée da jidooleeł biniyé kódahale' .
PRED:	Let him turn away from a man , and let him go down to him , that he may not stand .
GOLD:	He makes them turn from doing wrong ; he keeps them from pride .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	Áko da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii na'nitin woodláanii bee bidziil ádaalyaa , áádóó t'áá ákwíí jį́ lą'í ihidiikáahgo k'ee'ąą yilzhish .
PRED:	And the church is strong in the faith , and many days there are many .
GOLD:	So the churches were strengthened in their faith and grew larger every day .

ID:	2973
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad díí dadoohts'į́į́h , nihich'į' hodiiznáa'ii , wáin t'áágééd nidi nídadí'nóohdlą́ą'ii ,
PRED:	Now therefore hear this , and hear not wine , but drink not .
GOLD:	But now listen to this , you afflicted oneswho sit in a drunken stupor , though not from drinking wine .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	Dahoniidzą́ , danízingo ádadiníl'íinii áádóó , Hóyáanii daniidlį́ , danízinii bich'į' doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	Woe to those who know wisdom , and to those who are wise , and to those who know him !
GOLD:	What sorrow for those who are wise in their own eyesand think themselves so clever .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	<unk> tsoh , hayoołkááł biye' nílíinii , <unk> , dooládó' yá'ąąshdę́ę́' hadadzííníłhaal da ! Ał'ąą dine'é doo dabidziilgóó ádanile'ii nílíinii , dooládó' nihokáa'jį' andi'yoolghan da !
PRED:	How many days , O son of man , thou hast cast out of heaven ! How long shall the nations be put to death !
GOLD:	“ How you are fallen from heaven , O shining star , son of the morning ! You have been thrown down to the earth , you who destroyed the nations of the world .

ID:	2976
INPUT:	Háálá , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ni t'éiyá nee shił chohoo'į́ . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , t'áá ániid naasháádą́ą́' naa jííníshłí .
PRED:	For I trust in thee , O Lord God , in thee I have put my trust in thee , O Lord God .
GOLD:	O Lord , you alone are my hope.I 've trusted you , O Lord , from childhood .

ID:	2977
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii David éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' diyingo niidiní'áanii ał'ąą ana'í yik'eh deesdlį́'ígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó béésh łigaii índa óola t'áá íídą́ą́' diyingo niidiní'ánígíí éí yíjaa' yę́ę yíyiyiiłtsoodgo diyingo niidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	So King David took the silver and the gold that he had given to the Lord . He took it from all the nations that had been given to the Lord . He took it and gave it to him .
GOLD:	King David dedicated all these gifts to the Lord , as he did with the silver and gold from the other nations he had defeated —

ID:	2978
INPUT:	Áádóó diné índa asdzání t'óó ahayóí Bóhólníihii dayoosdląądgo yaa dadzoozlíi'go hohidiikai .
PRED:	And many women believed in the Lord , and believed in the Lord .
GOLD:	Yet more and more people believed and were brought to the Lord — crowds of both men and women .

ID:	2979
INPUT:	jó , diné éí kin ííléehii níléí wóyahdę́ę́' tsé'éłkáa'gi ha'íítł'inígíí nahojílin , áko tó dááląądgo bízdeesxał , nidi doo hidó'nááł át'ée da , háálá tsé'éłkáa'gi bidziilgo ályaa éí bąą .
PRED:	Behold , a man that is in the house is like a stone that is on the rock , and the waters is not in the sight of the flood , because it is made strong in the rock .
GOLD:	It is like a person building a house who digs deep and lays the foundation on solid rock . When the floodwaters rise and break against that house , it stands firm because it is well built .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	Áko deesk'aazgo , nidaal'a'ígíí áádóó siláo éí t'eesh nídeidiiłtłahgo yich'į' naazį́įgo nída'iidzííł ; Peter ałdó' ákwii atah sizį́įgo ná'iidzííł .
PRED:	And when they set them up in the morning , and put them on fire , and Peter stood among them .
GOLD:	Because it was cold , the household servants and the guards had made a charcoal fire . They stood around it , warming themselves , and Peter stood with them , warming himself .

ID:	2981
INPUT:	Christ bee t'áá ła' <unk> jée'go ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níi doo .
PRED:	If there is one another in Christ , love one another .
GOLD:	Keep on loving each other as brothers and sisters .

ID:	2982
INPUT:	Dáda'ak'eh yaa ádahalyáanii danohłíinii , ádaa yádanohdzįįh ; ch'il na'atł'o'ii yaa ádahalyáanii danohłíinii , tł'oh naadą́ą́' áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í baa daohchxa , háálá nídaohi<unk> ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	Be strong , you shepherds of the field ; you princes of the vine , you princes of grain and wheat , for the time has been destroyed .
GOLD:	Despair , all you farmers ! Wail , all you vine growers ! Weep , because the wheat and barley — all the crops of the field — are ruined .

ID:	2983
INPUT:	Áko ashkii bił baa jíkai , nít'éé' níłch'i bi'iiníziinii éí Jesus yiyiiłtsą́ągo t'áá áko ashkii ahaniiní'ą́ , áko naa'ajíígo'go hazhéé' hahagháahgo nidzimaas .
PRED:	And when he saw the boy , the devil saw Jesus , and the boy lifted up his hand upon him ; and he fell down , and fell down upon him .
GOLD:	So they brought the boy . But when the evil spirit saw Jesus , it threw the child into a violent convulsion , and he fell to the ground , writhing and foaming at the mouth .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	Áádóó díí naaltsoos biyi'dóó saad ádahodooníiłii bee baa dahóóne'ígíí ła'da bizhdíí'ą́ągo , iiná tsin sikaadii índa diyingo kin haal'áii díí naaltsoos biyi' baa hane'ii łahjį' hóó' dooleeł yę́ę Diyin God hats'ą́ą́' nahjį' kwíidoolííł .
PRED:	And he gave them the words of this book in this book , that he may take away from the words of life , and of the holy tree , and of the holy tree , and of the holy city .
GOLD:	And if anyone removes any of the words from this book of prophecy , God will remove that person 's share in the tree of life and in the holy city that are described in this book .

ID:	2985
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Yee hadahaasdzíi'ii yá'át'éehgo yee hadaasdzíí' .
PRED:	The Lord said to me , “ The prophets have spoken good . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord said to me , ‘ What they have said is right .

ID:	2986
INPUT:	1Kgs . 8 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of the Temple
GOLD:	Solomon 's Prayer of Dedication

ID:	2987
INPUT:	Dine'é t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bada'ahódlíii yah ahidookah biniyé dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó ąą ádaohłe' .
PRED:	open the gates of the righteous , that ye may enter into the gates of the righteous .
GOLD:	Open the gates to all who are righteous ; allow the faithful to enter .

ID:	2988
INPUT:	Éímas áádóó Amazáíyah
PRED:	Amaziah and Amaziah
GOLD:	Amos and Amaziah

ID:	2989
INPUT:	táá' góne' éí łį́į́łgaii bighą́ą́h dínil , índa dį́į́' góne' éí łį́į́stł'inii bidziilii bighą́ą́h dínil .
PRED:	And in the third time the white horses were white , and the fourth beast .
GOLD:	the third by white horses , and the fourth by powerful dappled-gray horses .

ID:	2990
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah ííyáago índa be'iina' nidahidoot'ihígíí baa ákoniizį́į́' .
PRED:	But I knew that he went into the temple of God and life .
GOLD:	Then I went into your sanctuary , O God , and I finally understood the destiny of the wicked .

ID:	2991
INPUT:	Hazhó'ó ábizhdííniidgo ájíní , Férisii danilíinii bidíík'ǫsh bee taos'nii' niilyółí índa Hérad bidíík'ǫsh bee taos'nii' niilyółí bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ Take heed of the Pharisees and of the bread of the Pharisees , and of bread . ”
GOLD:	As they were crossing the lake , Jesus warned them , “ Watch out ! Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and of Herod . ”

ID:	2992
INPUT:	Áádóó ánihidííniid , Ámor dine'é bidził daní'áhígóó éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaa hodiní'áníjį' nooná .
PRED:	He said to you , “ The mountain of the Amorites , which the Lord your God gives you to the wilderness .
GOLD:	I said to you , ‘ You have now reached the hill country of the Amorites that the Lord our God is giving us .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	Diné doo áhályáanii hoł yílįįdii éí tsé bee aditł'į́į́h bídziistł'ónígíí nahalin .
PRED:	A fool is like a fool in a stone , like a stone in a stone .
GOLD:	Honoring a foolis as foolish as tying a stone to a slingshot .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	éí yoołkáałdi diné shá nidaal'a'ígíí índa asdzání shá nidaal'a'ígíi nidit'áá biláahgo shiNíłch'i baa dideesh'áałgo , shá dahalne' dooleeł .
PRED:	In that day I will give my Spirit more than my servants and women .
GOLD:	In those days I will pour out my Spiriteven on my servants — men and women alike — and they will prophesy .

ID:	2995
INPUT:	Háálá ałk'idą́ą́' David haa halne'go ádííniid : Bóhólníihii t'áá áłahjį' shilą́ąjį' hojílǫ́ǫgo hweesh'į́ , háálá shinish'náájí hojílǫ́ , áko doo shił na'ii'náa da doo .
PRED:	For David told David , “ The Lord is always before me , because he is at my right hand , and he will not live . ”
GOLD:	King David said this about him : ‘ I see that the Lord is always with me.I will not be shaken , for he is right beside me .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	Nihí Diyin God baa dayoohnéehii , k'ad díí baa ntsídaohkees ; doo ádaoht'į́į́góogo t'óó nanihidiyeeshdlałgo doo ła'da yisdánihidiyoonił da .
PRED:	If you do not forget God , I will destroy you , no one will save you .
GOLD:	Repent , all of you who forget me , or I will tear you apart , and no one will help you .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	Nídísdzihígíí nidi shich'į' yaa nichį'got'áá íiyisí shił niiłch'iihgo áshósin .
PRED:	I am in my flesh , and I am filled with sorrow .
GOLD:	He will not let me catch my breath , but fills me instead with bitter sorrows .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	Hodiyingo haz'ánígi bich'į' yah e'etiinígi ch'é'étiin siláii ánoolninígíí índa agháago hodiyingo haz'ání ánoolninígíí t'áá áłah dik'ą́ągo ádaalyaa .
PRED:	And the door of the court , and the door of the sanctuary , and the inner court , were gathered together together , and the inner sanctuary .
GOLD:	There were square columns at the entrance to the sanctuary , and the ones at the entrance of the Most Holy Place were similar .

ID:	2999
INPUT:	Jó'akon , nináshidee'aahígíí k'ad kwe'é shił hólǫ́ǫgo bikáá' adání yik'i dah déesnii' .
PRED:	Behold , the one who sent me is with me is here , and my hands is upon my table .
GOLD:	“ But here at this table , sitting among us as a friend , is the man who will betray me .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí bi'aláahgo naat'áanii bá bee yisdáhóót'i'ii ayóó át'éii nilį́ ; ak'ah bik'i yaadziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii David áádóó ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii yaa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	The Lord is a king of salvation ; his mercy and his house forever .
GOLD:	You give great victories to your king ; you show unfailing love to your anointed , to David and all his descendants forever . ”

ID:	3001
INPUT:	áádóó Líyah ba'áłchíní yił áháníjį' hach'į' niikaigo ałdó' yaa ánáádaadzaa , áádóó bik'ijį' Jóseph índa Réíchel áháníjį' niní'áazhgo yaa ánáánádzaa .
PRED:	And Leah brought near to his sons , and did as they had done , and Joseph and Rachel went down to meet them .
GOLD:	Next came Leah with her children , and they bowed before him . Finally , Joseph and Rachel came forward and bowed before him .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	T'áá háiida éí dé'éyóní , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii , doodaii' sáanii bąąh ádahasdįįdii bá bee nihodiit'aahii bits'ą́ą́' dzidiiłgęęzii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	Whoever is a stranger or a fatherless or a widow , a curse of a widow ; and all the people shall say , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who denies justice to foreigners , orphans , or widows . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	3003
INPUT:	K'adę́ę haiłkaahgo t'áá ádzíłtso ch'iyáán ła' dazhdooyį́įłgo Paul yaa náhooskan kóníigo , K'ad dį́į́'ts'áadah yiiłkaah ; t'óó át'ah danohsingo t'áadoo da'ohsání .
PRED:	All the days of the morning they ate food , saying , “ Now are four days , and do not eat . ”
GOLD:	Just as day was dawning , Paul urged everyone to eat . “ You have been so worried that you have n't touched food for two weeks , ” he said .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	índa bee ádít'oodí , hatsiits'iin bik'ídeesdiz nít'é'ígíí , éí doo na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idígíí sinilígíí bił sinil da , nidi t'áá sahdii yisdisgo siłtsooz .
PRED:	and he put a robe on his head , and put it on his head , but he put it on him .
GOLD:	while the cloth that had covered Jesus ' head was folded up and lying apart from the other wrappings .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	Áyąądą́ą́' Judíyagi kéédahojit'ínígíí dziłjį' choda'iizhdooł'įįł , áádóó kin hadaas'áagi kéédahojit'ínígíí ch'íhizhdookah , índa binaagóó kéédahojit'ínígíí éí doo ákóne' adahizhdookah da ,
PRED:	The people who live in Judea will look at the mountain , and those who live in the towns will go out , and those who live in the towns will not go away .
GOLD:	Then those in Judea must flee to the hills . Those in Jerusalem must get out , and those out in the country should not return to the city .

ID:	3006
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nánídlíní da
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Everything Is Meaningless

ID:	3007
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ání , Maikéíyah daosiłgo kin haal'áádóó naat'áanii Éíman áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii biye' Jó'ash bich'į' bił nídadohkááh .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said , “ Take Micaiah Micaiah , and bring him back to Joash the son of Joash , and to the king . ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	3008
INPUT:	Riihobówam nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Rehoboam 's King Rehoboam
GOLD:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah

ID:	3009
INPUT:	nidi tsin bineest'ą' bits'ą́ą́dóó yá'át'ééhjí índa doo yá'át'ééhjí bééhózin dooleełii ts'ídá doo dííyį́įł da , háálá bąąhdóó ííníyą́ą́' bijį́įdi t'áá aaníí dadíítsaał .
PRED:	But you shall not eat the fruit of the tree of evil and evil , for you shall die in that day .
GOLD:	except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil . If you eat its fruit , you are sure to die . ”

ID:	3010
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bich'į' chánahgo ahééh nisin doo ; t'áá aaníí , diné t'óó ahayóí bitahgóó baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will give thanks to the Lord ; yea , I will praise among many people .
GOLD:	But I will give repeated thanks to the Lord , praising him to everyone .

ID:	3011
INPUT:	Áádóó ashkii éí Jánathan k'aa' yee adziist'ohíjį' yílwodgo Jánathan ábidííniid , Da' niláahdiísh k'aa' doo ahineezdee' da ?
PRED:	And the boy ran to Jonathan , and Jonathan said to Jonathan , “ Are we not able to fall ? ”
GOLD:	When the boy had almost reached the arrow , Jonathan shouted , “ The arrow is still ahead of you .

ID:	3012
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3013
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yá'át'éehgo hináago t'áá kin haal'áá nít'éé' diné bił dahózhǫ́ǫ łeh , áádóó diné doo yá'áshóonii bikéé' áhádįįhgo diné bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dadilwosh łeh .
PRED:	The righteous shall be glad , and the city shall be glad , and the wicked shall cry out with joy .
GOLD:	The whole city celebrates when the godly succeed ; they shout for joy when the wicked die .

ID:	3014
INPUT:	Áádóó Éísahel éí Ábner yikéé' nídiilwodgo nishtł'ajigo índa nish'náajigo t'áadoo haalyeedí Ábner yikéé' yilwoł .
PRED:	And Abner fled and followed Abner , and followed him not in the right hand , nor in the left hand of Abner .
GOLD:	and he began chasing Abner . He pursued him relentlessly , not stopping for anything .

ID:	3015
INPUT:	Zerowáíyah biyáázh Jó'ab bik'is Abísheiyai éí akéédę́ę́' táa'go nibidee'nilígíí ajítahgo aláahgo hóhólnííh ; éí bitsiidétáán néidiitą́ągo yee táadi neeznádiin diné neistseed , áko diné tált'éhígíí atah jílį́ ho'di'ní .
PRED:	And Joab the son of Zeruiah , the son of Zeruiah , the son of Zeruiah , took three hundred men , and killed them with his spear ; and he was among the three hundred men .
GOLD:	Abishai son of Zeruiah , the brother of Joab , was the leader of the Thirty . He once used his spear to kill 300 enemy warriors in a single battle . It was by such feats that he became as famous as the Three .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	Díí éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áhóót'įįdjí nááhániihii át'é ; t'áádóo nídí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdígíí bee Bóhólníihii bik'ijį' dzizlį́į́' nít'éé' .
PRED:	This is the sin offering of the Lord : yea , he became against the Lord .
GOLD:	This is a guilt offering , for you have been guilty of an offense against the Lord . ”

ID:	3017
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' David nídii'na'go tsé'áándę́ę́' haayáago Saul yikéé' hadoolghaazhgo ání , Bóhoníshníihii , aláahgo shinanit'a'í nílíinii . Áko nít'éé' Saul t'ą́ą́' nídéét'į́į'go hoołtsą́ , t'áá áko David yaa ádziidzaago ni'jį' tsé'yaa jineeshjool .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when David rose up from the cave , that David went out of the cave , and cried out to Saul , my lord , my lord , my lord . And Saul looked upon his face .
GOLD:	David came out and shouted after him , “ My lord the king ! ” And when Saul looked around , David bowed low before him .

ID:	3018
INPUT:	Díí <unk> doo tł'oh naadą́ą́' dadiigaii da ? Bóhólníihii baa néideeshkąąłgo adi'níigo nahałtingo íidoolííł , áko baa ákodadínóohsįįłígíí índa dadínóoł'įįłígíí éí ts'ídá ayóó át'éego doo yá'áshónígi ádaot'įįdígíí yee' Bóhólníihii binááł ádaot'įįd ; jó , aláahgo naat'áanii ádá dayínóokeed .
PRED:	Do n't we ask for this grain ? He will send rain to the Lord , and I will ask you what you have done . You have done evil in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	You know that it does not rain at this time of the year during the wheat harvest . I will ask the Lord to send thunder and rain today . Then you will realize how wicked you have been in asking the Lord for a king ! ”

ID:	3019
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá Jónah éí Níneveh dine'é yá bee ééhózinii silį́'ígi át'éego , t'áá ákót'éego Diné Silį́į'ii ałdó' , díí k'ad ahoolchíłígíí bá bee ééhózinii dooleeł .
PRED:	For as it is a sign of a sign , so shall the Son of Man also be a sign for this generation .
GOLD:	What happened to him was a sign to the people of Nineveh that God had sent him . What happens to the Son of Man will be a sign to these people that he was sent by God .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	Áko hánaaíké áádóó hatsilíké áádóó halahkéí danilíinii índa t'ah doo hąąh dahoo'aah yę́ędą́ą́' hwéédahósinii éí t'áá ałtso haa haaskaigo haghan góne' hoł da'ííyą́ą́' , áádóó Bóhólníihii bíniik'ehgo doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áho'dool'įįdii biniinaa hak'édí daazlį́į́' , áádóó hada'aho'ayoosne' , áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo béeso índa yoostsah óola bee ályaii haa dayiiznil .
PRED:	And their brethren , and their brethren , and their brethren , and their brethren , came to him in their house , and they ate them in the house of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) ; and they gave them their money , and gave them to each of them .
GOLD:	Then all his brothers , sisters , and former friends came and feasted with him in his home . And they consoled him and comforted him because of all the trials the Lord had brought against him . And each of them brought him a gift of money and a gold ring .

ID:	3021
INPUT:	John bídahooł'aahii ła' índa Jew dine'é nilíinii hodílzingo táá'ágisígíí biniinaa ałghada'dit'áahgo yaa nídiikai .
PRED:	And John and his disciples went down to meet him because of the holy things of the holy place .
GOLD:	A debate broke out between John 's disciples and a certain Jew over ceremonial cleansing .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	Ałtį́į́' nídaołtasii t'áá ánółtso Bábilan dine'é bináłzhíísh ; k'aa' t'áadoo áádaohsįįhí deínółt'óóh , háálá Bóhólníihii yich'į' ádił asiih .
PRED:	All the bow of Babylon shall be a time in the midst of Babylon ; do not turn away his bow , for the Lord has sinned against him .
GOLD:	“ Yes , prepare to attack Babylon , all you surrounding nations.Let your archers shoot at her ; spare no arrows.For she has sinned against the Lord .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih ! Sin ániidíii bee Bóhólníihii bich'į' dahohtaał ; bidiyį́į́' áłah nádleehgi sin bee baa ha'niihii bee dahohtaał !
PRED:	Sing to the Lord a new song ; sing praise to the Lord in the assembly of his saints .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Sing to the Lord a new song.Sing his praises in the assembly of the faithful .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ! Ha'át'íí lá ahayóí lá ! Ayóó ánóodziilgo índa k'ídíínílnii'go yádił hił índa nahasdzáán íinilaa . Ts'ídá t'áadoo nániłdzilí da .
PRED:	O Lord God , what are you many ? You have made the earth strong , and the earth , and the earth will not be afraid .
GOLD:	“ O Sovereign Lord ! You made the heavens and earth by your strong hand and powerful arm . Nothing is too hard for you !

ID:	3025
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo ák'ihazdoodzíi' da . Áko aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ninááhódééłkidgo ánááhodi'ní , Da' niísh Aláahgo Baa Ha'niihii biYe' , Christ nílį́ ?
PRED:	But he did not answer . The high priest asked him , “ Are you the Son of Christ ? ”
GOLD:	But Jesus was silent and made no reply . Then the high priest asked him , “ Are you the Messiah , the Son of the Blessed One ? ”

ID:	3026
INPUT:	<unk> hosist'įįd ; doo nááshiidoolkáałjį' baa hoolzhiizh ; yóó'áshidi'doolníiłgi shá hasht'ehoolyaa .
PRED:	The end of my days is near , and my time is ready for me .
GOLD:	“ My spirit is crushed , and my life is nearly snuffed out.The grave is ready to receive me .

ID:	3027
INPUT:	Nihaa a'ááh náádínóodzįįł ; doo ákwii ádeiit'įįdii yik'eh didoodleeł áádóó yee ádił nida'iisíi'ii tónteel ditą́ą́ góyaa ahidííłtł'ił .
PRED:	He will forgive us , and he will forgive their sins , and cast them into the sea .
GOLD:	Once again you will have compassion on us.You will trample our sins under your feetand throw them into the depths of the ocean !

ID:	3028
INPUT:	Héízar-shúwal , Béílah , Íízem ,
PRED:	and Tema , and Tema ,
GOLD:	Hazar-shual , Balah , Ezem ,

ID:	3029
INPUT:	Jó , díí diné doo Diyin God yine' anáníchéehii áyiilaii át'į́ , nidi t'áadoo bee néelą́'ígóó yit'íinii yaa dzólíí nít'éé' áádóó bidoo yá'áshǫ' yee t'óó tsé'édinda áániił nít'éé' .
PRED:	For this man made a strong place of God , but they trusted in him , and in his wickedness , and in his wickedness .
GOLD:	“ Look what happens to mighty warriorswho do not trust in God.They trust their wealth insteadand grow more and more bold in their wickedness . ”

ID:	3030
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí Béíshandóó aláahgo naat'áanii Ag joolyéii áádóó hodine'é t'áá ałtso t'áá bił nihílák'ee hodíí'ą́ , áádóó ałtso nidahosiiltseedgo t'áadoo ła' yisdájííyáhí da .
PRED:	And the Lord our God gave us into the hand of Og king of Bashan and all his people , and we destroyed none of us .
GOLD:	“ So the Lord our God handed King Og and all his people over to us , and we killed them all . Not a single person survived .

ID:	3031
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí biniyé Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii anídóot'įįłii baa hoolzhiizhgo doo hasht'e'niyiiníił da , áádóó ha'át'íí biniyé anídóot'įįł bijį́įdi áhodooníłígíí diné béédahósinii ts'ídá doo bił béédahózin da ?
PRED:	Why do you know what the Almighty says ? It will not be at the time of judgment , and you do n't know what will happen in the day of judgment ?
GOLD:	“ Why does n't the Almighty bring the wicked to judgment ? Why must the godly wait for him in vain ?

ID:	3032
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , asdzání t'áá ła' háá'áazhgo t'ááłá'íígíí bimá ;
PRED:	Son of man , one woman , and one mother 's mother .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , once there were two sisters who were daughters of the same mother .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii beidoołkááł bíká dadínóh'į́į'ii doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Bóhólníihii beidoołkáłígíí ha'át'íísh nihá íidoolííł ? T'óóyee' chahodoołhiłgo doo adinídíin da doo .
PRED:	Woe to the day of the Lord ! How long will the day of the Lord do to you ? How can the day of the day of the Lord make you light ?
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you who say , “ If only the day of the Lord were here ! ” You have no idea what you are wishing for.That day will bring darkness , not light .

ID:	3034
INPUT:	Áko t'óó báhádzidgo até'ésh'íinii binahjį' ádee hadeesdzíi'go ádííniid , Háá'áyį́į́h bee hooł'a'ígíí ts'ídá doo biih dazhdookah da .
PRED:	And I swore by my wrath , saying , They shall not enter into my rest .
GOLD:	So in my anger I took an oath : ‘ They will never enter my place of rest . ' ”

ID:	3035
INPUT:	Nidi níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í binahagiz yee átsé asdzą́ą́ Íiv yi'deezlo' yę́ęgi át'éego nihintsíkees t'ááłá'íígíí bee Christ nihił danilíinii bits'ą́ąjį' t'áá ádzaagóó anihidiyoo'ishii éí nihá binásdzid .
PRED:	But as the devil by the way of the devil , so was the one spirit of the body of Christ , that he might not turn away from you from the spirit of Christ .
GOLD:	But I fear that somehow your pure and undivided devotion to Christ will be corrupted , just as Eve was deceived by the cunning ways of the serpent .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	Áko hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Diné at'į́į́ léi' bidá'ák'ehgi t'áá íiyisí ná'neest'ą́ ,
PRED:	And he spake unto them a parable , saying , There was a certain man in the field .
GOLD:	Then he told them a story : “ A rich man had a fertile farm that produced fine crops .

ID:	3037
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jóseph <unk> dzídzidgo nízhdii'na' , áko Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í áhodííniidii bi'jiilaago , Mary bił ahaa jít'áázh ,
PRED:	And Joseph rose up , and he rose up , and took Mary , and brought him to Mary .
GOLD:	When Joseph woke up , he did as the angel of the Lord commanded and took Mary as his wife .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	Mk . 9 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Teaching about Vows

ID:	3039
INPUT:	Áádóó Kaldíya dine'é bisiláo t'áá át'é éí siláo yinanit'a'í yił naakaígíí Jerúsalem ditą́ągo binaagóó ahéé'ítł'inígíí naa'adeiniiskaad .
PRED:	And all the army of the Chaldeans who were with him were with the army of the Chaldeans , broke down the walls of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii asdzání ła' adiléé lágo yik'ídaaskaigo Jesus yaa deizlóóz , áko diné biníi'gi dah hoosį'go ,
PRED:	Then the Pharisees and the Pharisees took Jesus away from the hand of the women , and set him on the midst of the people .
GOLD:	As he was speaking , the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in the act of adultery . They put her in front of the crowd .

ID:	3041
INPUT:	Áko nihí éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą́'dóó doo ch'ídoohkah da ; áko doo dínóohnéeł da ; jó , Bóhólníihii bi'ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidii bee danihi'doolzį́į́' . Áko Mózes bizaad k'ehgo ádadziidzaa .
PRED:	You shall not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting , and you shall not die ; for the oil of the Lord is upon you , as Moses had commanded .
GOLD:	But you must not leave the entrance of the Tabernacle or you will die , for you have been anointed with the Lord 's anointing oil. ” So they did as Moses commanded .

ID:	3042
INPUT:	Nidi bídę́ę'go álíleego bee ééhózinii t'áá ádzaaí át'éego yaa nitsídaakees doo ; t'áadoo naaki nilíní ádee hadadeesdzíí' danízin nidi , áhodi'doolníłígíí biniyé doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdii bééhodi'yoolnih .
PRED:	But there is a sign for them , that they would not swear by two witnesses , but they would be put to death .
GOLD:	The people of Jerusalem will think it is a false omen , because of their treaty with the Babylonians . But the king of Babylon will remind the people of their rebellion . Then he will attack and capture them .

ID:	3043
INPUT:	Ákohgo dah oonéłígíí ahíikaigo Mózes áádóó Éran yik'ijį' daazlį́į'go níbaal bii' dahozdísinii deiníł'į́į́ nít'éé' ; jó , k'os bik'iildoh lá , áko Bóhólníihii bits'ádi'nílíidii yit'íní silį́į́' .
PRED:	Then the whole community gathered together against Moses and Aaron and Aaron looked at the tent of meeting , and the cloud looked upon them , and the glory of the Lord appeared to them .
GOLD:	As the community gathered to protest against Moses and Aaron , they turned toward the Tabernacle and saw that the cloud had covered it , and the glorious presence of the Lord appeared .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	Diné éí asdzání bishchínígíí éí ne'ełdįįhjį' bich'į' nahwii'náa łeh , índa doo lą'í biiłkaah da .
PRED:	If a man 's children are destroyed , and many days are destroyed .
GOLD:	“ How frail is humanity ! How short is life , how full of trouble !

ID:	3045
INPUT:	Peter éí Korníílyas bighandi yáłti'
PRED:	Peter 's Death
GOLD:	Peter Visits Cornelius

ID:	3046
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' Jesus nazh'nitingo ájíní , Ha'át'éegoshą' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii ádaaní , Christ éí David biye' nilį́ ?
PRED:	Jesus taught them in the temple , “ Why do the scribes say , ‘ He is the son of David ? '
GOLD:	Later , as Jesus was teaching the people in the Temple , he asked , “ Why do the teachers of religious law claim that the Messiah is the son of David ?

ID:	3047
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'ayíłniihjį' Jésii hágo bididíínii ł , áádóó ádííníłígíí nił bééhodeesįįł , índa bízhi' bee nił hodeeshnihii ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo díísį́į́ł .
PRED:	And thou shalt offer Jesse a burnt offering , and thou shalt know what thou hast said , and I will pour it upon thy name , and anoint it with oil .
GOLD:	Invite Jesse to the sacrifice , and I will show you which of his sons to anoint for me . ”

ID:	3048
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii híti'ígíí t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshíłteeh . Diné doo ádahalyáanii doo shá nidahałt'i'góó áshílééh !
PRED:	deliver me from all your law , and deliver me from the foolish .
GOLD:	Rescue me from my rebellion.Do not let fools mock me .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	Ákódzaago shiwos dah deesh'ááłáádóó naat'á ch'ah hach'ah ájíléhígi át'éego shitsiinídeesht'ih nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that I would put my head on my head , and I would put my head like a crown of a crown .
GOLD:	I would face the accusation proudly.I would wear it like a crown .

ID:	3050
INPUT:	Jó , baa ahééh nínízingo yá'át'éehgo sodílzin nidi éí dinéhígíí doo bee bidziilgo ábi'dilnéeh da .
PRED:	For it is good to give thanks , but it does not be able to stand .
GOLD:	You will be giving thanks very well , but it wo n't strengthen the people who hear you .

ID:	3051
INPUT:	Náwóne'di ahééhool'áhígíí ha'a'aahdę́ę'go yah a'atiin áhoot'éhígíí t'áá ákót'éego náhookǫsdę́ę́' yah a'atiinígíí binaashiijí yah a'atiin hólǫ́ , áádóó bita' ánízahígíí yí'nééł'ąądgo t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiin ké silá bita' ánízah .
PRED:	The gate of the inner court was toward the east side of the east side , and the gate was a hundred cubits .
GOLD:	Here on the north side , just as on the east , there was another gateway leading to the Temple 's inner courtyard directly opposite this outer gateway . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	Háálá nihaa dahosidiits'ą́ą'go haash yit'éego Bóhólníihii éí Tónteel Łichíí' tsé'naa nihilą́ąjį' nihá nihoníłtseii éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' náoh'nééł yę́ędą́ą́' áhóót'įįdígíí áádóó Ámor dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nidilt'éego Jórdan tooh wónaanídi bich'į' ádaot'įįdígíí éí Sáíhan índa Ag wolyéii nidasoołtseedii baa dahosidiits'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	For when the Lord heard you , how did the Lord pass over ahead of you in the Red Sea , which was in the way of Egypt , and all that he did to Sihon king of the Amorites , and to Sihon king of the Jordan .
GOLD:	For we have heard how the Lord made a dry path for you through the Red Sea when you left Egypt . And we know what you did to Sihon and Og , the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River , whose people you completely destroyed .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	Nidi ni , diné nílíinii , shoo , tł'óół niniyé nideidooniłgo éí yee nida'dootł'óołgo doo bitaa nináa da doo .
PRED:	But you , son of man , behold , they will make you a net , and you will cast it into your hand , and you will not enter it .
GOLD:	There , son of man , you will be tied with ropes so you can not go out among the people .

ID:	3054
INPUT:	Áko Jesus ádííniid , ShiTaa' , díí yaa naakaígíí t'áadoo bik'ijį' síníł'ání , háálá doo bił béédahózingóó ádaat'į́ . Áádóó ha'éé' ałtaadeis'nii' biniyé yáá'iilt'e' yaa naaskai .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ My Father , do n't do these things against them because they do not know them . ” And they spread out their clothes .
GOLD:	Jesus said , “ Father , forgive them , for they do n't know what they are doing. ” And the soldiers gambled for his clothes by throwing dice .

ID:	3055
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii dólzin éí hódzą́ bína'niltin át'é , áádóó a'ohgo ádaa nitsídzíkeesii éí ił ídlį́ bitsé siláii át'é .
PRED:	The fear of the Lord is wisdom , and the glory of the humble is glory .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord teaches wisdom ; humility precedes honor .

ID:	3056
INPUT:	Áko diné yá'ádaat'éehii dayíkááhgóó yínáał doo , áádóó diné t'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii ádaat'ínígi ánít'į́į doo .
PRED:	You will walk in the way of the wicked , and you will do what is right .
GOLD:	So follow the steps of the good , and stay on the paths of the righteous .

ID:	3057
INPUT:	Díníyáágóó bínandínéeshtįįł áádóó bínaninishtin doo ; nik'i dísh'į́į'go nineeshtį́įł doo .
PRED:	I will teach you the way , and I will teach you . I will look on you .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ I will guide you along the best pathway for your life.I will advise you and watch over you .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	yá'át'éehii áádóó doo yá'át'éehii nił bééhózingo éí bee nihídzíih doo ; ak'idi'yiitįįh naa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	You will know what is good and evil ; you will be your refuge .
GOLD:	Wise choices will watch over you.Understanding will keep you safe .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bii'góó ayóó ádahonízádígíí bílák'ee silá . Dził aghádahaz'áhígíí ałdó' bí .
PRED:	The earth has been lifted up , and the hills also is the hills .
GOLD:	He holds in his hands the depths of the earthand the mightiest mountains .

ID:	3060
INPUT:	Dah diinááh ; kéyah náásee índa naaniigo hadiinááh , háálá díí kéyah naa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	Arise , and go , and take away , for I will give this land to you .
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	3061
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniih dooígíí tsin nitł'izii bee ádadoohłííł ; tsosts'id ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go áníłnéez doo , áádóó naaniigo tsosts'id ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go áníłtéel doo ; dik'ą́ągo ádadoohłííł , índa dego éí dį́į́' ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go ánízah doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt make an altar of acacia wood : and thou shalt make a cubit , and a cubit thereof , and a cubit thereof , and a cubit thereof , and a cubit thereof .
GOLD:	“ Using acacia wood , construct a square altar 71/2 feet wide , 71/2 feet long , and 41/2 feet high .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	Áko dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hadanáásdzáago tsé dilkǫǫhii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii íishłaaígíí biih yínil , áko Bóhólníihii shich'į' yee haadzí'ígi át'éego ákwii ninínil .
PRED:	And I went up from the mountain , and set up the ark , and set it in the midst of the ark , as the Lord commanded me .
GOLD:	Then I turned and came down the mountain and placed the tablets in the Ark of the Covenant , which I had made , just as the Lord commanded me . And the tablets are still there in the Ark . ”

ID:	3063
INPUT:	Naalte' nilíinii chaha'oh t'áá íiyisí yídin nilínígi át'éegoáádóó adeenáago naalnishí bich'į' nidoolyéełii nayólíhígíí nahalingo ,
PRED:	As a slave , as a shadow of a shadow , and as a soul of a slave ,
GOLD:	like a worker who longs for the shade , like a servant waiting to be paid .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii danilíinii bąąh da'éébį́į'go ayii'éésh ; diné ayóó ádaat'éii danilínígíí nahjį' hááyii'nííł .
PRED:	The priests have taken away their robe , And they have taken away the mighty men .
GOLD:	He leads priests away , stripped of status ; he overthrows those with long years in power .

ID:	3065
INPUT:	Jew dine'é áádóó Gríik dine'é danilíinii doo ał'ąą át'éego baa nitsáhákees da , háálá t'ááłá'í Bóhólníihii jílínígíí diné t'áá ałtso bee hóhólnííh , áádóó t'áá ałtso hach'į' sodadilzinígíí éí ts'ídá aláahgo bik'iijidlí .
PRED:	There was not a Jew between the Jews and Greeks , because one Lord is over all people , and blessed is greater than all men .
GOLD:	Jew and Gentile are the same in this respect . They have the same Lord , who gives generously to all who call on him .

ID:	3066
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad bee nahodi'nitinii éí nahonitinii áádóó t'áá ałtso bee jiináanii bił ałts'ą́ą́' ajíłk'iiz doo .
PRED:	The words of God will be with all the words of life .
GOLD:	Those who are taught the word of God should provide for their teachers , sharing all good things with them .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalemgi hondahaz'ą́ągo Léíkish kin haal'áágóó azhnííchą́ą́' , nidi ákǫ́ǫ́ hakéé' ada'as'a'go áadi dahwiisxį́ .
PRED:	So the men of Jerusalem fled to Achish , but they sent him away , and killed him there .
GOLD:	There was a conspiracy against Amaziah 's life in Jerusalem , and he fled to Lachish . But his enemies sent assassins after him , and they killed him there .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	Áádóó díí Diyin God bikin diyingo nideideez'ą́ągo dóola t'ááłáhídi neeznádiin áádóó deenásts'aa' naakidi neeznádiin índa dibé yázhí dį́įdi neeznádiin náádahaaz'nii' . Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso dadóone'é bik'ehgo ádił ni'iidzííh biniinaa tł'ízíchǫǫh naakits'áadah bá náádahaaz'nii' .
PRED:	And these [ are ] the house of God , a hundred bulls , two hundred lambs , and four hundred lambs , and four hundred lambs , and four hundred lambs ; for all the people of Israel were the sin offering of the goats .
GOLD:	During the dedication ceremony for the Temple of God , 100 young bulls , 200 rams , and 400 male lambs were sacrificed . And 12 male goats were presented as a sin offering for the twelve tribes of Israel .

ID:	3069
INPUT:	Áádóó áadi jiníyáago siláo dah deínéehii binanit'a'í danilíinii naháaztą́ ; áádóó ání , Siláo binanit'a'í nílíinii , hane' naa ní'ą́ . Jííhu ání , Háí lá ábidiní ? Áko ábijiní , Ni ándishní , siláo binanit'a'í nílíinii .
PRED:	And when he came , the princes of the army sat down , and said , O captain of the army , I have given thee ; and Jehu said , Who is thou ? And Jehu said unto him , O prince of the army .
GOLD:	When he arrived there , he found Jehu sitting around with the other army officers . “ I have a message for you , Commander , ” he said. “ For which one of us ? ” Jehu asked. “ For you , Commander , ” he replied .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	yéego niníyol ó'oołdįįłii bee naanaajeeh , áádóó niníyoltsoh bee tsídabidíłhéés .
PRED:	The wind brings out the wind , and the wind does not send out the wind .
GOLD:	chase them with your fierce storm ; terrify them with your tempest .

ID:	3071
INPUT:	Áko aa náhát'į́į́dóó ch'íininíłkaad .
PRED:	And he cast him out of his judgment , and cast him out of his mouth .
GOLD:	And he threw them out of the courtroom .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	Jesus kóníigo díí diné naakits'áadahgoígíí ayiis'a' , Doo Jew dine'é danilíinii t'ááká bitahjį' dadohkááh yíila' , áádóó Samériya dine'é ła' bikin haal'áajį' dadohkááh lágo ,
PRED:	Jesus sent twelve men away from among the Gentiles , saying , “ Do n't go to Samaria .
GOLD:	Jesus sent out the twelve apostles with these instructions : “ Do n't go to the Gentiles or the Samaritans ,

ID:	3073
INPUT:	Jó ákohgo , k'ad éí shił hózhǫ́ , yínííł biih noodee'ígíí éí doo biniinaa da , nidi yíní biih noodee'ígíí bee łahgo át'éego Diyin God bich'į' tsíńdasidookézígíí bąą shił hózhǫ́ , háálá Diyin God bíniik'ehgo yínííł biih noodee' , áko nihinahjį' ha'át'íhída doo yóó'adasoołdéel da .
PRED:	And now I rejoice , because of the sorrow , but because of the sorrow , I rejoice in the land of God because of the word of God , because you did not forget it .
GOLD:	Now I am glad I sent it , not because it hurt you , but because the pain caused you to repent and change your ways . It was the kind of sorrow God wants his people to have , so you were not harmed by us in any way .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	Áko kóhóót'įįd : éí haz'ání góne' asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh Esther dzizį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii hoołtsą́ągo bił jíílįįd , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bi'óola naat'á gish bílák'ee sitánígíí Esther yich'į' yideeztsih . Ákohgo Esther éí aláahgo naat'áanii bit'áahjį' jideeyáago óola naat'á gish bílátahdę́ę́' bizhdeelchid .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Esther saw that Esther was standing in the court , that Esther was standing in the king 's hand , and the king gave it to Esther the gold that was in the hand of the king . And Esther came near to the king 's hand .
GOLD:	When he saw Queen Esther standing there in the inner court , he welcomed her and held out the gold scepter to her . So Esther approached and touched the end of the scepter .

ID:	3075
INPUT:	Nihitsilí akéédę́'ígíí áádę́ę́' bił shaa noohkaigo índa t'áá aaníígóó dahoołne' doo , áko doo dínóohnéeł da . Áko ákódadziidzaa .
PRED:	If your brother and your brother come with me , you will not die . ” So they did so .
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . This will prove that you are telling the truth , and you will not die. ” To this they agreed .

ID:	3076
INPUT:	Ałtso bis yik'i na'a<unk> go da' doósh dil áádóó kámin wolyéii bílástsii' áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' <unk> wolyéii nihiidiyoołkał da ?
PRED:	Shall he not cast them in the field , nor shall he cast forth the grain , the wheat , and the grain , and the wheat ?
GOLD:	Does he not finally plant his seeds — black cumin , cumin , wheat , barley , and emmer wheat — each in its proper way , and each in its proper place ?

ID:	3077
INPUT:	Diné naakigo nitsídzíkeesii éí t'áá ałtsojį' doo bééhózingóó nijighá .
PRED:	The words of two men are not known in all things .
GOLD:	Their loyalty is divided between God and the world , and they are unstable in everything they do .

ID:	3078
INPUT:	Nidi Jáshowa bich'į' handziihgo chánah ánílééh áádóó bidziilgo ánílééh , háálá díí dine'é yoo'ishgo ha'naa nidoogááł , áko kéyah íí' dooleełii ádíí' ádeidoolíiłgo íidoolíłígíí yidííłtsééł .
PRED:	Speak unto Joshua , and make strong and strong ; for this people shall come to thee , and thou shalt see the land which thou shalt possess it .
GOLD:	Instead , commission Joshua and encourage and strengthen him , for he will lead the people across the Jordan . He will give them all the land you now see before you as their possession . '

ID:	3079
INPUT:	Éí bąą sodizin bee nik'i dah díshnii'dą́ą́' Diyin God yee nik'ijisdli'go niih yiyííláhígíí nídiiłtłáadgo yéego diltłi'go íínísin dooleełígíí bééniyiishnííh .
PRED:	Therefore I pray upon your hands , if God bless you , I want to bless you in order to do what they do .
GOLD:	This is why I remind you to fan into flames the spiritual gift God gave you when I laid my hands on you .

ID:	3080
INPUT:	Éí tséhígíí Ízrel biye'ké bee bééhániih biniyé íífad wolyéii bikáa'gi awostisgi t'áá ałch'ijí sinilgo Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	The stones of the sons of Israel were on the shoulder , on the two sides of the ephod , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	He fastened these stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that the priest represents the people of Israel . All this was done just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	3081
INPUT:	Béílam éí Béílak yaa nádzá , áko didlidgo nááhániihígíí yíighahgi sizį́ ; bí áádóó Mó'ab dine'é binanit'a'í t'áá ałtso yił naazį́ .
PRED:	Balak went to Balaam and stood beside the burnt offering . He and all the princes of Moab stood with him .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	3082
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh áádóó até'él'į́ ts'ídá doo hwiih yileeh daígi át'éego diné bináá' yee dayiiłtse'ii ts'ídá doo hwiih daaleeh da .
PRED:	The eye of death is filled with death , and the eye of the eyes of men shall not be filled with it .
GOLD:	Just as Death and Destruction are never satisfied , so human desire is never satisfied .

ID:	3083
INPUT:	Diné doo da'oo'íinii bá anáá' nishłį́į́ nít'éé' , índa diné doo nidaakaii bá ajáád nishłį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	I was a blind man 's eyes , and I was a blind man .
GOLD:	I served as eyes for the blindand feet for the lame .

ID:	3084
INPUT:	éí hwe'ana'í danilíinii áádóó hazéé'deidoot'įįłgo hádaat'íinii bílák'ee hodideesh'ááł , áko hats'íís daneeznáanii éí tsídii índa nihokáá'góó naaldlooshii dabich'iyą' doo .
PRED:	I will deliver them into the hand of their enemies and their mouth , and their flesh shall be food for the living and the beasts of the earth .
GOLD:	I will give you to your enemies , and they will kill you . Your bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals .

ID:	3085
INPUT:	Oodlání jílį́įgo hak'éí ła' bąąh ádahasdįįdgo éí baa ádahojilyą́ą doo , áko da'oodlání áłah nádleehii t'ah yówehgo doo biyéél ánáhojidléeh da doo , nidi bąąh ádahasdįįdii ts'ídá t'áadoo baa ádahólyą́'í daígíí t'éiyá yaa ádahalyą́ą doo .
PRED:	And if any of them be a stranger , they shall eat it , that they may not give it to the church , but they shall not eat it , but they shall eat it .
GOLD:	If a woman who is a believer has relatives who are widows , she must take care of them and not put the responsibility on the church . Then the church can care for the widows who are truly alone .

ID:	3086
INPUT:	Kót'éego Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go kóní , Wáin t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí<unk> íinii át'éego díí bee adlání bee dah yishkáłígíí nídiikaah áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bitahgóó díkaahgo dabidiyííłdlį́į́ł .
PRED:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , says to me : “ Take the cup of wine , and drink it in all the nations . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , said to me : “ Take from my hand this cup filled to the brim with my anger , and make all the nations to whom I send you drink from it .

ID:	3087
INPUT:	Áko Peter , ídahooł'aahii ła'ts'áadahígíí bił nidzizį́įgo , áłah nilínígíí yéego bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Judíyadóó diné danohłíinii , áádóó Jerúsalemgi kéédahoht'íinii t'áá ánółtso , shizaad dayínółts'ą́ą'go díí nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	Peter was standing with his disciples , and cried out to the crowd , “ Listen to my words , all you people and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then Peter stepped forward with the eleven other apostles and shouted to the crowd , “ Listen carefully , all of you , fellow Jews and residents of Jerusalem ! Make no mistake about this .

ID:	3088
INPUT:	Ch'il hísap wolyéhígíí nídadidoołjołgo łeets'aa' háámazí biyi'jį' dił yadahooziidígíí ch'é'étiin siláii ałts'ą́ą́hjí áádóó naadasitánígi bee daashdlish doo . Hoos'įįdjį' nihí t'áadoo tł'óó'góó nidaahkaí .
PRED:	And ye shall burn the wood , and put it on the sides of the vessels , and upon the two corners of the house , and upon the two corners of the door , until the day of the door is come .
GOLD:	Drain the blood into a basin . Then take a bundle of hyssop branches and dip it into the blood . Brush the hyssop across the top and sides of the doorframes of your houses . And no one may go out through the door until morning .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí níłch'i bee ánihwiit'aahii áádóó níłch'i ąąh ha'diiłk'ą́ąhii bee Záíyan bich'é'éké chin yąąh tánéízgizgo áádóó Jerúsalemgi dine'é bidił yá nináninídee'ii doo bąąh chinígóó ánáyiidlaago ,
PRED:	And the Lord hath made the Holy Spirit , and hath washed the daughter of Zion , and hath washed the blood of his people , and hath made them clean .
GOLD:	The Lord will wash the filth from beautiful Zionand cleanse Jerusalem of its bloodstainswith the hot breath of fiery judgment .

ID:	3090
INPUT:	Díí íí' dooleełii Júdah dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	This is the inheritance of the tribe of Judah according to their families .
GOLD:	This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	3091
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham éí t'áá íiyisí t'ah abínígo nízhdii'na'go Bóhólníihii binááł dzizį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi jiníyá ,
PRED:	Abraham rose up early in the morning and stood before the Lord .
GOLD:	Abraham got up early that morning and hurried out to the place where he had stood in the Lord 's presence .

ID:	3092
INPUT:	télii ałchinii honoojíidi íneesdinii éí télii biką' dooleełii haintáago níłch'i yił ahidziihígíí nahonílin ; ch'íná'náago háí doo ákót'į́į́góó íidoolííł ? Hadabintáii éí doo ch'ééh hadabidínóotaał da ; biką'ii bidiigháahgo índa hasht'edit'eeh .
PRED:	The donkey is like a wild donkey in the wilderness , a wild donkey , a wild donkey , and no one can find it , and there is no one to find it , and there is none to find it .
GOLD:	You are like a wild donkey , sniffing the wind at mating time.Who can restrain her lust ? Those who desire her do n't need to search , for she goes running to them !

ID:	3093
INPUT:	Áádóó Adonáíjah éí Zerowáíyah biyáázh Jó'ab áádóó náá'iiłniihii Abáíyathar ałdó' bił ahił nidahodzisne' , áko Adonáíjah bikéé' nizhní'áazhgo bíká ahizhnoolchą́ą́' .
PRED:	And Adonijah told Joab the son of Zeruiah and Abiathar the priest , and Adonijah followed him .
GOLD:	Adonijah took Joab son of Zeruiah and Abiathar the priest into his confidence , and they agreed to help him become king .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	Nihighandóó dóola índa nihidibé bighandóó tł'ízíchǫǫh doo ła' dínéesįįł da .
PRED:	No one of your house and of your sheep will be left in your house .
GOLD:	But I do not need the bulls from your barnsor the goats from your pens .

ID:	3095
INPUT:	T'áá shí hwiideestsééł ; shináá' bee hwiideestsééł ; t'áá háiida éí dooda .
PRED:	I will see the eyes of my eyes , and whoever does not see it .
GOLD:	I will see him for myself.Yes , I will see him with my own eyes.I am overwhelmed at the thought !

ID:	3096
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán kódaat'éii doo nisxin da ; ch'iyáán kódaat'éii ná shiigha' .
PRED:	My bread is no food ; my bread is in your ways .
GOLD:	My appetite disappears when I look at it ; I gag at the thought of eating it !

ID:	3097
INPUT:	Áko Mózes áádóó náá'iiłniihii Éran éí Dził Sáínai honoojíigi Ízrel dine'é yiyííłta' yę́ędą́ą́' éí díí dayéélta'ígíí bitahdóó doo ła' hoł da'éélta' da nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Moses and Aaron the priest counted them in the wilderness of Sinai , in the wilderness of Sinai , and there were no number among them .
GOLD:	Not one person on this list had been among those listed in the previous registration taken by Moses and Aaron in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	3098
INPUT:	Áádóó David dah náázdiidzáago Mó'ab kéyahgi Mízpeh kin haal'áajį' jiníyá , áádóó Mó'ab dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ábizhdííniid , Nánooshkąąh , bíni' shimá áádóó shizhé'é kwe'é doo'ashgo Diyin God shá ádooníłígíí shił bééhoozinjį' kwe'é nił naháaztą́ą doo .
PRED:	So David left Mizpah and went to Mizpah . He said to the king of Moab , “ Please know that my mother and my father is here . ”
GOLD:	Later David went to Mizpeh in Moab , where he asked the king , “ Please allow my father and mother to live here with you until I know what God is going to do for me . ”

ID:	3099
INPUT:	Nidi náásgóó kwe'é t'áadoo hane' yá'át'éehii baa nááhóshne'ígi da hazlį́į́' , áádóó lą'í nááhaídą́ą́' nihaa jóya' laanaa ch'ééh níízįįd .
PRED:	But there was no good news for a long time , so that it could not come to you for many years .
GOLD:	But now I have finished my work in these regions , and after all these long years of waiting , I am eager to visit you .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	Éí t'áá ániid naagháádą́ą́' bahastiin nilį́įgo hoolzhiizh yę́ę yóó'iidíí'ą́ , áádóó Diyin God binááł aha'deet'áanii yaa yooznah .
PRED:	He was a husband who was young , and has forgotten the covenant of God .
GOLD:	She has abandoned her husbandand ignores the covenant she made before God .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	áádóó diné chahałheeł nideinishin doo biniyé t'áá ákogi át'éego dahonít'i' yits'ádahaaskaii yits'ą́ąjį' yisdándoołtééł .
PRED:	and he will deliver you from the face of darkness , that they may deliver you out of darkness .
GOLD:	These men turn from the right wayto walk down dark paths .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Féro bił yah anináahgo bił hólne' , Hííbrew dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shidine'é béé'níłnííh , áko shich'į' nidahałáa doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Tell Pharaoh , ‘ Thus says the Lord God : Let my people go , and worship me . '
GOLD:	“ Go back to Pharaoh , ” the Lord commanded Moses . “ Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	3103
INPUT:	Áko áádóó ha'át'éegoda ashja'iilaago nináhozhdidoo'áałgi baa nitsídzíkeesgo hodeeshzhiizh .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that he would judge him , that he might give him a place , and that he might give it to him .
GOLD:	From that time on , Judas began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus .

ID:	3104
INPUT:	Shich'į' ééhonísįįh ! Ayóó'ííní'níinii yisdádooltééł biniyé nigaan nish'náájí bee shíká anilyeed .
PRED:	Give ear to me , my right hand , to save me .
GOLD:	Now rescue your beloved people.Answer and save us by your power .

ID:	3105
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán yiniyé nidaakai áádóó doo hwiih daaleehgóó bii' nidahodi'ni' doo .
PRED:	They will be filled with food , and they will be filled with food .
GOLD:	They scavenge for foodbut go to sleep unsatisfied .

ID:	3106
INPUT:	Éídar yiziłígíí binih táá'ts'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo ádahóót'įįd . Áko dį́į́'ts'áadah yoołkááł góne' t'óó háádaasyį́į́' áádóó éí bijį́ ída'azįįdgo índa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo yaa naaskai .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the fourteenth day of the month , on the fourteenth day of the month , in the fourteenth month , and in the fourteenth day of gladness , and gladness .
GOLD:	This was done throughout the provinces on March 7 , and on March 8 they rested , celebrating their victory with a day of feasting and gladness .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Jó , bee ak'e'ashchį́ , Shikin éí kin bii' sohodizin wolyée doo , nít'éé' nihí aghada'ii'níiłii be'a'áán ádaahłaa lá .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Behold , it is written : My house was called the house of my temple , and ye have made a pit of refuge .
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves ! ”

ID:	3108
INPUT:	Áádóó David yił dahoolne'go ádaaní , Shoo , Filístiya dine'é éí Kii'áílah kin haal'áagi yik'iijée'go ha'ínída'al'isígi haghada'iis'nil .
PRED:	And David told David , Behold , the Philistines have fought against Keilah , and they have cast them down against them at Keilah .
GOLD:	One day news came to David that the Philistines were at Keilah stealing grain from the threshing floors .

ID:	3109
INPUT:	Diyin God ánáádoo'niid , Doo danoodlą́ą́góogo , doodaii' átsé bee ééhózinii doo dayoodlą́ą́góó akée'di bee ééhózinii deizhdoodląął .
PRED:	God said , “ If you do not believe or believe , you will believe a sign from the beginning . ”
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ If they do not believe you and are not convinced by the first miraculous sign , they will be convinced by the second sign .

ID:	3110
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii áádóó Férisii danilíinii Mózes dah sidáá nít'éé' yę́ęgi dah naazdá ;
PRED:	And the scribes and the Pharisees sat in the place of Moses .
GOLD:	“ The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees are the official interpreters of the law of Moses .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	K'ad Bóhólníihii ánínígíí deísółts'ą́ą́' : Nídoohjeeh , dził daní'áii bidááhdóó aghada'dooht'ááh , dah daask'idii bíni'dii nihiinéé' deidiits'į́į́h .
PRED:	Listen to the voice of the Lord , and hear the voice of the mountains , and hear the voice of the hills .
GOLD:	Listen to what the Lord is saying : “ Stand up and state your case against me.Let the mountains and hills be called to witness your complaints .

ID:	3112
INPUT:	Áadi ła' Ananáíyas yolyéé léi' , diné hodísinii , bee haz'áanii Mózes baa deet'áanii yik'eh hół'íinii nilį́ , Jew dine'é ákwe'é kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá át'é yá'át'éehgo baa ch'ídahwii'aah .
PRED:	There there was a certain man named Ananias , who was the law , who was the law , who kept all the Jews who live there .
GOLD:	A man named Ananias lived there . He was a godly man , deeply devoted to the law , and well regarded by all the Jews of Damascus .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	éí bąą k'ad , t'áadoo shiníníłtł'aaí díí diné hach'į' t'áá íiyisí hashké nísdzingo áhodeeshdįįł , áádóó nits'ą́ą́dóó diné ayóó át'éego náás ahoolchíiłgo ádeeshłíí ł .
PRED:	Now therefore , do n't let me be angry with this people , and I will make them a great nation .
GOLD:	Now leave me alone so my fierce anger can blaze against them , and I will destroy them . Then I will make you , Moses , into a great nation . ”

ID:	3114
INPUT:	Áko t'áá bí bídadéét'i'ii Mózes éí náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízar áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa índa Ízrel dine'é dabizhé'é á naazíinii ída'doolíłígíí yee hach'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	Moses spoke to Eleazar the priest , Joshua , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of Israel .
GOLD:	So Moses gave orders to Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of the clans of Israel .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	háálá łá'í nidi doo ła' bee haleeh da lá , nidi Bóhólníihii Jesus bízhi' t'éí bee tó bee dabi'doolzį́į́' lá .
PRED:	For there was no one in them , but they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit had not yet come upon any of them , for they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii bínda'nołtinii áádóó Férisii danohłíinii , t'óó ádahodoł'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Háálá dajishcháá' doo daat'íinii nidahonohłin , áko éí diné t'áadoo bił béédahóziní yikáá' naaldeeh .
PRED:	Woe to you teachers of the law and Pharisees , Pharisees ! For you are like those who do not know what they do .
GOLD:	Yes , what sorrow awaits you ! For you are like hidden graves in a field . People walk over them without knowing the corruption they are stepping on . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :

ID:	3118
INPUT:	T'áadoo nánídlíníii , t'áadoo nídandlíní da , ní halne'í ; t'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nídandlíní da .
PRED:	They are vain , and they are vain ; all things are vain .
GOLD:	“ Everything is meaningless , ” says the Teacher , “ completely meaningless . ”

ID:	3119
INPUT:	Nahagizgo yáníłti'ígíí nahjį' nidiní'aah , índa t'áá naaki nahwiiláago yáníłti'ígíí doo deeghánígóó áts'ádinít'aah .
PRED:	Take away from the mouth of the mouth , and from the two tongue .
GOLD:	Avoid all perverse talk ; stay away from corrupt speech .

ID:	3120
INPUT:	Nihí naakigo dah wohnéłígíí háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' doo nidaołnishígíí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' aláahgo naat'áanii baa ádahołyą́ą doo .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day of the Sabbath , you shall keep the king 's house in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	The other two units who are off duty on the Sabbath must stand guard for the king at the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	Diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Ízrel dine'é dajílínígíí t'áá hó hadah na'at'a'í bíighahgi dahazhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní bił bidah na'at'a'í bíighahgi ninádaji'néeh doo ; níbaal bii' dahozdísinii binaadi ninádaji'néeh doo .
PRED:	All the tribes of Israel shall stand near the camp of their fathers , by their fathers ' house , by their fathers ' houses , at the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	“ When the Israelites set up camp , each tribe will be assigned its own area . The tribal divisions will camp beneath their family banners on all four sides of the Tabernacle , but at some distance from it .

ID:	3122
INPUT:	Áko Iiláíjah bibeeldládí éé' ádeidiiltsoozgo yizdisgo yee tooh néidíí'ahgo tó ałts'áálk'ol , áko t'áá ájíłah hóółtseigóó ha'naa nizhní'áázh .
PRED:	And they took the robe of Elijah , and cast it into the river , and cut off the waters , and passed through the sea , and passed through the ground .
GOLD:	Then Elijah folded his cloak together and struck the water with it . The river divided , and the two of them went across on dry ground !

ID:	3123
INPUT:	bíni'dii <unk> yeedgo shił dah dii'aash ; bee hinishnánígíí bíni' yik'i naaghá , áádóó bee ił nishłíinii ni'jį' kwíílééh . Síilah .
PRED:	Let me go with me , and let my life be upon me , and let my glory come to the ground . Selah .
GOLD:	then let my enemies capture me.Let them trample me into the groundand drag my honor in the dust.Interlude

ID:	3124
INPUT:	Da' niísh nihizhé'é Éíbraham yę́ę biláahgo ayóó ánít'é ? Éí daaztsą́ , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii nít'é'ígíí ałdó' daneezná ! Ákoshą' háí í'díl'į́ ?
PRED:	Are you greater than our father Abraham ? He died , and who also died ?
GOLD:	Are you greater than our father Abraham ? He died , and so did the prophets . Who do you think you are ? ”

ID:	3125
INPUT:	Átsé nídízídígíí binih , neeznáá jį́į́ góne' Jórdan tooh ha'naa ninínáago Jériko bihoodzo ha'a'aahjígo Gílgal hoolyéegi niníná .
PRED:	On the tenth day of the first month , on the tenth day of the month , they came to Gilgal .
GOLD:	The people crossed the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month . Then they camped at Gilgal , just east of Jericho .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	ATaa' shiníł'a'ígíí t'áá bí ałdó' shaa hoolne' . Éí biinéé' nidi ts'ídá t'ah doo dadoohts'į́įh da , ázhnoolninígíí nidi ts'ídá doo daołtséeh da ,
PRED:	The Father who sent me is also the one who sent me . But you do not see the voice , but you do not see .
GOLD:	And the Father who sent me has testified about me himself . You have never heard his voice or seen him face to face ,

ID:	3127
INPUT:	Badahojoobá'íii daachago bich'į' jé'áhozhdilkałii t'áá hó ałdó' jicha doo , nidi t'áadoo hodidoots'į́łí da .
PRED:	He will cry for the poor , but he will not hear .
GOLD:	Those who shut their ears to the cries of the poorwill be ignored in their own time of need .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	Ákondi dine'é ła' t'áá ákogi ádaa<unk> gi át'éego áádóó Diyin God bibik'eh hoogáałii doo nahjį' nideideez'áaniigi át'éego éí t'áá ákwíí jį́ há dashidéez'į́į́' índa shik'ehgo iináanii shił bééhodoozįįł danízingo yaa bił dahózhǫ́ ; t'áá ákogi át'éego bik'eh hoogáałii shídayókeed ; t' áá áháníjį' Diyin God yich'į' nidadookahígíí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	But I know that there is no nation like a righteous nation , and that they seek my statutes every day , and my statutes , and my statutes , and my statutes , and my statutes , And they cry for the righteous .
GOLD:	Yet they act so pious ! They come to the Temple every dayand seem delighted to learn all about me.They act like a righteous nationthat would never abandon the laws of its God.They ask me to take action on their behalf , pretending they want to be near me .

ID:	3129
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bee hódzáanii eidiyii'aah ; ił ééhózin áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįh yee hahadziih .
PRED:	For the wisdom of the Lord is given wisdom and understanding .
GOLD:	For the Lord grants wisdom ! From his mouth come knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3130
INPUT:	Áádóó bá nidaal'a'í áyidííniid , Shoo , shidá'ák'eh bíighahgóó t'áá áhą́dígi Jó'ab bidá'ák'eh ákwii bitł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í hólǫ́ ; nílááh , ákǫ́ǫ́ dohkáahgo biih dah hodohnííł , áko Ábsalam bá nidaal'a'í éí dá'ák'ehgi tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í yíl'áii yiih dah hodeeznil .
PRED:	And he said unto his servants , Behold , Joab is near the field near the field , and go , and go , and go , and bring it into the field ; and Absalom put the grain in the field .
GOLD:	So Absalom said to his servants , “ Go and set fire to Joab 's barley field , the field next to mine. ” So they set his field on fire , as Absalom had commanded .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	Háálá diné nihich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii bá yóó'adahidoh'aahgo nihiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii bich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaot'įįdii ałdó' nihá yóó'iidii'aah doo ,
PRED:	For forgive your sins , and forgive your Father in heaven .
GOLD:	“ If you forgive those who sin against you , your heavenly Father will forgive you .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	Áko kéyah ayóó áhonóolnin góne' yah adoogáałgo kéyah t'óó ahayóí yik'eh didoodleeł , nidi Íídam dine'é áádóó Mó'ab dine'é índa Áman dine'é dah da'í'éeshii ałdó' hayaa hadookah .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , that he shall pass through the border of the land , but Edom , and Moab , and the sons of Ammon , and the sons of Ammon , and the sons of Ammon .
GOLD:	He will enter the glorious land of Israel , and many nations will fall , but Moab , Edom , and the best part of Ammon will escape .

ID:	3133
INPUT:	Lą'í shízhi' yee ádadójíigo nidahidookah , Shí Christ ásht'į́ ! daaníigo , áko lą'í yóó'adeidínóo'ah .
PRED:	Many will come to you in my name , saying , “ I am the Messiah ! ” And many will turn away from him .
GOLD:	for many will come in my name , claiming , ‘ I am the Messiah . ' They will deceive many .

ID:	3134
INPUT:	Áko ánáábizhdoo'niid , Da' nihíísh Néíhor binálí Léíban wolyéii béédahonohsin ? Áko áhodííniid , Aoo' , béédahoniilzin .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ Do you know that we know that Abraham 's brother ? ” And he said to them , “ Yes , we know . ”
GOLD:	“ Do you know a man there named Laban , the grandson of Nahor ? ” he asked. “ Yes , we do , ” they replied .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	T'ahdii shijéí biyi'dóó hódzą́ shoolóosgo , Haa lá yit'éego shits'íís éí wáin bee bił honishǫ́ǫ dooleeł lá , nisingo shintsíkees nisíłkáá' , áádóó , Haa lá yit'éego doo hóshkał yideestsoł lá , niizį́į́' . Yádiłhił biyaagi diné ba'áłchíní nida'iisdįįd bijį́įjį' ha'át'íí yá'át'ééh shį́į́ yaa nidaakai dooleeł lá éí shił bééhodoozįįł , niizį́į́' .
PRED:	But if I have wisdom in my heart , how shall my body be filled with wine , and I thought , ‘ What is my soul , ' and I know that the sons of heaven are evil in the sky , that they may know that it is good for all the days of men .
GOLD:	After much thought , I decided to cheer myself with wine . And while still seeking wisdom , I clutched at foolishness . In this way , I tried to experience the only happiness most people find during their brief life in this world .

ID:	3136
INPUT:	Áko t'áá da'ał'ąą dah naazhjaa'go há nidaal'a'í bá ats'á'dziiznil , áádóó há nidaal'a'í ábizhdííniid , Shilą́ąjį' tsé'naa nihohnééh ; nihita' honí'ą́ągo danóołkaad .
PRED:	He said to his servants , “ Go ahead of the villages and drive them out before me . ”
GOLD:	He divided these animals into herds and assigned each to different servants . Then he told his servants , “ Go ahead of me with the animals , but keep some distance between the herds . ”

ID:	3137
INPUT:	Háálá shikin biyi'dóó shitsésǫ'gi tsin yistł'ǫ́ǫgo dáádiníbaalígíí biníká dínísh'į́į'go
PRED:	For when I look out from my house , I look at the window of my house ,
GOLD:	While I was at the window of my house , looking through the curtain ,

ID:	3138
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shijéí t'áá át'é bee naa hashniih , diyin dabidi'níinii binááł nich'į' hashtaałgo naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise you with all my heart , O Lord , and I will sing praise to other gods .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	3139
INPUT:	Nóah áádóó biye'ké
PRED:	Noah and Noah
GOLD:	Noah 's Sons

ID:	3140
INPUT:	bikáá' adání áádóó tsin níyizii bee naat'áa dooígíí áádóó beedí chodao'į́į dooleełígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá bił , Diyin God bich'į' bááh nááhániih dooleełígíí ,
PRED:	and the table , and all its vessels , and all its vessels , and all its vessels ;
GOLD:	the table , its carrying poles , and all its utensils ; the Bread of the Presence ;

ID:	3141
INPUT:	Áádóó Bétheldóó dah náázhdii'ná , áko Éfrath t'áá áyídí hadziihgo Réíchel awéé' bídii'na'go t'áá íiyisí bich'į' nahwiisnáá' .
PRED:	And he went up from Bethel , and his sister Rachel rose up , and saw that Rachel rose up early with her .
GOLD:	Leaving Bethel , Jacob and his clan moved on toward Ephrath . But Rachel went into labor while they were still some distance away . Her labor pains were intense .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	Diné t'óó ahayóí éí bił béédahoozingo , hakéé' yíkai , áko baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫgo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bee bich'į' hadzoodzíí' , áádóó hadaałt'é nídeeshdleeł danízinígíí éí hadaałt'é áńdajiidlaa .
PRED:	And many men saw him , and followed him , and he spake unto the kingdom of God , and he healed them .
GOLD:	But the crowds found out where he was going , and they followed him . He welcomed them and taught them about the Kingdom of God , and he healed those who were sick .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	Honoojíidi dahootsogóó nidi bee áda'azįįd . Áádóó dah daask'idígíí bił nidahoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	In the wilderness there is no joy in the wilderness ; and the hills rejoice in joy .
GOLD:	The grasslands of the wilderness become a lush pasture , and the hillsides blossom with joy .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	Bábilan bich'é'é bízháán naagháii nílíinii , wóshdę́ę́' hadanináahgo ni'dóó łeezh dibahí bii' nídaah ; Kaldíya dine'é bich'é'é nílíinii , bikáá'dóó nahat'áii ná ádin , áko yilzhólí áádóó ayóó ánóolninígíí doo nándi'níi da doo .
PRED:	Come up from the dust , O daughter of Babylon , and sit on the dust , O daughter of the Chaldeans , the daughter of the Chaldeans , and no one will say to you .
GOLD:	“ Come down , virgin daughter of Babylon , and sit in the dust.For your days of sitting on a throne have ended.O daughter of Babylonia , never again will you bethe lovely princess , tender and delicate .

ID:	3145
INPUT:	Áádóó biiskání siláo bighangóó anídahaas'náago łį́į́' nidabiyéhígíí t'éiyá hoł dah náádii'ná .
PRED:	On the next day the soldiers went back to the house of the army , and the men who had gone with him .
GOLD:	They returned to the fortress the next morning , while the mounted troops took him on to Caesarea .

ID:	3146
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad t'éiyá bee haz'áanii t'áágééd Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii k'ad nihich'į' ííshją́ą́ ályaa . Éí bee haz'áanii índa Diyin God bá dahojilne'ii yę́ę baa ch'ídahodziiz'ą́ .
PRED:	But now the law is revealed to you , but now the righteousness of God is revealed to you . They have given it to the prophets and the prophets .
GOLD:	But now God has shown us a way to be made right with him without keeping the requirements of the law , as was promised in the writings of Moses and the prophets long ago .

ID:	3147
INPUT:	Éran éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee naakáhígíí bii' tsííd hadeezbingo bikáá' náá'iiniihí si'ánídóó Bóhólníihii binááł néidiikáah doo , índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii áłts'íísígo yitseedígíí bílák'ee hadeezbingo néidiijihgo aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ání góne' yah anéíkáah doo .
PRED:	And Aaron shall take the vessels of incense , and shall take it out of the altar before the Lord , and shall put them in the hand of the incense .
GOLD:	he will fill an incense burner with burning coals from the altar that stands before the Lord . Then he will take two handfuls of fragrant powdered incense and will carry the burner and the incense behind the inner curtain .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	Táá' náhááh góne' nínádanołt'į́įhii t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' t'áá éí yihahígíí binih nihikin hadaas'áá góne' nooh ná'áchíihgi hasht'e'nidahohnííł .
PRED:	And in the third year you shall make a tenth of every year , a tenth of all that you shall give to me .
GOLD:	“ At the end of every third year , bring the entire tithe of that year 's harvest and store it in the nearest town .

ID:	3149
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí t'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii nízhi' yich'į' ahééh dadínóozįįł ; t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii honílǫ́ǫgi kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	I will give thanks to the righteous , and the righteous will dwell in it .
GOLD:	Surely righteous people are praising your name ; the godly will live in your presence .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Ízrel dine'é bitahgóó ashiiké alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í bee nídadeezidóó yówehgo béédááhaii yíníłta' , áádóó dabízhi' ałkéé' dadíízoh .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Take every firstborn firstborn firstborn among the children of Israel from twenty years old and upward , and write them in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Now count all the firstborn sons in Israel who are one month old or older , and make a list of their names .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	háálá dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náázhdidoodáałgo Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo yaa halne'ígíí t'ah doo yik'ida'diitįįh da .
PRED:	For when he was raised from the dead , he would not understand the Scriptures .
GOLD:	for until then they still had n't understood the Scriptures that said Jesus must rise from the dead .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	aa hwiinít'į́įgi t'áá ádzaagóó ak'ihodii'aahii , índa ałk'isgóó dandlíinii yił hááhoniłcha'ii éí Bóhólníihii bijoołxá .
PRED:	The Lord hates judgment against his brethren , and against his brethren .
GOLD:	a false witness who pours out lies , a person who sows discord in a family .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	Nidi Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí tádiindóó ba'aan naaki siláo binanit'a'í danilíinii éí hatsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí bee bídahólníihii yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Ádaałts'ísígíí , doodaii' ayóó ádaat'éhígíí t'áadoo bił da'ahohgání , nidi Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii t'éiyá .
PRED:	But the king of Aram spoke to the captains of the chariots of the chariots , saying , “ Do n't go with great , except only the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the king of Aram had issued these orders to his thirty-two chariot commanders : “ Attack only the king of Israel . Do n't bother with anyone else ! ”

ID:	3154
INPUT:	Nidi nihaa niikai yę́ędą́ą́' nihá ádahwiinít'į́'ígo nihitaa siikai , t'áá amá ba'áłchíní yaa áhályánígi át'éego nihitaa deiikai nít'éé' .
PRED:	But when we came to us , we came to us , and gave us as our mother 's children .
GOLD:	As apostles of Christ we certainly had a right to make some demands of you , but instead we were like children among you . Or we were like a mother feeding and caring for her own children .

ID:	3155
INPUT:	Áko Sháílohdi diné bitahgi níbaal bii' hodílzinii niiní'ą́ągo bii' bighanígíí yóó'iidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	And he fled from the midst of the people in Shiloh , which was in Shiloh .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	Shá nahazt'i'ígíí bik'ee atídiníshdlį́į́' , áko t'áá íiyisí yínííł naashá . Shik'édí hodoodleeł niizį́į́' , nidi t'áadoo shik'édí silį́'í da . Bee ha'ahóníinii biniyé tádííyá , nidi t'áadoo ła' bik'íníyáa da .
PRED:	I am afflicted , and I am troubled , and I am very sad ; but I found no mercy , but I did not find any pity .
GOLD:	Their insults have broken my heart , and I am in despair.If only one person would show some pity ; if only one would turn and comfort me .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	Nihijéí bii' nihá hosiil'ą́ , nidi nihí aají danihijéí bii' doo nihá nidahosooł'ą́ą da .
PRED:	We have delivered you into your heart , but you have not put your heart in your hearts .
GOLD:	There is no lack of love on our part , but you have withheld your love from us .

ID:	3158
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é dayííłkiin dooígíí
PRED:	The priests and Levites
GOLD:	Provisions for Temple Worship

ID:	3159
INPUT:	Éí asdzání ákót'éii nízaadi bits'ąą nidaahkai , índa bich'é'étiin bit'áahjį' dohkááh lágo .
PRED:	You are far from a distance , and go near to the door .
GOLD:	Stay away from her ! Do n't go near the door of her house !

ID:	3160
INPUT:	Agháhóó'áadi hat'oh ájíléehgo índa doo yá'át'éehii bibee adziilii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdá'ázhdílteehgo biniyé doo yá'át'éehii ha'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bá bidázhnoolníinii éí doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	Woe to those who live on high places , to save their children from the power of evil .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you who build big houseswith money gained dishonestly ! You believe your wealth will buy security , putting your family 's nest beyond the reach of danger .

ID:	3161
INPUT:	Nihich'į' bee haasdzí'ígíí ádaa daahsįįhgo bida'íínóhsin ; doo ła' bíidooh'áał da , doodaii' doo ła' bididooh'áał da .
PRED:	Be careful to obey my command , and do n't let any of them be able to do any of them .
GOLD:	“ So be careful to obey all the commands I give you . You must not add anything to them or subtract anything from them .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	Ch'ó sikaadii nílíinii , nichxa , háálá gadtsoh naazkaadii naa'adahineezkaad , háálá tsin ayóó ánóolningo naazkaadii dááchxǫ' . Béíshandóó chéch'iltsoh danohłíinii , cha nidahohłe' , háálá tsin bee hodíłch'ilii ałtso heesne' .
PRED:	Sing , O tree , because the trees are cut down , For the trees of Bashan are cut down , O trees of Bashan ; for all the trees of the forest are gone .
GOLD:	Weep , you cypress trees , for all the ruined cedars ; the most majestic ones have fallen.Weep , you oaks of Bashan , for the thick forests have been cut down .

ID:	3163
INPUT:	hakee' éí béésh da'ahólzha'í yee hadeideesnih . Béésh da'ahólzha'í yee dah dahwiiztł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	His feet are bound with bronze ; they put chains in chains .
GOLD:	They bruised his feet with fettersand placed his neck in an iron collar .

ID:	3164
INPUT:	Bíla' yee naanish áyoolíiłii éí t'áá aaníí áádóó t'áá ákogi ádaat'é . Bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá ałtso bada'ahódlí .
PRED:	He does what is right and righteous ; all his commandments are faithful .
GOLD:	All he does is just and good , and all his commandments are trustworthy .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	Ákohgo Áman dine'é éí David doo bíłdin da áda'diilyaago yaa ákódaniizį́į́' , áko dah da'diił'a'go Beth-rííhob kin haal'áádóó Síriya dine'é bisiláo áádóó Zóba kéyahdóó Síriya dine'é bisiláo t'áá ni' nidaabaahígíí naadiindi míilgo índa aláahgo naat'áanii Méíyakah bisiláo t'ááłáhídi míilgo índa Íshtab dine'é bisiláo éí naakits'áadahdi míilgo yik'é nida'iizláago yíká ada'iis'a' .
PRED:	When the Ammonites saw that David had no reason , they sent him out , and they sent out from the valley of Syria , and from the border of Aram , and from the land of Aram , and from the army of Syria , and of thousands , and of thousands .
GOLD:	When the people of Ammon realized how seriously they had angered David , they sent and hired 20,000 Aramean foot soldiers from the lands of Beth-rehob and Zobah , 1,000 from the king of Maacah , and 12,000 from the land of Tob .

ID:	3166
INPUT:	Áko áyidííniid , Táá' yiską́ągo shaa nínáádoohkah . Áko diné anídahaaskai .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Bring me three days . ” So the people went to the crowd .
GOLD:	Rehoboam replied , “ Come back in three days for my answer. ” So the people went away .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́ Héíman bił hózhǫ́ǫgo índa bijéí bił nihoozhǫǫhgo dah diiyá . Nidi aláahgo naat'áanii bich'é'étiingóó dáń'dítį́hígi Mórdiikai doo t'áá k'ad yiizį'góó índa doo t'áá k'ad hideesnáá'góó éí Héíman yiyiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí Mórdiikai yich'į' báhóóchįįd .
PRED:	So Haman and his heart was glad . But when Mordecai saw that Mordecai was not in the gate of the king 's gate , he was very angry with Mordecai .
GOLD:	Haman was a happy man as he left the banquet ! But when he saw Mordecai sitting at the palace gate , not standing up or trembling nervously before him , Haman became furious .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	Áko David éí Saul hákantáago hoł bééhoozin . David éí Zif honoojíigi tsintahgi nijigháá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And David knew that Saul was in the wilderness of Ramah . And David was in the wilderness of Ramah .
GOLD:	One day near Horesh , David received the news that Saul was on the way to Ziph to search for him and kill him .

ID:	3169
INPUT:	Éíbraham áádóó Áízak índa Ízrel ninaal'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę béénílniih ; éí bich'į' ádee hahidíínídzíi'go ádabidííníniid , Yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ'ígi ánéelą́ą'go niha'áłchíní ts'ídá t'óó ahayóigo nídínéesht'į́į́ł , áádóó díí kéyah t'áá át'é niha'áłchíní baa dideesh'ááł , diníigo bee háínídzíí' , áko éí hool'áágóó bíí' dadooleeł .
PRED:	Remember Abraham , Isaac , Isaac , and Israel , and said to them , “ I will give you many children as the stars in heaven , and I will give you all these land for ever . ”
GOLD:	Remember your servants Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . You bound yourself with an oath to them , saying , ‘ I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars of heaven . And I will give them all of this land that I have promised to your descendants , and they will possess it forever . ' ”

ID:	3170
INPUT:	Diyin God bits'ą́ądi nízaadi honohłǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę Christ jiníyáago hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į́' jiníigo nihił hojoolne' , índa hwíighahgi dahólóonii ałdó' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į́' jiníigo bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	When he was far away from God , he told us that he was far away , and he told them that were near .
GOLD:	He brought this Good News of peace to you Gentiles who were far away from him , and peace to the Jews who were near .

ID:	3171
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalemdi náájíkai . Áko kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' joogáałgo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii haa yíkaigo
PRED:	And they went to Jerusalem . And when he went into the temple , the chief priests , the elders , and the elders ,
GOLD:	Again they entered Jerusalem . As Jesus was walking through the Temple area , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders came up to him .

ID:	3172
INPUT:	Áko kojį' nidashiyoołnii'ígíí t'áadoo bąąh danihíni'í , índa t'áadoo ách'į' nihá nídahachįįhí . Háálá Diyin God t'áá nihítséedi shiníł'a'go dahináanii dadoodzih biniyé ádzaa lá .
PRED:	Do n't be angry with those who hate me , and do n't be angry with you . For God sent me to speak to those who sent me .
GOLD:	But do n't be upset , and do n't be angry with yourselves for selling me to this place . It was God who sent me here ahead of you to preserve your lives .

ID:	3173
INPUT:	Nidi nihí éí nihá áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii áádóó nida'ídíłkidii áádóó t'áá nihí nideisooyeelii áádóó iiníziin nihá yee dahaniihii índa nihá da'diłgąshii éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í doo bá nidaał'a' da doo , danihiłníigo t'áadoo deísółts'ą́'í ,
PRED:	But if you do not listen to the king of Babylon , your prophets , a prophet , a prophet , a prophet , a prophet , a prophet , a prophet , a prophet , a prophet , a prophet , and an end to the king of Babylon ,
GOLD:	“ ‘ Do not listen to your false prophets , fortune-tellers , interpreters of dreams , mediums , and sorcerers who say , “ The king of Babylon will not conquer you . ”

ID:	3174
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God ání , Bóhólníihii Diyin God t'áá bí ádee hadoodzíi'go ádííniid , Jéíkab bibee ádaa hodzódli' t'óó shił baa'ih ; bidziilgo bił nahaz'ánígóó t'óó hojooshłxá ; kin haal'áii áádóó bii' dahólóonii t'áá bił ninádideesh'ááł .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord God of hosts , The Lord God of hosts , I have sworn to Jacob , and I hate him , and I hate the city , and I will give it to the city and its inhabitants .
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord has sworn by his own name , and this is what he , the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ I despise the arrogance of Israel , and I hate their fortresses.I will give this cityand everything in it to their enemies . ”

ID:	3175
INPUT:	Azhą́ ał'ąą dine'é bitahdóó bíká adoojahii dayoozkan nidi , k'ad áłah áhodeeshłííł áádóó bídahólníihii binanit'a'í nilíinii hade ádahósingo biniinaa ájíłch'į́į́dí jooleeł .
PRED:	Even though they had forgotten him among the nations , I will gather them together , and the princes of the Lord was very little .
GOLD:	But though they have sold themselves to many allies , I will now gather them together for judgment.Then they will writheunder the burden of the great king .

ID:	3176
INPUT:	Nílááh , Heziikáíyah bich'į' dínáahgo ábidiní , Bóhólníihii éí nizhé'é yę́ę David biDiyin God ání , Nisodizin diséts'ą́ą́' , ninák'eeshto' yiiłtsą́ ; jó , nááhiní'náa dooleełígíí ashdla'áadah nááhai nábínéideeshnił .
PRED:	“ Go and say to Hezekiah , ‘ I have heard your father David , the God of your father , saying , ‘ I have seen your tears , for I will give you ten years . '
GOLD:	“ Go back to Hezekiah and tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of your ancestor David , says : I have heard your prayer and seen your tears . I will add fifteen years to your life ,

ID:	3177
INPUT:	Háálá biyęęzhii t'áá ni'góó niyiiníiłgonahasdzáán éí ayęę<unk> gíí deineesdogo
PRED:	For the false prophet who is lying on the earth has been cut off .
GOLD:	She lays her eggs on top of the earth , letting them be warmed in the dust .

ID:	3178
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá díkwííhígo haz'ą́ t'éí bee nihik'íhásh'ááh , jó , éí Béílam bina'nitin Ízrel dine'é dabidínóołtł'ahígíí , éí e'elyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii deiyą́ą doogo , índa na'ageh yee tsi'nidaakai doogo Béílak yee neineeztą́ą'ii nihitahgi ła' dayótą' .
PRED:	But I have mercy on you , behold , Balaam will teach the people of Israel to eat the sacrifices of Balaam , and they will eat it , and they will take some of you with sin .
GOLD:	“ But I have a few complaints against you . You tolerate some among you whose teaching is like that of Balaam , who showed Balak how to trip up the people of Israel . He taught them to sin by eating food offered to idols and by committing sexual sin .

ID:	3179
INPUT:	Dilyéhé t'áá ahídahidííłtł'óołgoósh bíninil'ą́ ? Doodaii' t'áá bá níhánígóó sǫ' náánáshjaa'ígíí éí ałch'į' kódabósinígíísh t'áá k'e'díí'ałgo bíninil'ą́ ?
PRED:	Can you send them to the forest ? Or will you send them to the stars , or will you write to them that are in the same way ?
GOLD:	“ Can you direct the movement of the stars — binding the cluster of the Pleiadesor loosening the cords of Orion ?

ID:	3180
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' dabitsi'ké danilíinii danihiye'ké bá nídahidoohnííł lágo , áko dabitsi'ké bidiyin dabidi'níinii bił tł'éé' na'aldeehii danihiye'ké ałdó' t'ááká yił tł'éé' naaldeeh yíila' .
PRED:	Do not take the daughters of your daughters , that they may go with you , and with your daughters , and with your daughters .
GOLD:	Then you will accept their daughters , who sacrifice to other gods , as wives for your sons . And they will seduce your sons to commit adultery against me by worshiping other gods .

ID:	3181
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Gag bik'ijį' nílį́įgo handziihgo kóbidiní , Gag yinílyéii , Mííshek dine'é índa Túbal dine'é agháago binanít'áii , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Nik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon ;
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against you , and say to them , ‘ Thus says the Lord God : ‘ Behold , I am against you , and I am against you . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy against Gog . Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : I am your enemy , O Gog , ruler of the nations of Meshech and Tubal .

ID:	3182
INPUT:	T'áá aaníinii áádóó t'áádóo nídíii díí jį́ Jerabéíyal áádóó bighandóó danilíinii bił bich'į' bee ádanoht'éé nít'ée'go Abímelek baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo índa bí ałdó' bíni'dii nihaa bił nihoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	Let us rejoice in truth , and in all that thou hast spoken unto Abimelech , and to his household , and in all that thou hast spoken unto Abimelech , and in him .
GOLD:	“ If you have acted honorably and in good faith toward Gideon and his descendants today , then may you find joy in Abimelech , and may he find joy in you .

ID:	3183
INPUT:	a'áán áhojiilaaígíí éí bilį́į́' ílíinii yá'át'éehgo béeso baazhdoonił , áko alį́į́' daaztsánígíí éí hó dooleeł .
PRED:	He who made the pit will give it to him , and he will be his own .
GOLD:	The owner of the pit must pay full compensation to the owner of the animal , but then he gets to keep the dead animal .

ID:	3184
INPUT:	Áádóó Samériya kin haal'áagi tł'óół bee í'neel'ąąhí índa Éíhab ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii k'éhézdon tł'óół náát'i'ígíí éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áii bee bídadí'néesh'ąął , áádóó diné éí łeets'aa' yi<unk> go yaa nii'áhígi át'éego Jerúsalem t'áá át'é bii' hahodeesht'oł .
PRED:	And I will stretch out the line of Ahab , and the house of Ahab , and the line of Ahab , and I will cast out Jerusalem , and I will turn away from all the people .
GOLD:	I will judge Jerusalem by the same standard I used for Samaria and the same measure I used for the family of Ahab . I will wipe away the people of Jerusalem as one wipes a dish and turns it upside down .

ID:	3185
INPUT:	íídą́ą́' ła'da <unk> <unk> naadą́ą́' naadiindi yikááł bíighahgo yanáa'á jinízingo biniyé jiníyáá nít'éé' t'áá neeznání yikááł lá ; ła'da ch'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizhgi ashdladiindi yikááł bíighahgo jinízingo biniyé jiníyáá nít'éé' t'áá naadiiní yikááł lá .
PRED:	At that time , he went to the place where he had gone , and there was a hundred days , and there was a hundred days in the vineyard .
GOLD:	When you hoped for a twenty-bushel crop , you harvested only ten . When you expected to draw fifty gallons from the winepress , you found only twenty .

ID:	3186
INPUT:	Óola t'áá bízhání bik'ídadííłtih ; bikáá'dę́ę́' áádóó booshk'iizh naaz'áhígíí índa bidee' hadaaz'áa dooígíí ákódíílííł , áádóó ałdó' bibąąhgóó óola ahénálch'ah dooígíí ádíílííł .
PRED:	You shall cover them with pure gold , with pure gold , with the sides of the table , and with its horns , and with the crown of gold .
GOLD:	Overlay the top , sides , and horns of the altar with pure gold , and run a gold molding around the entire altar .

ID:	3187
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá nizhé'é David yę́ę shinááł naayáhígi át'éego nijéí doo bina'adlo'góó áádóó t'áá ákóne' ánít'éego shinááł yínáałgo áádóó bee nich'į' haasdzí'ígíí bik'eh honíł'į́įgo ááníiłgo índa bee nihoní'áanii áádóó bee nihodiish'aahii baa honíyáago
PRED:	If you walk in my heart as David your father did , and do what is right in my sight , and do what I command you , and keep my statutes , and my statutes ,
GOLD:	“ As for you , if you will follow me with integrity and godliness , as David your father did , obeying all my commands , decrees , and regulations ,

ID:	3188
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii kóshíłníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then another message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3189
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí nihokáa'gi diné ájiilaaígíí bąąh háni' , índa hajéí biyi'di t'áá íiyisí háni' yiyiił'a' .
PRED:	And the Lord sent a heart upon the earth , and the heart of his heart was troubled .
GOLD:	So the Lord was sorry he had ever made them and put them on the earth . It broke his heart .

ID:	3190
INPUT:	Háálá shá bíighah shide áhoot'éé nít'éé' áádóó t'áá ákwíí abíní shich'aho'dishkéego nashidi'nitin nít'éé' .
PRED:	For all day long I have taught me , and I have taught me every morning .
GOLD:	I get nothing but trouble all day long ; every morning brings me pain .

ID:	3191
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bá atídoot'įįł , áádóó baa nahozdeeskaii éí Bóhólníihii áhodoołdįįł .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish them , and the Lord will destroy them .
GOLD:	For the Lord is their defender.He will ruin anyone who ruins them .

ID:	3192
INPUT:	Nizhé'é nishchíinii yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , áádóó nimá haastihgo t'áadoo ni'íní .
PRED:	Listen to your father , and do n't let your mother be old .
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	3193
INPUT:	Diné doo ádahalyáanii éí bąąhági át'éii t'óó <unk> dahałt'i' , nidi diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bitahgóó ach'oha'né yá'át'éehii dahólǫ́ .
PRED:	The foolish have no sin , but the righteous are in the midst of the righteous .
GOLD:	Fools make fun of guilt , but the godly acknowledge it and seek reconciliation .

ID:	3194
INPUT:	Síriya dine'é naalyéhé t'óó ahayóí nee hólónígíí bąą nił ahaa nida'iilniih nít'éé' ; tsé ílíinii émerald wolyéii áádóó na'at'ą́hí tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa na'at'ą́hí bibąąhgóó nidaashch'ąą'ii áádóó áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii índa yoo' łichí'í índa tsé ílíinii ágat wolyéii nidayiijáahgo ninaalyéhé yił ałgháá' da'ii'nííł nít'éé' .
PRED:	The people of Aram were with you because you had been with you , purple , purple , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	“ Syria sent merchants to buy your rich variety of goods . They traded turquoise , purple dyes , embroidery , fine linen , and jewelry of coral and rubies .

ID:	3195
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é dah diikaigo ákódaadzaa . Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' yee haadzí'ígi ádaadzaa .
PRED:	The Israelites left and did as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel did just as the Lord had commanded through Moses and Aaron .

ID:	3196
INPUT:	Áko Íísa ání , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'óó ahayóí shidááh da'niiskaad ? Áádóó ázhdííniid , Shinanit'a'í nílíinii , díí ajooba' bee shich'oha'néego shaa nitsíníkees doo biniyé danéelkaad .
PRED:	Esau said , “ Why have you cast me away ? ” And he said , “ My lord , I have found favor in your sight . ”
GOLD:	“ And what were all the flocks and herds I met as I came ? ” Esau asked.Jacob replied , “ They are a gift , my lord , to ensure your friendship . ”

ID:	3197
INPUT:	Diyin God bidááhdóó hool'áágóó hojílǫ́ǫgo ahool'áa doo . Aa a'ááh hasinii áádóó t'áá aaníinii haa áhályą́ą doo biniyé hasht'ehólééh !
PRED:	Let him stand before God forever and ever , for his mercy and truth .
GOLD:	May he reign under God 's protection forever.May your unfailing love and faithfulness watch over him .

ID:	3198
INPUT:	Síírag jiináago tádiin honááhaigo Néíhor há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	When he was thirty years old when he became the father of Shem .
GOLD:	When Serug was 30 years old , he became the father of Nahor .

ID:	3199
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Christ bii' hojílónígíí bąąhági át'éii doo t'áá náás joołt'ih da doo ; t'áá háiida bąąhági át'éii t'áá náás joołt'ihígíí Christ t'ah doo jiiłtséeh da , doo nidi bééhojísin da .
PRED:	Whoever is in Christ does not sin ; whoever does not see sin , but I do not know the Messiah .
GOLD:	Anyone who continues to live in him will not sin . But anyone who keeps on sinning does not know him or understand who he is .

ID:	3200
INPUT:	t'áá ákót'éego Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Ííjip dine'é áádóó Iithiyópiya dine'é yidoołnééł ; ániid nidaakaii áádóó hadaastihii t'áá daalchí'ígo áádóó bikee' t'áádaagéedgo bitł'aa' nidi t'áá daalchí'ígo iidiyoo'ish , áko Ííjip dine'é bich'į' t'óó baa yáhásin dooleeł .
PRED:	So the king of Assyria will attack Egypt and Assyria . He will bring them away from their young men and their feet , their feet , their feet and their feet , and they will be ashamed .
GOLD:	For the king of Assyria will take away the Egyptians and Ethiopians as prisoners . He will make them walk naked and barefoot , both young and old , their buttocks bared , to the shame of Egypt .

ID:	3201
INPUT:	Zúrishádai éí Símiyan dine'é nilį́įgo biye' Shiilúmiyel ,
PRED:	from the tribe of Simeon , the son of Simeon ,
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai

ID:	3202
INPUT:	Yisnááh danilíinii t'áá ałtso bich'į' í'ííléehgo kóbidiní , Bóhólníihii kóní , Niihélam hoolyéédóó naagháii Shiiméíyah t'áadoo yíł'aadgóó nihił hoolne'ígíí biniinaa wooch'ííd baa da'jíísóolíí' ;
PRED:	Thus says the Lord to all the captivity , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ I have sent to you , and you have not been a lie in you because of the words that he sent to you .
GOLD:	“ Send an open letter to all the exiles in Babylon . Tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite : Since he has prophesied to you when I did not send him and has tricked you into believing his lies ,

ID:	3203
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí shizaadígíí nihijéí bii' índa nihii' sizíinii bii' hazhó'ó hasht'e'nidahidohnííł , áádóó díí saad bee ééhózinii át'éego nihíla' índa nihináta'gi bídahaastł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	Therefore , take up your heart and your soul and your soul , and put a sign between you and your hands .
GOLD:	“ So commit yourselves wholeheartedly to these words of mine . Tie them to your hands and wear them on your forehead as reminders .

ID:	3204
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí diné bide ádahólzinígíí t'áá ałtso yaa áhályą́ índa t'áá ákogi át'éego yá ó'oolííł .
PRED:	The Lord keeps all those who hate him , and He makes them right .
GOLD:	The Lord gives righteousnessand justice to all who are treated unfairly .

ID:	3205
INPUT:	Naaki góne' bá yizhchínígíí éí Kíliyab wolyé ; éí Kármeldóó dine'é Néíbal be'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí Ábigeil wolyéii biyáázh jílį́ áádóó táá' góne' bá yizhchínígíí éí Ábsalam wolyé ; Gíísher kéyahgi aláahgo naat'áanii Tálmai bitsi' Méíyakah wolyéii biyáázh jílį́ .
PRED:	And the second was Eliab , the son of Nabal , the wife of Nabal , the son of Nabal , and the third ; and the name of Absalom , the daughter of the king of Asher .
GOLD:	The second was Daniel , whose mother was Abigail , the widow of Nabal from Carmel.The third was Absalom , whose mother was Maacah , the daughter of Talmai , king of Geshur .

ID:	3206
INPUT:	Shoo , ádahodineestł'isii bik'ijį' t'ah biláhígo áhodíníltł'isgo áádóó doo ła' nijóle' át'éégóó ániishłaa .
PRED:	Behold , I have set up my heart against the wall , and I have made thee a fool , and I have made thee a fool .
GOLD:	But look , I have made you as obstinate and hard-hearted as they are .

ID:	3207
INPUT:	Dibé naazhjéé' bitahgóó danohjahgo hasbídí bit'a' béésh łigaii bik'ésti' nahalinígíí , áádóó bits'os nineezígíí éí óola łitsoii bik' <unk> ti' nahalinígíí nidahonohłin .
PRED:	You are like a flock in the villages , and the wings of silver , and the wings of gold , so that you can not be like gold .
GOLD:	Even those who lived among the sheepfolds found treasures — doves with wings of silverand feathers of gold .

ID:	3208
INPUT:	Háálá nił bééhózingo diné ákót'éii honít'i'ii yits'áníyáago ádił ni'iisííh índa t'áá bí bibąąhági át'éii yee ádá nihoot'ą́ .
PRED:	For you know the way of the righteous , and have sinned against the wicked , and have committed sin .
GOLD:	For people like that have turned away from the truth , and their own sins condemn them .

ID:	3209
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ab éí diné bił hoolne'ígíí áyidííniid , Áko , jó , yinił tsą́ą́ léi' doo haniih ni'jį' abídzíłxaał da , áko béésh łigaii neeznáá bíighahgo áádóó sis bił naadeeshnił nít'éé' .
PRED:	Joab said to the man who had been told him , “ Behold , there is a man who is dead , and I will put my face on the face of the ground , and I will put the ten pieces of silver . ”
GOLD:	“ What ? ” Joab demanded . “ You saw him there and did n't kill him ? I would have rewarded you with ten pieces of silver and a hero 's belt ! ”

ID:	3210
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii yéego nikéé' ahidíízį́ ; ninish'náájí bee nisdzilgo áshíínísin .
PRED:	My soul is with me ; You have set me on your right hand .
GOLD:	I cling to you ; your strong right hand holds me securely .

ID:	3211
INPUT:	Nidi nihida'ana'í ayóó'ádeínóh'ní , áádóó yá'át'éehgo ádaaht'į́ , áádóó t'áadoo le'é ada'iyohnííł , t'áadoo k'ééshidi'doolnííł danohsiní , áko yá'ąąshdi nihaa dahidoolyéełii ayóó ádaat'ée dooleeł , áádóó nihí Ts'ídá Aláahgo Át'éii ba'áłchíní danohłį́į dooleeł , háálá éí doo ahééh danízinii índa doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa jooba' .
PRED:	But love your enemies , and do what is good , and do what is good , and do not let me be glorified in heaven , that you may be great , and be glorified in heaven , for I will give thanks to you , and give thanks to you .
GOLD:	“ Love your enemies ! Do good to them . Lend to them without expecting to be repaid . Then your reward from heaven will be very great , and you will truly be acting as children of the Most High , for he is kind to those who are unthankful and wicked .

ID:	3212
INPUT:	Jó , t'ááłáhídi náá'ázdiisnii'ii bee diné dadiyingo ádajiilaaígíí éí hool'áágóó doo bee bich'į' anáhóót'i'góó ájiilaa .
PRED:	For he made an everlasting covenant to the people who made him holy forever .
GOLD:	For by that one offering he forever made perfect those who are being made holy .

ID:	3213
INPUT:	Peter , Dooda , náádoo'niidgo t'áá áko naa'ahóóhai biką'í ádííniid .
PRED:	Peter answered , “ No , ” and the servant answered .
GOLD:	Again Peter denied it . And immediately a rooster crowed .

ID:	3214
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá ałtso hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Eii diné sołhé , Barábasgo nihich'į' ch'ééníłt'e' .
PRED:	But all the people cried out , saying , “ Send him up to Pilate . ”
GOLD:	Then a mighty roar rose from the crowd , and with one voice they shouted , “ Kill him , and release Barabbas to us ! ”

ID:	3215
INPUT:	Áko tł'ée'go Paul bił áhát'į́įgo Bóhólníihii ábidííniid , T'áadoo náníldzidí áádóó t'áadoo áhodiilzéhí yáníłti' ,
PRED:	Paul was with him in the night , and said to the Lord , “ Do n't be afraid and speak ,
GOLD:	One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision and told him , “ Do n't be afraid ! Speak out ! Do n't be silent !

ID:	3216
INPUT:	Siláo éí díí ájínínígíí naat'áaniishchíín danilíinii yee yił hoolne'go Rome dine'é jílį́į́ láígíí deidiizts'ą́ą'go nídaasdzííd ,
PRED:	When the soldiers heard this , they were afraid . They were afraid .
GOLD:	When the police reported this , the city officials were alarmed to learn that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens .

ID:	3217
INPUT:	Áko diné tált'éego Job yił ahił dahalne'ígíí éí Iiláíhu yilą́ąjį' nidaakaígíí bąą t'ah índa Job bich'į' hadeesdzih jinízingo ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	Then Job continued to speak to Job and Job because of the words of his men .
GOLD:	Elihu had waited for the others to speak to Job because they were older than he .

ID:	3218
INPUT:	nidi Jesus éí Christ , Diyin God biYe' nilį́įgo deidoohdląąłígíí biniyé díidíígíí bik'inídaháasdzo , áko éí deinohdlą́ągo baa dadzíínóhłíigo bízhi' biniit'aa iiná nihee dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	But it is written in the book of Jesus Christ , that ye may believe in the name of God , that ye may have eternal life .
GOLD:	But these are written so that you may continue to believe that Jesus is the Messiah , the Son of God , and that by believing in him you will have life by the power of his name .

ID:	3219
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é éí bee adlání óola bee ályaaígi át'éego Bóhólníihii dah yoo'áałgo nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso yii'dóó nínáda'dí'nídlį́į́h nít'éé' ; ał'ąą dine'é éí Bábilan biwáin deidlą́ą́ nít'éé' ; éí bąą tsi'deeskai .
PRED:	And all the earth drink the cup of the Lord , as the cup of the cup of the cup of the Lord , and all the nations were drink wine . Therefore the wine of Babylon was drink .
GOLD:	Babylon has been a gold cup in the Lord 's hands , a cup that made the whole earth drunk.The nations drank Babylon 's wine , and it drove them all mad .

ID:	3220
INPUT:	Diné ła' da'oołch'íihii Bábilan kéyahgóó deesh'aałgo yąąh da'iidoołch'ihgo bikéyahgi doo siláhígóó ádeidoolííł , háálá bich'į' nahwii'ná beiníłką́ądi t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' bik'ijį' danilį́į doo .
PRED:	And I will send a false prophet to Babylon , and he will send them into the land of Babylon , because in the days of affliction they will come upon all the days of trouble .
GOLD:	Foreigners will come and winnow her , blowing her away as chaff.They will come from every sideto rise against her in her day of trouble .

ID:	3221
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	Payment of the Temple Tax

ID:	3222
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhígíida yidáanii , doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhígíida yidláanii éí Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii doo bídéét'i' da , nidi ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é áádóó k'é hwiindzin índa ił hózhǫ́ Níłch'i Diyinii eidii'aahii bídéét'i' .
PRED:	There is no one who eats anything that is in the Kingdom of God , but in righteousness , and peace , and peace .
GOLD:	For the Kingdom of God is not a matter of what we eat or drink , but of living a life of goodness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit .

ID:	3223
INPUT:	Jó'akon , tł'iish índa séígo' bik'i naałdeeh doo biniyé bee óhólnííh nihaa diní'ą́ , áádóó ana'í bibee adziilii t'áá át'é bee nihídahólníih doo biniyé nihaa diní'ą́ , áko ts'ídá t'áadoo atídanihidoolíłí da .
PRED:	Behold , I have given you authority over all the kingdoms , and I have given you authority over all the power of the enemy , so that they may not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Look , I have given you authority over all the power of the enemy , and you can walk among snakes and scorpions and crush them . Nothing will injure you .

ID:	3224
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii David bił hóóne'go áhodoo'niid , Bóhólníihii éí Óbed-íídam bighandóó danilíinii áádóó bídadéét'i'ii t'áá ałtso yik'ijisdli' , háálá Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii ba'ałk'ee si'ą́ą́ nít'éé' , áko David ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago hániik'ehgo Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii Óbed-íídam bikindóó ch'ídeiz'ą́ągo David bikin haal'áajį' nát'ą́ągo yaa bił nihoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	Then the king told David , “ The Lord has blessed all the house of Adam and all the vessels of God , because he was in the ark of God , and David went and went out to the ark of God , and he went in to the house of his God .
GOLD:	Then King David was told , “ The Lord has blessed Obed-edom 's household and everything he has because of the Ark of God. ” So David went there and brought the Ark of God from the house of Obed-edom to the City of David with a great celebration .

ID:	3225
INPUT:	Áádóó díidí bee hadziidziihgo , bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii hádahodiilchįįł danízingo índa tsístł'ah dahodíníilchééł danízingo t'áá bizáákáágóó nidahódééłkid ,
PRED:	And he said these things , and the scribes and the Pharisees sought him to turn away from him ,
GOLD:	As Jesus was leaving , the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees became hostile and tried to provoke him with many questions .

ID:	3226
INPUT:	Lébanah , Héígabah índa Ákab bada'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii ,
PRED:	The sons of Lebanon , and the sons of Jacob , the sons of Jacob ,
GOLD:	Lebanah , Hagabah , Akkub ,

ID:	3227
INPUT:	Áádóó béégashii t'áá ákǫ́ǫgo Iiláíjah yikéé' nídiilwodgo ání , T'áá shǫǫdí , shíni'dii shizhé'é áádóó shimá deests'ǫs , áko índa nikéé' yisháał doo . Áko ábijiní , Nílááh , t'ą́ą́' nídídááh , haashą' niishłaa ?
PRED:	And the ox followed Elijah , and followed Elijah , and said , Let my father and my mother and my mother . And he said unto him , Go back , and come back .
GOLD:	Elisha left the oxen standing there , ran after Elijah , and said to him , “ First let me go and kiss my father and mother good-bye , and then I will go with you ! ” Elijah replied , “ Go on back , but think about what I have done to you . ”

ID:	3228
INPUT:	Háálá azhą́ doo nihił honishłǫ́ǫ da nidi , t'áá áłahjį' nihaa nitséskeesgo hasht'ehodít'éego baa naahkaígíí , áádóó Christ baa dadzíínóhłíhígíí haleebee nisoozį́įgo shił bééhózingo baa shił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	For I am not with you , but I know that you are always doing what you do , and I know that you are doing in Christ .
GOLD:	For though I am far away from you , my heart is with you . And I rejoice that you are living as you should and that your faith in Christ is strong .

ID:	3229
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' aláahgo naat'áanii kóní , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God baa ha'niih le' , bí éí díí jį́ shibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' ła' dah néineesdá ; t'áá shináá' bee yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	And the king said , Blessed be the Lord , the God of Israel , who sits on my throne today , and I have seen my eyes .
GOLD:	and he said , ‘ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who today has chosen a successor to sit on my throne while I am still alive to see it . ' ”

ID:	3230
INPUT:	Áko nídzíldzid nidi , t'áá íiyisí hoł hózhǫ́ǫgo tséní'ootsééldóó tsxį́įłgo dashdii'áázh , áko bídahooł'aahii hane' baa nízhdoo'ááł biniyé dah ahizhdíníilchą́ą́' .
PRED:	And they were afraid , but they went out of the tomb , and fled to the tomb , and they fled to tell his disciples .
GOLD:	The women ran quickly from the tomb . They were very frightened but also filled with great joy , and they rushed to give the disciples the angel 's message .

ID:	3231
INPUT:	Da' deenásts'aa' daamííl bíighahgoósh , doodaii' ak'ah éí neeznáadi mííl tooh danílį́ bíighahgoósh Bóhólníihii bił hóshǫ́ǫ doo ? Da' alą́ąjį' shá yizhchíiniísh éí ádił ni'iisíihii bik'é nááhidoonihgo ninádideesh'ááł ? Da' shits'íís bineest'ą'ásh éí shii' sizíinii ádił ni'iisíihii bik'é nááhidoonihgo ninádideesh'ááł ?
PRED:	Is it not a thousand goats , or a thousand , or a thousand ? Shall I offer the firstborn for your sin offering ? Shall I give you the fruit of my soul for your sins ?
GOLD:	Should we offer him thousands of ramsand ten thousand rivers of olive oil ? Should we sacrifice our firstborn childrento pay for our sins ?

ID:	3232
INPUT:	Záíyan kin haal'áagi deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí bee ída' dohsooł ; hodílzingo doo adą́ ats'ánó'aah .
PRED:	Sing ye the trumpet in Zion , sound ye the trumpet in Zion ; make ye holy .
GOLD:	Blow the ram 's horn in Jerusalem ! Announce a time of fasting ; call the people togetherfor a solemn meeting .

ID:	3233
INPUT:	Nidi áshidííniid , Daniel yinílyéii , nílááh yínááł . Shą́ą́' , nihodoogáałjį' saad ałch'į' ánályaago bidá'deeljée' ni' .
PRED:	But he said to me , “ O Daniel , come and stand before you ; and when he comes , the word was shut up before you . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Go now , Daniel , for what I have said is kept secret and sealed until the time of the end .

ID:	3234
INPUT:	Diltłish éí bizis biih nánítįįh . Áni'diilyaa yę́ędi , kéyah bii' ni'dizhchį́ yę́ędi atíndeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will bring you into the sword ; when he was born , I will bring you out of the land of your birth .
GOLD:	“ Now return the sword to its sheath , for in your own country , the land of your birth , I will pass judgment upon you .

ID:	3235
INPUT:	Bee nahaz'áanii doo yik'ehgo át'éii doo bééhózin da yę́ę t'áá íídą́ą́' naalnish , k'ad t'ą́ą́' ábósinii t'áá nahjį' kóbi'diilyaaíjį' yilnish doo .
PRED:	If the law does not know the law , then it will be cut off from the end of the law .
GOLD:	For this lawlessness is already at work secretly , and it will remain secret until the one who is holding it back steps out of the way .

ID:	3236
INPUT:	Áádóó Jónah dashdiiyáago kin haal'áá góne' ajííyáago ła'a jį́ oodááł ánízahgóó nizhníyá , áko jidilwoshgo ájíní , Dízdiin jį́ t'ah hadziih áádóó índa Níneveh kin haal'á ałtso ádooldįįł !
PRED:	So Jonah went to the city and went to the first day of the first day . He said to him , “ I am forty days and Ai . ”
GOLD:	On the day Jonah entered the city , he shouted to the crowds : “ Forty days from now Nineveh will be destroyed ! ”

ID:	3237
INPUT:	áádóó naat'áaniishchíín danilíinii , éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'íinii atídeidoolííł áádóó yá'át'ééh ádajooníiłii haa daha'niih doo biniyé nihich'į' nabidi'nilgo bídahwíínółnííh .
PRED:	and let the princes destroy the rich , and make them suffer for the good , that they may give glory to you .
GOLD:	or the officials he has appointed . For the king has sent them to punish those who do wrong and to honor those who do right .

ID:	3238
INPUT:	Áko éí nitsidinígo'go nábooskango ábíłní , Ha'íínílní , t'áadoo tsį́į́ł shíł'íní , t'áá ná niná'deeshdléełgo át'é .
PRED:	And he fell down , and cried out , saying , “ Do n't let me be able to give you any more . ”
GOLD:	“ His fellow servant fell down before him and begged for a little more time . ‘ Be patient with me , and I will pay it , ' he pleaded .

ID:	3239
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Díí oochíłígíí éidí t'áá ałtso yá nandeeh dooleeł .
PRED:	I say to you , This generation will pass over all these generation .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , this judgment will fall on this very generation .

ID:	3240
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Yádiłhił éí shibik'i dah asdáhí bikáá'dóó nahash'áii át'é , áádóó nahasdzáán éí shibik'i dah adées'eezí át'é ; háadish kin shá ádaohłééh ? Índa háadish éí shihóoghahgo hanáshyį́įh doo ?
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The sky is my throne , and the earth is my throne , and where are you going to build a house for me ? ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Heaven is my throne , and the earth is my footstool.Could you build me a temple as good as that ? Could you build me such a resting place ?

ID:	3241
INPUT:	Diné bitsii' yiigaii éí naat'á ch'ah bee aa ha'niihii át'é ; éí t'áá ákogi át'éego honít'i'góó hináago bééhózin .
PRED:	The crown of a man is the head of his head ; he knows the way of righteousness .
GOLD:	Gray hair is a crown of glory ; it is gained by living a godly life .

ID:	3242
INPUT:	áko Júdah kéyahdóó Shiyáltiyel biye' Zerábabel naat'áanii nilíinii éí Bóhólníihii áhoniisį́į́' áádóó Jásedek biye' Jéshuwa alą́ąjį' náá'iiłniihii nilíinii índa diné daadziihígíí éí Bóhólníihii ádabiniisį́į́' , áko nidahaaskaigo biDiyin God éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin yidadeeshnish .
PRED:	Then Zerubbabel the son of Zerubbabel , the son of Zerubbabel , the king of Judah , spoke to Joshua , the son of Nun , the priest , and the people , and all the people , and they came to the house of the Lord God of hosts , to do the work of the Lord God .
GOLD:	So the Lord sparked the enthusiasm of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , governor of Judah , and the enthusiasm of Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the high priest , and the enthusiasm of the whole remnant of God 's people . They began to work on the house of their God , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ,

ID:	3243
INPUT:	Shich'į' ééhosínísįįdgo bee yisdéíyáii sínílį́'ígíí bąą naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise you because you have saved me , because you have saved me .
GOLD:	I thank you for answering my prayerand giving me victory !

ID:	3244
INPUT:	Záíyan bináhkááh ; binaagóó nidaahkai ; bikin yadaa'áhígíí deínółta' .
PRED:	“ Go to Zion , and stand around its houses .
GOLD:	Go , inspect the city of Jerusalem.Walk around and count the many towers .

ID:	3245
INPUT:	Áko Jóram éí Eihazáíyah ííłní , Eihazáíyah nílíinii , nihizéé' deest'ą́ą́ lá , níigo naa ná'ásbą́ązgo dah díníichą́ą́' .
PRED:	And Ahaziah said to Ahaziah , O Ahaziah , I will open thy mouth , for he has fled from the land .
GOLD:	Then King Joram turned the horses around and fled , shouting to King Ahaziah , “ Treason , Ahaziah ! ”

ID:	3246
INPUT:	Nidi biiskání Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' saad dahasłį́į'go ádaaní , Bóhólníihii bidine'é nisoołtseed .
PRED:	But on the next day the whole community of Israel spoke to Moses and Aaron , saying , “ The Lord has killed his people . ”
GOLD:	But the very next morning the whole community of Israel began muttering again against Moses and Aaron , saying , “ You have killed the Lord 's people ! ”

ID:	3247
INPUT:	Méígag dine'é áádóó tónteel bibąąhgóó bohoníłdzilgo kéédahojit'íinii kǫ' hak'ijį' yeideeshnił , áádóó índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And I will send fire upon the people of the sea , and they shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will rain down fire on Magog and on all your allies who live safely on the coasts . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	3248
INPUT:	Jóseph dine'é , t'áá éí Manáseh dine'é bitahdóó <unk> biye' Gádai .
PRED:	Joseph was from the tribe of Manasseh , from the tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	Manasseh son of JosephGaddi son of Susi

ID:	3249
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ał'ąą dine'é ádeinilaii t'áá ałtso nidááhdę́ę́' nidahakáahgo nich'į' nidahałáa doo , áádóó nízhi' bee ni'dójíigo naa dahaniih doo .
PRED:	O Lord , all the nations who serve thee shall worship thee , and they shall praise thee in thy name .
GOLD:	All the nations you madewill come and bow before you , Lord ; they will praise your holy name .

ID:	3250
INPUT:	Shił anílį́įgo áádóó ił nílį́įgo índa ayóó'áníínísh'níigo bąą diné danilíinii nik'é nináníshdlá índa dadine'é ne'iina' bik'é nináníshdlá .
PRED:	I love you , and I love you , because I have redeemed you from the peoples , and I have redeemed your life from their people .
GOLD:	Others were given in exchange for you.I traded their lives for yoursbecause you are precious to me.You are honored , and I love you .

ID:	3251
INPUT:	Shí Paul , Jesus Christ yá naal'a'í nishłíinii , deesh'aałgo shíká áhodoo'niidii , Diyin God baa hane' yá'át'éehii baa hodeeshnihgo ats'áshiníłtį́ .
PRED:	Paul , a servant of Christ Jesus , called for me , and sent me away from the Good News of God .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of Christ Jesus , chosen by God to be an apostle and sent out to preach his Good News .

ID:	3252
INPUT:	Shich'į' nahwii'náago t'áadoo shits'ą́ąjį' kónít'éhí ! Shich'į' dah díníit'aah ; nánooshkąąhgo t'áá tsį́łígo shich'į' ééhodíísįįł !
PRED:	Do n't turn away from me in trouble ; cry out to me , and come down to me .
GOLD:	Do n't turn away from mein my time of distress.Bend down to listen , and answer me quickly when I call to you .

ID:	3253
INPUT:	Diné aghada'ii'níiłii bizajííyáhígíishą' diné tált'éhígíí háí hoł kééhat'íinii nilį́įgo baa nitsíníkees ?
PRED:	Who do you think about these three men ? Who do you think about their neighbor ?
GOLD:	“ Now which of these three would you say was a neighbor to the man who was attacked by bandits ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	3254
INPUT:	Nidi diné éí , Díí t'áá ha'át'éegoda náhideesh'nih , nízingo éí ashdla' aháádzooígíí t'ááłá'í yínéidoozohgo naaldlooshii bą́ą́h aníłį́ bik'ehgo yił ninéidoodlééł .
PRED:	But if a man does this , he shall pay it to him , and he shall give it to the fifth beast according to the number of the beast .
GOLD:	If you want to buy back the animal , you must pay the value set by the priest , plus 20 percent .

ID:	3255
INPUT:	Honílónígíí bits'ą́ąjį' áshólééh lágo , áádóó niNíłch'i Diyinii <unk> ą́ąjį' kóole' yíila' .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from the beginning of the beginning , and do n't let the Spirit come near .
GOLD:	Do not banish me from your presence , and do n't take your Holy Spirit from me .

ID:	3256
INPUT:	Jew dine'é bizází yę́ę bi'é'él'į'
PRED:	The Law of the Jews
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Inner Purity

ID:	3257
INPUT:	Áko Josáíyah éí kédaayah t'áá át'é Ízrel dine'é daabíhígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó doo daaldinii t'áá át'é nahjį' kóyiilaago Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi nidajikaígíí t'áá ádzíłtso haBóhólníihii Diyin God yá nidaal'a'go áyiilaa . Áádóó Josáíyah bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Bóhólníihii t'áadoo yits'ákáhí , dabizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God yá nidaal'a' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Josiah removed all the abominations of the land of Israel , from all that were in the land of Israel , and served the Lord God of Israel in the days of Josiah the God of their fathers .
GOLD:	So Josiah removed all detestable idols from the entire land of Israel and required everyone to worship the Lord their God . And throughout the rest of his lifetime , they did not turn away from the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	3258
INPUT:	Alámelek kin shijaa' , Éí<unk> kin shijaa' , Méíshal kin shijaa' , e'e'aahjígo Kármel kin shijaa' índa Sháí<unk> nath tó níł<unk> ígíí
PRED:	Abimelech gave it to me , and put it on the east side of Carmel , and to the east side of Carmel .
GOLD:	Allammelech , Amad , and Mishal . The boundary on the west touched Carmel and Shihor-libnath ,

ID:	3259
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , ha'át'íísh biniinaa hool'áágóó yóó'anihiníníłkaad ? Ha'át'íísh biniinaa náhóóchįįdígíí łid nahalingo nidibé hootsogóó naakaígíí bik'ijį' nítsxaaz ?
PRED:	Why do you cast us away forever ? Why do you cast us away like a lion in the field ?
GOLD:	O God , why have you rejected us so long ? Why is your anger so intense against the sheep of your own pasture ?

ID:	3260
INPUT:	Nidi díí béédaołniih : Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' danohłį́į́ nít'éé' áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'ą́ą́' náánihiisnii' ; éí bąą díí nihich'į' bee haasdzíi'ii bida'íínóhsin doo .
PRED:	But ye shall remember that ye were slaves in Egypt , and turn back from the Lord your God : therefore ye shall fear him .
GOLD:	Always remember that you were slaves in Egypt and that the Lord your God redeemed you from your slavery . That is why I have given you this command .

ID:	3261
INPUT:	Siláo binanit'a'í danilíinii éí diné yich'į' hadadoodzihgo ádadidooniił , Háísh diné shį́į́ bighan áyiilaago t'áadoo da'azhdlish da ? Bíni' éí bighangóó nídoodáałgo da'doodlish ; éí doodaii' anaa'di bi'diisyį́įgo diné náánáła' éí hooghan da'doodlish .
PRED:	And the captain of the army shall speak to the people , saying , Who hath built a man 's house , and hath not put it on his house ? And he shall take it with the blood , or with the blood of the men , and with the blood of the battle .
GOLD:	“ Then the officers of the army must address the troops and say , ‘ Has anyone here just built a new house but not yet dedicated it ? If so , you may go home ! You might be killed in the battle , and someone else would dedicate your house .

ID:	3262
INPUT:	Áko Tííman bik'ijį' kǫ' ádeeshłíiłgo Bázra bidziilgo bił nahaz'áanii ałtso adidook'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	And I will send fire upon Edom , and fire shall devour the law of Edom .
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on Teman , and the fortresses of Bozrah will be destroyed . ”

ID:	3263
INPUT:	Háni'dii Ízrel dine'é ádaaní , Aa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	Let the children of Israel say , “ Your mercy endures forever . ”
GOLD:	Let all Israel repeat : “ His faithful love endures forever . ”

ID:	3264
INPUT:	Dan éí honít'i'gi tł'iish sitínígíí jílį́į doo ; Łį́į́' be'atiinígíí bikáá' tł'iish na'ałtseedii jílį́į doo ; Éí łį́į́' bikétalígíí ahijiiłháashgo biniinaa bik'i dah nidadzizdáhígíí t'ą́ąjigo adahizhnidéeh dooleeł .
PRED:	Dan shall be like a serpent , and he shall be a serpent , and the horse shall be broken , and the horses shall be broken , and the horse shall be broken .
GOLD:	Dan will be a snake beside the road , a poisonous viper along the paththat bites the horse 's hoovesso its rider is thrown off .

ID:	3265
INPUT:	Łóód na'ałtseedii t'áá át'é hakáá'góó niníkę́ęzgohats'íís bidziilii bidi'niiłdzid .
PRED:	They are afraid of the sword , and all the heads of the flesh are afraid .
GOLD:	Disease eats their skin ; death devours their limbs .

ID:	3266
INPUT:	Néthinim ła' : Záíha ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Hashúfa ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Tabéíyath ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	The temple : the sons of Jeshua , the sons of Man , the sons of Merari ,
GOLD:	The descendants of the following Temple servants returned from exile : Ziha , Hasupha , Tabbaoth ,

ID:	3267
INPUT:	Baa hoł hózhóonii t'áá át'é éí áda'azįįd nídeit'aahii áádóó dah yiitą́ągo háá'áyį́į́h jį́ áádóó hoháá'áyį́į́h jį́ índa dahozdísingo áłah nída'adleehii t'áá ałtso nahjį' kódeeshłííł .
PRED:	And I will cut off all the days of gladness , and the sabbath , and the sabbath , and the sabbath , and all the feast .
GOLD:	I will put an end to her annual festivals , her new moon celebrations , and her Sabbath days — all her appointed festivals .

ID:	3268
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéíkab éí Ííjip kéyahdi ch'iyáán hólǫ́ǫgo yiyíínii'go biye'ké áyidííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'óó nída'ahinół'įįh .
PRED:	When Jacob heard that there was food in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why do you want ? ”
GOLD:	When Jacob heard that grain was available in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why are you standing around looking at one another ?

ID:	3269
INPUT:	Tsézéí yee shiwoo' niyiizti' índa łeeshch'iih bii' shishjoolgo áshiilaa .
PRED:	He broke my teeth with ashes and ashes .
GOLD:	He has made me chew on gravel.He has rolled me in the dust .

ID:	3270
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' Íílai náhást'édiindóó ba'aan tseebíí binááhai ; haná'oh halbáago doo hazhó'ó ajoo'į́į da .
PRED:	At that time Eli was eight years old , and his eyes had no eyes .
GOLD:	who was ninety-eight years old and blind .

ID:	3271
INPUT:	Áko Peter éí yiyiiłtsą́ągo diné yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , ha'át'íishą' biniyé díí bik'ee t'óó nihił adahayóí ? Ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'áá hó habee adziilii bee , éí doodaléi' hozdísinígíí bee , diné naagháago ájiilaa danihíínóh'níigo ayóogo danihinół'į́ ?
PRED:	When Peter saw it , he said to the people , “ You people of Israel , why do you be afraid ? Why do you want to do these things ? Why do you want to do such things ? Why do you want to see them ? ”
GOLD:	Peter saw his opportunity and addressed the crowd . “ People of Israel , ” he said , “ what is so surprising about this ? And why stare at us as though we had made this man walk by our own power or godliness ?

ID:	3272
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' yádiłhił biyaagi ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bitahdę́ę́' Jew dine'é dahodísinii Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	At that time the Jews who lived in heaven lived in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	At that time there were devout Jews from every nation living in Jerusalem .

ID:	3273
INPUT:	Áko awáalyaadóó ch'ízhní'áazhgo , Lídiya bighandi yah ajíí'áázh , áko ałk'isóó danilíinii bił nída'ahijiiltsą́ągo hada'ólníigo ájiilaa , áádóó dashdii'áázh .
PRED:	And he went out of prison , and went to his house Leah , and he made his brethren to see them , and they went away .
GOLD:	When Paul and Silas left the prison , they returned to the home of Lydia . There they met with the believers and encouraged them once more . Then they left town .

ID:	3274
INPUT:	Ła'da na'ageh doo yee tsi'naagháa da dooleeł , doodaii' Íísa doo hodísin da yę́ęgi át'éego t'ááká doo ádá dahodíínółzin da yíila' . Jó , éí átsé yizhchíinii jílį́įgo bee hóhólníih dooleeł yę́ę t'ááłáhídi oodą́'ígíí bee haa nahaaznii' .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone commit adultery , or Esau , as he was born to the first generation .
GOLD:	Make sure that no one is immoral or godless like Esau , who traded his birthright as the firstborn son for a single meal .

ID:	3275
INPUT:	éí bit'ąą' nizhóní áádóó bineest'ą' t'óó ahayóí bąąh hazlį́į'ii índa t'áá ałtso deiyą́ą doogo bá át'éii éí halgaigóó naaldlooshii nidaakaii yiyaa chaha'oh anídaakahii índa wódahgo tsídii nidaat'a'ii tsin bits'ádaoz'a' bąąh bit'oh áńdayiil'įįhígíí
PRED:	And they shall eat its fruit , and its fruit , and all its fruit , and its fruit shall be for the beasts of the field , and for the birds of the sky , and the birds of the sky ,
GOLD:	It had fresh green leaves and was loaded with fruit for all to eat . Wild animals lived in its shade , and birds nested in its branches .

ID:	3276
INPUT:	<unk> bichaha'ohjį' iigháahgo t'iis bit'ąą' bich'ą́ą́h yíl'áa łeh . Tooh nílį́įgi tábąąhgóó k'ai' yíl'áago ákóne' iigháahgo k'ai' bich'ą́ą́h yíl'áa łeh .
PRED:	When the tree falls down , it goes down to a tree , and the waters grow on the waters .
GOLD:	The lotus plants give it shadeamong the willows beside the stream .

ID:	3277
INPUT:	Hasht'ehodít'é , t'áá ałtsogóó hasht'ehodít'é , daaníigo shidine'é adadeeznihii t'óó t'įįhdígo nídayííłdzíí' . Nidi doo hasht'ehodít'ée da .
PRED:	The people of my people have said , “ peace and peace ! ” But there is no peace .
GOLD:	They offer superficial treatmentsfor my people 's mortal wound.They give assurances of peacewhen there is no peace .

ID:	3278
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii éí Héíman áyidííniid , Nílááh tsį́įłgo , naat'á éé' nizhóníii ła' nídiinííł áádóó łį́į́' ałdó' nídiilóosgo t'áá ádínínígi át'éego ákónínééh áádóó Mórdiikai éí Jew dine'é nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii bich'é'étiingi dáń'dítį́hígi dah sidáhígíí ákónílééh . Bee yáníłti'ígíí doo ła' t'áadoo bi'ohí ánílééh .
PRED:	Then the king said to Haman , “ Go quickly , and take a robe , just as you have done , and do to Mordecai the king 's gate , and do not let it be in the gate of the king 's gate . ”
GOLD:	“ Excellent ! ” the king said to Haman . “ Quick ! Take the robes and my horse , and do just as you have said for Mordecai the Jew , who sits at the gate of the palace . Leave out nothing you have suggested ! ”

ID:	3279
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , K'ad lą́ą índa Jéíkab bits'ą́ą́dóó oochíiłii yisnááh danilíinii nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo daabíí' nít'éé' yę́ę bíi'go áńdeeshdlííł , áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso baa a'ááh dínéesįįł áádóó shízhi' Diyinii baa łe'nisingo hánígo baa áháshyą́ą doo .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold , I will take away the captivity of Jacob , and I will give to all Israel , and I will have mercy on all Israel , and I will have mercy on my name .
GOLD:	“ So now , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will end the captivity of my people ; I will have mercy on all Israel , for I jealously guard my holy reputation !

ID:	3280
INPUT:	Dabizhé'é yę́ę éí shizaad doo t'áá k'ad deidiizts'ą́ą'ii doo ákwii é'ét'éii yaa nidaaskai yę́ę éí yich'į' t'ą́ą́' anáákaigo diyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' . Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é dabizhé'é yę́ę bił ahada'dinisht'áanii dayiizti' .
PRED:	But when their ancestors heard my words , they turned back to other gods . They served other gods . They served the gods of Israel and Judah .
GOLD:	They have returned to the sins of their ancestors . They have refused to listen to me and are worshiping other gods . Israel and Judah have both broken the covenant I made with their ancestors .

ID:	3281
INPUT:	T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Diné yee bąąhági ádaat'íinii ts'ídá t'áá ałtso , áádóó Diyin God baa'ihgo bá yáti' t'áá ałtso éí bá yóó'anídahidit'aah dooleeł ,
PRED:	I tell you the truth , everyone who does evil will be forgiven .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , all sin and blasphemy can be forgiven ,

ID:	3282
INPUT:	Bee hódzáanii hádaat'íinii ła' <unk> yan danilínígíí índa ła' <unk> <unk> danilínígíí ałdó' haa haaskaigo hoł ałgha'dadit'ááh . Áko ła' ádaaní , Díí ha'diłch'ałí lá , ha'át'íí níí lá ? Náádaała' ádaaní , Ha'át'íí shį́į́ dadiyin doo béédahózin da léi' yaa halne'gi át'é ? Háálá Jesus índa aninéédę́ę́' náádi'doojahgi yaa nahalne' .
PRED:	And some of the wise men of the wise came to him , and they spoke against him . And some said , What do these things mean ? And they said , What is there any god , and there is no god , for there is no god , and Jesus .
GOLD:	He also had a debate with some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers . When he told them about Jesus and his resurrection , they said , “ What 's this babbler trying to say with these strange ideas he 's picked up ? ” Others said , “ He seems to be preaching about some foreign gods . ”

ID:	3283
INPUT:	Jó , bee na'óhontaahii át'é , ákoshą' naat'á gish yiz'įįdígíí ts'ídá ádoodįįł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	For , behold , the Lord God says , how shall the rod be cut off , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	It will put them all to the test.What chance do they have ? says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	3284
INPUT:	T'ah doo e'e'aahgóó , t'ah doo chaha'oh iildóóhgóó shich'į'go náníyisgo shaa nínááh , ayóó'ánósh'níinii . <unk> her dził daní'áágóó jádí , doodaii' bįįhką' naagháhígíigi ánít'ée doo .
PRED:	But if the sun is not taken away from the sun until the sun , I love my love , my love is like a flock , or a flock .
GOLD:	Before the dawn breezes blowand the night shadows flee , return to me , my love , like a gazelleor a young stag on the rugged mountains .

ID:	3285
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ aleeh góne' Íífreiyim dine'é naat'áanii nilíinii Amáíhad biye' Iilíshama náá'iisnii' :
PRED:	On the seventh day , the prince of the sons of Ephraim , offer an offering :
GOLD:	On the seventh day Elishama son of Ammihud , leader of the tribe of Ephraim , presented his offering .

ID:	3286
INPUT:	Áko Sídim honíteelgi łeejin dijé'ígíí t'óó ahayóigo bee nidahodits'ǫ' , áko Sádam dine'é binanit'a'í índa Gomárah dine'é binanit'a'í dazhnéechéehgo ła' ákwii biishníídee' ; nidahaasdzí'ígíí éí dziłgóó yóó'adahaazhjéé' .
PRED:	And they cast them into the valley of Seir , and the king of Sodom , and the princes of Sodom , and the remnant of the mountains fled .
GOLD:	As it happened , the valley of the Dead Sea was filled with tar pits . And as the army of the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled , some fell into the tar pits , while the rest escaped into the mountains .

ID:	3287
INPUT:	áádóó éí hoodzooígíí yé'iitsoh biyíldzis náhookǫsjígo nineel'ánídi Hínam biye' biyíldzisígíí binaashii dziłígíí bitsį́įjį' hoodzo , áádóó Hínam biyíldzis góyaa índa Jííbas dine'é bikéyah bíighahgóó shádi'ááhjí áádóó Enrógel tó háálíní góyaa hodeesdzo .
PRED:	And the border was at the north side of the valley of the valley of the valley , which is in the valley of Merari , and at the north side of the Hittites , and at the south side of the Jebusites .
GOLD:	and down to the base of the mountain beside the valley of Ben-Hinnom , at the northern end of the valley of Rephaim . From there it went down the valley of Hinnom , crossing south of the slope where the Jebusites lived , and continued down to En-rogel .

ID:	3288
INPUT:	Nidi Gíbiyah dine'é k'ad kódahodiilníił ni : yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo bich'į' hidiikah .
PRED:	But now we will do this to the tribe of Gibeah , and we will go to him according to their lot .
GOLD:	Instead , this is what we will do to Gibeah ; we will draw lots to decide who will attack it .

ID:	3289
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' niha'áłchíní yázhí , Yisnááh dadooleeł , dadooniid yę́ę , éí íídą́ą́' doo yá'át'éehii índa yá'át'éehii doo yaa ákodanízinii , éí kéyah yiih dahidoonééł áádóó baa dideesh'áałgo bíí' dadooleeł .
PRED:	The children of your children will go into captivity , saying , ‘ It is good and evil , evil and evil , and I will give them into the land . ' ”
GOLD:	I will give the land to your little ones — your innocent children . You were afraid they would be captured , but they will be the ones who occupy it .

ID:	3290
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii aa a'ááh nízinii hool'áágóó baa hashtaał doo ; náás oochííłgóó na'ahódlíigo ná baa hashne' doo .
PRED:	I will sing to the Lord for ever ; I will declare your faithfulness to your generations .
GOLD:	I will sing of the Lord 's unfailing love forever ! Young and old will hear of your faithfulness .

ID:	3291
INPUT:	Naa a'ááh hwiindzingo índa nik'édí nilį́įgo díí ła' ná yaa nidoo<unk> go t'áadoo ninééł'į́į' da , háálá ni'dizhchį́ yę́ędą́ą́' éí bijį́į́dóó t'óó naa'ihgo nąąh tsíhodeeskéezgo biniinaa t'áá ádzaajį' andi'yoolghan .
PRED:	And I will not look upon thee , neither shall I look for thee this day , because of thy birth , because of the day of thy birth I was born , and he shall be put to death .
GOLD:	No one had the slightest interest in you ; no one pitied you or cared for you . On the day you were born , you were unwanted , dumped in a field and left to die .

ID:	3292
INPUT:	Áko Léíban éí Jíí<unk> <unk> hoolyée doo , dííniid , nidi Jéíkab éí Galíid hoolyée doo , dííniid .
PRED:	And Laban called the name of the name of Jacob , but he called the name of Jacob .
GOLD:	To commemorate the event , Laban called the place Jegar-sahadutha ( which means “ witness pile ” in Aramaic ) , and Jacob called it Galeed ( which means “ witness pile ” in Hebrew ) .

ID:	3293
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii bídahooł'aahígíí éí Jérikodę́ę́' dadéez'į́'ígíí ádaaní , Iiláíjah biníłch'i Iiláísha bik'i hoole' lá . Áko ákǫ́ǫ́ hadááh yíkaigo ni'jį' hach'į' yaa ádaadzaa .
PRED:	The disciples of the prophets of Jericho said , “ Elisha 's spirit is on Elisha ! ” So they went down and bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	When the group of prophets from Jericho saw from a distance what happened , they exclaimed , “ Elijah 's spirit rests upon Elisha ! ” And they went to meet him and bowed to the ground before him .

ID:	3294
INPUT:	áádę́ę́' hadoogáałgo t'áá dį́į́'góó ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'áanii , éí Gag índa Méígag wolyéhígíí yi'doolohgo , anaa' ádeidoolííł biniyé áłah íidoolííł ; éí ánéelą́ą'gi tábąąhgóó séigi ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , and I will make a law between the nations : and I will gather it , and they shall gather it , and it shall be as the sand of the sea .
GOLD:	He will go out to deceive the nations — called Gog and Magog — in every corner of the earth . He will gather them together for battle — a mighty army , as numberless as sand along the seashore .

ID:	3295
INPUT:	Áko jideezghal nít'éé' , shoo , tsííd bikáa'gi łees'áán sit'éé lá , áádóó jinées'ání bíighahgi tóshjeeh yázhí bee tó si'ą́ . Áko ajííyą́ą́dóó tó joodlą́ą'go názneeztį́ .
PRED:	And he lifted up his eyes , and behold , there was no bread upon it ; and he said unto him , The water is upon the waters . And he drank and drank .
GOLD:	He looked around and there beside his head was some bread baked on hot stones and a jar of water ! So he ate and drank and lay down again .

ID:	3296
INPUT:	Áádóó dah náhást'ánígíí bich'į' tsosts'idgo ałk'i hoo'niłí haaz'á ; wóne'di éí yah ahóót'i' ch'é'étiindóó tł'óo'di éí tsin ałts'ą́ą́hjí íí'áhígíí éí t'áá áłah bąąhjį' páam sikaadii bééda'alyaago nidaask'ęę' .
PRED:	And there were seven cherubim on each side of the court , and on the other side of the gate were four palm trees on each side .
GOLD:	This gateway also had a stairway of seven steps leading up to it , and an entry room at the inner end , and palm tree decorations along the dividing walls .

ID:	3297
INPUT:	Diné ła' atł'ááh nástł'inii bikáá'dóó óola , béésh łigaii , tsé da'ílíinii deitł'in , náánáła' éí tsin , tł'ohda , ehégoda deitł'in .
PRED:	If a man had the foundation of gold , silver , and the house , and the house , and the other .
GOLD:	Anyone who builds on that foundation may use a variety of materials — gold , silver , jewels , wood , hay , or straw .

ID:	3298
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí hastóí danilíinii kót'éego dahałnínígíí doo bázhniizį́į́'góó t'áá na'níle'dii diné bich'į' hadziisdzíí' ,
PRED:	Then the king went to meet him , and said to the people ,
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to the people , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	3299
INPUT:	<unk> néíyah haz'ánídóó diné táadi mííldóó ba'aan hastą́ądi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin .
PRED:	The men of the house , three thousand and six hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The citizens of Senaah3,630

ID:	3300
INPUT:	Jórdan tooh bibąąhgóó halgai hóteel wolyéhígíí Sákath haz'ání áádóó <unk> déíthah haz'ání bita' gónaa hashtł'ish dits'idí hólónígi ákwe'é aláahgo naat'áanii béésh deidííłhį́į́' .
PRED:	And he cast them in the midst of the Jordan , which is beyond the Jordan , and cast them in the midst of the river , which is in the midst of the river .
GOLD:	The king had them cast in clay molds in the Jordan Valley between Succoth and Zarethan .

ID:	3301
INPUT:	Áko éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' David yá sodoolzin , áádóó ch'iyáán ła' ya'níłtsood , índa Filístiya diné Goláíyath bidiltłish yeinítą́ .
PRED:	So David prayed to the Lord , and gave him some food to eat , and gave him to the sword of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Ahimelech consulted the Lord for him . Then he gave him food and the sword of Goliath the Philistine . ”

ID:	3302
INPUT:	Nida'ídółkidgo ádadohní , Ha'át'éegoshą' ? Ániid nanináádą́ą́' ne'asdzą́ą́ bina'ílo'go biniinaa nihita'gi Bóhólníihii oo'íinii nilį́į́ nít'éé' . Éí t'ahdii nich'ooní át'é nidi , bee aha'deet'áanii binahjį' ne'asdzą́ą́ silį́į́' nít'éé' nidi , ákódaohdzaa .
PRED:	“ Tell you , ‘ Why do you say , ‘ The Lord is a man between your wife ? ' But he is a friend and a wife , but you have become his wife .
GOLD:	You cry out , “ Why does n't the Lord accept my worship ? ” I 'll tell you why ! Because the Lord witnessed the vows you and your wife made when you were young . But you have been unfaithful to her , though she remained your faithful partner , the wife of your marriage vows .

ID:	3303
INPUT:	Nidi nídzízyizgo dzideezteh . [ Áádóó ázhdííniid , Ádanoht'éii doo nihił béédahózin da ,
PRED:	But he turned and began to rebuke them . He said , “ You do n't know where you are . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus turned and rebuked them .

ID:	3304
INPUT:	Éí bąą danihiideestséełgo ałch'į' hadadiidzih biniyé hágo danihidííniid , háálá Ízrel dine'é nidayólíii biniinaa díí béésh da'ahólzha'í bee dashi'diistł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	Therefore we called to see , that we may speak unto thee , for they have been bound in chains , because of the house of Israel .
GOLD:	I asked you to come here today so we could get acquainted and so I could explain to you that I am bound with this chain because I believe that the hope of Israel — the Messiah — has already come . ”

ID:	3305
INPUT:	Nitł'iz ałtaas'éí da'ahól<unk> go nitsii' názt'i'go niniitsį' bik'ijį' nidahaazhjée'go bee nízhóní ; yoo' nizhóníii nizénázt'i' .
PRED:	And they cut off the head of gold , and put on the head of the robe , and upon the robe of the robe .
GOLD:	How lovely are your cheeks ; your earrings set them afire ! How lovely is your neck , enhanced by a string of jewels .

ID:	3306
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Christ bee ahee daniildzilgo índa diyingo ats'ánihinínil ;
PRED:	God has set us up in Christ Jesus , and has set us holy .
GOLD:	It is God who enables us , along with you , to stand firm for Christ . He has commissioned us ,

ID:	3307
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó Diyin God nilíinii bine' nidaohdzi'ii nilį́ ; éí hool'áágóó bigaan bits'áhoníyée'ii yee nanihijaah ; nihinááł nihi'ana'í ch'íiniiłkaad doo , áko ádidooniił , Ádaołdįįh .
PRED:	You are the God of forever ; the arm of his arm will drive out your enemies out before you , and you will say , ‘ You will destroy them . '
GOLD:	The eternal God is your refuge , and his everlasting arms are under you.He drives out the enemy before you ; he cries out , ‘ Destroy them ! '

ID:	3308
INPUT:	Ákohgo nááts'ó'oołdísii biyi'dę́ę́' Bóhólníihii éí Job yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to Job out of the storm , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord answered Job from the whirlwind :

ID:	3309
INPUT:	Diné danilíinii nihitsiits'iin bik'i łį́į́' bił nidaazhjée'go íinilaa . Kǫ' áádóó tó bii' ch'ínii'ná , nidi t'áá ałtsoní hózhǫ́ǫgo bee áda'azįįdjį' anihííní'eezh .
PRED:	He smote the head of our head , and cast out the fire , and brought us out of the waters , but he brought us into peace .
GOLD:	Then you put a leader over us.We went through fire and flood , but you brought us to a place of great abundance .

ID:	3310
INPUT:	Na'nitiní , Mózes yę́ę kót'éego nihá ak'e'ashchį́ , Diné ła'da bił hajíí'áázh ba'áłchíní t'áadoo haleehí be'asdzą́ą́ yąąh daaztsą́ągo , hak'is be'asdzą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę hwe'asdzą́ą dooleeł , áko hak'is yę́ę bá áłchíní hwee hodooleeł , níí nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Teacher , ” he said , “ No one has taken his wife and his brother 's wife 's wife , so that he would be his brother 's wife . ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , Moses gave us a law that if a man dies , leaving a wife without children , his brother should marry the widow and have a child who will carry on the brother 's name .

ID:	3311
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehgóó nínáníłt'į́įhii deidooyį́į́ł ; niye'ké índa nitsi'ké deidooldił . Nidibé deíl'áii índa nibéégashii deíl'áii deidooldił . Nich'il na'atł'o'ii deíl'áii índa fig deíl'áii yaa nahodidookah . Nikin hadaas'áago binída'azt'i'go baa dadzíínílíii diltłish yee ádeidoołdįįł .
PRED:	And they shall eat the field of the field , and they shall eat thy sons , and thy daughters , and thy daughters , and their daughters , and they shall bring them into the cities of thy cities , and they shall fall by the sword .
GOLD:	They will devour the food of your harvest ; they will devour your sons and daughters.They will devour your flocks and herds ; they will devour your grapes and figs.And they will destroy your fortified towns , which you think are so safe .

ID:	3312
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , Sí<unk> ch'ííníyá yę́ędą́ą́' , Íídam kéyahdóó ch'ííníyá yę́ędą́ą́' nahasdzáán ditsxiz , índa yádiłhiłdę́ę́' nahóółtą́ ; k'os ałdó' bits'ą́ą́dóó nahóółtą́ .
PRED:	When you came out of the land of Edom , Edom came up out of the land of Edom , and the earth tremble from the sky , and the earth tremble from the sky .
GOLD:	“ Lord , when you set out from Seirand marched across the fields of Edom , the earth trembled , and the cloudy skies poured down rain .

ID:	3313
INPUT:	Hozéíya áádóó asdzání adiléii
PRED:	The Woman and women
GOLD:	Hosea 's Wife Is Redeemed

ID:	3314
INPUT:	Shéífan biye' Gemaráíyah biye' Maikáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bizaad naaltsoos yisdisii bikáa'gi bee bik'e'ashchínígíí t'áá át'é yidiizts'ą́ą'go
PRED:	When Jeremiah the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , heard all the words of the Lord ,
GOLD:	When Micaiah son of Gemariah and grandson of Shaphan heard the messages from the Lord ,

ID:	3315
INPUT:	Áko Stephen daaztsánígíí Saul bił t'áá áko . Éí bijį́į́dóó Jerúsalemgi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii t'áá íiyisí atídabidil'į́įgo hodeeshzhiizh . T'áá ádzíłtso Judíya índa Samériya kéyahgóó tahodi'nooskaad , t'áá hazhó'ó daal'aadii éí t'áá dooda .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that when Saul died , that the church of Jerusalem was filled with fear , and all the apostles were scattered together , and all the apostles were scattered in Samaria .
GOLD:	Saul was one of the witnesses , and he agreed completely with the killing of Stephen.A great wave of persecution began that day , sweeping over the church in Jerusalem ; and all the believers except the apostles were scattered through the regions of Judea and Samaria .

ID:	3316
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' náánáła' ch'ikéí yę́ę ałdó' yíkaigo ádaaní , Bóhólníihii , Bóhólníihii , nihá ąą ánílééh .
PRED:	Some women also came and said , “ Lord , open your mouth . ”
GOLD:	Later , when the other five bridesmaids returned , they stood outside , calling , ‘ Lord ! Lord ! Open the door for us ! '

ID:	3317
INPUT:	Áádóó , shoo , Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii yidááh yíkaigo aláahgo naat'áanii ádeidííniid , Ha'át'íísh biniyé nihik'isóó Júdah dine'é danineez'į́į'go aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó ba'áłchíní índa David bidiné danilíinii t'áá ałtso Jórdan tooh ha'naa yił ná'ná ?
PRED:	And behold , all Israel came to meet the king of Israel , and said unto the king , Why have ye seen the brethren of Judah , and all the people of Judah , and all the people of David , and all the people of the Jordan ?
GOLD:	But all the men of Israel complained to the king , “ The men of Judah stole the king and did n't give us the honor of helping take you , your household , and all your men across the Jordan . ”

ID:	3318
INPUT:	Áko Heziikáíyah haa ákoniizį́į'go Senákerib éí Jerúsalem kin haal'á bich'į' nideeshbah jinízingo jiníyáá lá ;
PRED:	When Hezekiah saw that Hezekiah went up to Jerusalem , he found it .
GOLD:	When Hezekiah realized that Sennacherib also intended to attack Jerusalem ,

ID:	3319
INPUT:	Tsin ałnáoszid bąąhjį' Christ bił o'oolkaalígíí baa hane'
PRED:	The Death of Christ
GOLD:	Paul 's Message of Wisdom

ID:	3320
INPUT:	Bohoníłdzilgo kin haal'áajį' háishą' shił doo'ash ? Íídamgóoshą' háí shił doo'ash ?
PRED:	Who will bring me to the city ? Who will bring me to Edom ?
GOLD:	Who will bring me into the fortified city ? Who will bring me victory over Edom ?

ID:	3321
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí Saul yił nát'áázh áádóó Saul éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' nahodzisá .
PRED:	Then Samuel brought him to Saul and worshipped the Lord .
GOLD:	So Samuel finally agreed and went back with him , and Saul worshiped the Lord .

ID:	3322
INPUT:	Áyąądą́ą́' náás deekaígíí t'áá éí bik'ehgo náás yiikah doo .
PRED:	And they shall walk according to their number , according to their number .
GOLD:	But we must hold on to the progress we have already made .

ID:	3323
INPUT:	Zedekáíyah nant'áago ła'ts'áadah náhááh góne' áádóó dį́į́' nídízííd binih índa náhást'éí jį́į́ góne' kin haal'áago tsé binaago ahénátł'inii łahgo yigháda'aznil .
PRED:	And in the fourth month of Zedekiah , in the fourth month , in the fourth month , and on the fourteenth day of the seventh month , the wall was broken down .
GOLD:	Two and a half years later , on July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , a section of the city wall was broken down .

ID:	3324
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nílíinii , Ííjipdę́ę́' nidine'é nibee adziilii bee ch'ííní'eezhgo díí jį́ át'éhígi át'éego nízhi' bééhózingo íinilaa . Ádił nida'ayeelzíí' ; ts'ídá doo yá'áshónígi ádeiit'įįd .
PRED:	Now therefore , O Lord our God , thou hast brought forth the hand of thy people out of Egypt , and hast known thy name as this day : we have sinned against thee .
GOLD:	“ O Lord our God , you brought lasting honor to your name by rescuing your people from Egypt in a great display of power . But we have sinned and are full of wickedness .

ID:	3325
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	This is another message that came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3326
INPUT:	Diné éí hak'isóó t'óó ahayóigo t'áá éí ła' náháłchǫǫh , nidi bił hajíí'áázh biláahgo náánáła' áhánígo k'é hó'níinii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	A great multitude of his brothers , and he brought him to him , but one of them is with him .
GOLD:	There are “ friends ” who destroy each other , but a real friend sticks closer than a brother .

ID:	3327
INPUT:	Éí bąą ałk'isóó danilínígíí nihich'į' shilą́ąjį' wohkah bidideeshniiłgi t'áá ákónéehee dooleełgo baa nitsísíkééz , béeso adahidoohniłgo bee nidahosoo'áanii t'áá áłdįįłt'éego ádadoohłííł biniyé , áko ahees'nilii doo nihílák'ee haa'nilii át'ée da doo , nidi t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo adahisoonilii át'ée doo .
PRED:	So I want you to go ahead of your brothers and sisters , and I want you to go ahead of you . If you do this , you will take away the money and throw it into the hand of your hand , you will not take it into your hand , but you will not be strong .
GOLD:	So I thought I should send these brothers ahead of me to make sure the gift you promised is ready . But I want it to be a willing gift , not one given grudgingly .

ID:	3328
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí bidine'é yik'ijį' bi'didooltsééł , índa bik'aa' éí atsiniltł'ish anáháta' nahalin doo ; Bóhólníihii Diyin God deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádidooniił , áko shádi'ááhjígo nááts'ó'oołdísii yee yigáał doo .
PRED:	The Lord will see his people , and his arrows will be like lightning . The Lord God will say to them , “ The trumpet of the Lord God will shout in the south . ”
GOLD:	The Lord will appear above his people ; his arrows will fly like lightning ! The Sovereign Lord will sound the ram 's hornand attack like a whirlwind from the southern desert .

ID:	3329
INPUT:	T'ááká diyin dabidi'níinii béésh łigaii bee eda'alyaii , doodaii' óola bee eda'alyaii shí daóltą'go doo ádá ádadoohłíił da .
PRED:	Do n't you do n't have any gods of silver , silver , gold , gold , and gold .
GOLD:	Remember , you must not make any idols of silver or gold to rival me .

ID:	3330
INPUT:	Áko nikin haal'á binaa wódahgo ahééda'astł'inii éí bighą́ą'di bine' nanidzi'ígíí ni'góó łeeshtahjį' hadeidoołkałgo wóyahdi nidadeeztąąd doo .
PRED:	And the walls of thy city shall be cut down upon the ground , and they shall fall upon the ground .
GOLD:	The high walls of Moab will be demolished.They will be brought down to the ground , down into the dust .

ID:	3331
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá da'níł'ąą át'éego bee nidajilnish , nidi Diyin God t'ááłá'íígíí t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá ałtsoní hwee ła'yoolííł .
PRED:	They do all work , but God gives all things to all .
GOLD:	God works in different ways , but it is the same God who does the work in all of us .

ID:	3332
INPUT:	Háishą' hach'į' ninádadoodleeł biniyé Bóhólníihii bazh'nílá ?
PRED:	Who gave him the Lord to return to him ?
GOLD:	And who has given him so muchthat he needs to pay it back ?

ID:	3333
INPUT:	Diyingo naal'a'í ashdla' góne'ígíí bileets'aa' biyi'ígíí naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bikáa'jį' yayiiką́ , áko bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ągi bił chahóółhéél . Diné t'áá íiyisí bił dahoneezgaigo bitsoo' dei'aał ,
PRED:	And the fifth angel poured out his throne on the throne of the beast , and the kingdoms of the kingdom was darkness , and the tongue of the earth was very deep .
GOLD:	Then the fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast , and his kingdom was plunged into darkness . His subjects ground their teeth in anguish ,

ID:	3334
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí ak'áán nááhániihii ak'áán áádóó ak'ah ła' índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii fránkinsens wolyéii t'áá át'é bóóltą'go bílák'ee hadeezbingo hanéíjihgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidi<unk> go łikání halchingo bee ééhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' nááyiiłniih doo .
PRED:	Then the priest shall take the grain offering , the grain offering , the oil , the oil , and the oil , and all the incense , and put it on the altar , an offering made by fire to the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest on duty will take from the grain offering a handful of the choice flour moistened with olive oil , together with all the frankincense . He will burn this representative portion on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	3335
INPUT:	Áko Bethséyida kin haal'áhídi jíkai . Áko diné doo oo'į́į da léi' haa deizlóozgo , Bididííłchił , dahałníigo nídahookąąh .
PRED:	And they came to the city of Bethany . And the men brought him to him , and begged him , that he would not touch him .
GOLD:	When they arrived at Bethsaida , some people brought a blind man to Jesus , and they begged him to touch the man and heal him .

ID:	3336
INPUT:	Bee nihoyíní'áanii bóhwiideesh'áłígíí biniyé shich'į' nahwii'náá nít'é'ígíí shá yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	It is good for me , that I may judge thy law .
GOLD:	My suffering was good for me , for it taught me to pay attention to your decrees .

ID:	3337
INPUT:	Ákohgo Béíyasha éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ada'iishxaazhígi át'éego i'jííłhaazhgo Térzahgi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áádóó haye' Íílah hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And Baasha slept with his fathers , and was buried in Hebron , and his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Baasha died , he was buried in Tirzah . Then his son Elah became the next king .

ID:	3338
INPUT:	Áko <unk> éí bik'isóó áyidííniid , Nihitsilí daseelyį́įgo índa bidił nídadeel'į́įgoshą' ha'át'íí bits'ą́ą́dóó nídadidiilyééł ?
PRED:	And it came to pass , that he said unto his brethren , How shall we take away from him ?
GOLD:	Judah said to his brothers , “ What will we gain by killing our brother ? We 'd have to cover up the crime .

ID:	3339
INPUT:	áádóó aláahgo nihindanit'a'í áádóó nihinanit'a'í danilíinii áádóó nihá nááda'iiłniihii índa danihizhé'é yę́ę nibee haz'áanii doo yik'eh dahóół'įįd da , áádóó nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii índa bee hahínídzíi'ii éí bee hak'ijį' nílį́įgo háínídzí' ígíí doo dayíists'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	and they did not obey the law of our kings , our princes , our priests , and our fathers , and your commandments , and your commandments , and you did not listen to them .
GOLD:	Our kings , leaders , priests , and ancestors did not obey your Law or listen to the warnings in your commands and laws .

ID:	3340
INPUT:	Azhą́ yádił hił yaa ninísą́ą nidi , azhą́ k'os yaa ninísą́ągo bitsiits'iin yee yé<unk> náah nidi ,
PRED:	Even though you eat the blood of blood , when the cloud grew up and stood in a cloud ,
GOLD:	Though the pride of the godless reaches to the heavensand their heads touch the clouds ,

ID:	3341
INPUT:	nít'éé' asdzání éí ałjiłnii k'ehgo hadít'éii índa bijéí biyi'dóó nítséékosii hadááh níyá , jó'akon .
PRED:	And behold , she came out of her heart , and out of her heart , and out of her heart .
GOLD:	The woman approached him , seductively dressed and sly of heart .

ID:	3342
INPUT:	Áko ákódzaago diné dahoołtsą́ągo dabik'isóó tádiingo nídeiizh'eezhgo yił haa áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	When the people saw it , they brought him to his brothers and brought him to him .
GOLD:	When the bride 's parents saw him , they selected thirty young men from the town to be his companions .

ID:	3343
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi Ííjipdę́ę́' Asíriya kéyahgóó atiin áhodoolnííł , áádóó Asíriya dine'é Ííjipgóó ałnáádaakah doo , áádóó Ííjip dine'é Asíriyagóó ałnáádaakah doo , índa Ííjip dine'é éí Asíriya dine'é yił nidahałáa doolee ł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that the way of Egypt shall come to Egypt , and Assyria shall return to Assyria , and Assyria shall serve them .
GOLD:	In that day Egypt and Assyria will be connected by a highway . The Egyptians and Assyrians will move freely between their lands , and they will both worship God .

ID:	3344
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hánaaíké bééhodzísin nidi bí t'éí doo hwéédahósin da .
PRED:	Joseph knew his brothers , but they did not know him .
GOLD:	Although Joseph recognized his brothers , they did n't recognize him .

ID:	3345
INPUT:	Áádóó índa Diyin God hach'į' yáłti' yę́ę hats'ą́ą́' dah náhodiidle' .
PRED:	And he took away from his mouth , and said to him ,
GOLD:	Then God went up from the place where he had spoken to Jacob .

ID:	3346
INPUT:	Da' díísh doo kin ííł'íní biye' át'į́į da ? Da' bi<unk> doo Mary wolyée da ? Áádóó da' dabitsilíísh doo James índa Jóseph áádóó Sáíman índa Júdas daolyée da ?
PRED:	Is n't this not the son of Mary , the son of Mary , the father of James , and Simon , and Simon ?
GOLD:	Then they scoffed , “ He 's just the carpenter 's son , and we know Mary , his mother , and his brothers — James , Joseph , Simon , and Judas .

ID:	3347
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'ah yáłti'go , áłah ná'ádleehgo á dah názhnídaahígíí haghandę́ę́' diné ła' níyáago áháłní , Nitsi' daaztsą́ ; Na'nitiní éí t'áadoo kót'é náábidi'níní .
PRED:	While Jesus was speaking , a man of the synagogue came from his house and said to him , “ Teacher , your daughter is dead . ”
GOLD:	While he was still speaking to her , a messenger arrived from the home of Jairus , the leader of the synagogue . He told him , “ Your daughter is dead . There 's no use troubling the Teacher now . ”

ID:	3348
INPUT:	áko k'ad , shiTaa' nílíinii , nił honishłǫ́ǫgo nahasdzáán t'ah doo álnééhdą́ą́' ayóó át'éii bee nił honishłǫ́ǫ́ nít'é'ígíí bee ayóó ánísht'éego áshílééh .
PRED:	Now , my Father , I have been with you , before I was with you before the earth was with you .
GOLD:	Now , Father , bring me into the glory we shared before the world began .

ID:	3349
INPUT:	Áko Jeremáíyah éí t'ah doo yah abi'dilt'e'góó diné yitaaghá .
PRED:	So Jeremiah was still in the house where the people had not been put to death .
GOLD:	Jeremiah had not yet been imprisoned , so he could come and go among the people as he pleased .

ID:	3350
INPUT:	Áízak éí kéyah yikáá' k'i'díílá , áko t'áá éí yihahígíí biyi' neeznádiindi ánánéelą́ą'go há bilááh násdlį́į́' , áádóó Bóhólníihii hak'ijisdli' .
PRED:	Isaac saw the land , and he became more than a hundred times , and the Lord blessed him .
GOLD:	When Isaac planted his crops that year , he harvested a hundred times more grain than he planted , for the Lord blessed him .

ID:	3351
INPUT:	Áízak éí ch'ikę́ę́h yił dah dii'áazhgo bimá Sárah yę́ę biníbaal góne' yił yah íí'áázh , áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ dzizlį́į́' , áko Áízak ayóó'áhó'níigo bimá daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' ha'oosniid .
PRED:	And Isaac took her , and brought her into the tent of Sarah , and she became his wife , and his mother Isaac loved him .
GOLD:	And Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah 's tent , and she became his wife . He loved her deeply , and she was a special comfort to him after the death of his mother .

ID:	3352
INPUT:	Iiláíjah doo ła' bich'į' abi'dool'a' da , nidi Sáídan kéyahdi Zárefathgóó t'éiyá asdzání bąąh áhásdįįd léi' bich'į' abi'dool'a' .
PRED:	No one was sent to Elijah , but he sent to a woman who lived in the land of Sidon .
GOLD:	Yet Elijah was not sent to any of them . He was sent instead to a foreigner — a widow of Zarephath in the land of Sidon .

ID:	3353
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi háí dine'é nilíinii t'áá nidine'é Ízrel nilíinii nahalin ? Éí Diyin God bidine'é dooleeł biniyé ádá t'ą́ą́' nááyiisnii' , áko yízhí bee béého'dílzinii íidoolííł , áádóó ayóó át'éego índa t'óó báhádzidgo ída'iinilaaígíí nikéyahgi nidine'é binááł ádíílííł biniyé Ííjip dine'é áádóó ał'ąą dine'é índa bidiyin dabidi'níinii bits'ą́ąjį' t'ą́ą́' nááhíníłnii' .
PRED:	Who is like a nation in the earth ? He has offered a name to his people , to make his name a name , a great name , and a great name in the sight of the Egyptians , and in the sight of the gods of Egypt .
GOLD:	What other nation on earth is like your people Israel ? What other nation , O God , have you redeemed from slavery to be your own people ? You made a great name for yourself when you redeemed your people from Egypt . You performed awesome miracles and drove out the nations and gods that stood in their way .

ID:	3354
INPUT:	Díí hastą́ągo kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichééh biniyéhígíí Ízrel dine'é áádóó dé'éyóní nilíinii índa t'óó átsééd nihitahgi kéédahat'ínígíí bá át'ée doo , áko t'áá háiida doo t'áá ákójínééhgóó diné jiisxíinii áajį' yisdázhdínóochééł .
PRED:	This shall be for the six cities of refuge , and for the stranger , and for the stranger , and for the stranger that dwell among you , that he may escape .
GOLD:	These cities are for the protection of Israelites , foreigners living among you , and traveling merchants . Anyone who accidentally kills someone may flee there for safety .

ID:	3355
INPUT:	Áádóó Léímek ba'ákéí naaki : ła' Éídah wolyé , náánáła'ígíí Zílah wolyé .
PRED:	And Bildad had two wives : and the other was born : the name of the other .
GOLD:	Lamech married two women . The first was named Adah , and the second was Zillah .

ID:	3356
INPUT:	Doo dashíínółts'ą́ą́'góó índa nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' shízhi' doo baa dahohniih dago ts'ídá hóyé'ígi át'éego bee nihá hadeesdzihii nihik'ijį' kódeeshłííł . Áádóó bee nihik'ihojidlíii hóyée'go bá hadeesdzih ; t'áá aaníí , t'áá íídą́ą́' hóyée'go bá haasdzíí' , háálá t'áadoo bee ádiih tsídasookéez da , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	If you do not listen to me , I will bring a curse on you , and I will bless you . I will bless you , because I have not spoken in my heart , ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	Listen to me and make up your minds to honor my name , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ or I will bring a terrible curse against you . I will curse even the blessings you receive . Indeed , I have already cursed them , because you have not taken my warning to heart .

ID:	3357
INPUT:	Ízrel nílíinii , ał'ąą dine'é bił nidahoozhǫǫhígi át'éego t'áadoo nił nihoozhǫǫhí , háálá niDiyin God bits'éíníyáago íłjił nít'éé' ; da'ool<unk> góó t'áá át'é ałjiłnii nááyííłbįįhii nił ayóó áhoot'éé nít'éé' .
PRED:	Do n't be glad , O Israel , as the nations rejoice , because you have gone up from the way of your God , and you have made a prostitute .
GOLD:	O people of Israel , do not rejoice as other nations do.For you have been unfaithful to your God , hiring yourselves out like prostitutes , worshiping other gods on every threshing floor .

ID:	3358
INPUT:	Éí nideizyeelígíí yee ahił dahalne'go shidine'é éí shízhi' yaa deidiyoonah danízingo yiniyé ádaat'į́ . T'áá ákót'éego dabizhé'é yę́ę ałdó' Béíyal yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' yę́ę biniinaa shízhi' yaa dayooznah .
PRED:	They told them the dream , “ My people have forgotten my name . They have forgotten Baal because they have forgotten my name . ”
GOLD:	By telling these false dreams , they are trying to get my people to forget me , just as their ancestors did by worshiping the idols of Baal .

ID:	3359
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán áádįįłii t'éiyá t'áadoo bíká nidaahkaí , nidi iiná doo ninít'i'ii bá ch'iyáán doo ádįįhii hádaaht'į́ , éí Diné Silį́į'ii nihaididoo'ááł , háálá Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii hwee lą́ asłį́'ígíí bee hwéého'dílzingo áhoolaa .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of food , but do n't seek life , for the Son of Man has given you to the Son of Man , because he has given them the power of God .
GOLD:	But do n't be so concerned about perishable things like food . Spend your energy seeking the eternal life that the Son of Man can give you . For God the Father has given me the seal of his approval . ”

ID:	3360
INPUT:	áádóó Gíliyad biye' Ásriyel ba'áłchíní Ásriyel dine'é danilį́ . Gíliyad biye' Shííkem ba'áłchíní Shííkem dine'é danilį́ ,
PRED:	and the sons of Gilead , and the sons of Shechem ; of the sons of Shechem , the sons of Shechem ,
GOLD:	The Asrielites , named after their ancestor Asriel.The Shechemites , named after their ancestor Shechem .

ID:	3361
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph ánááhodoo'niid , Ánihidishnínígíí éí t'áá aaníí ; naalchi'íga' danohłį́ .
PRED:	Joseph said to them , “ I tell you , you are spies . ”
GOLD:	But Joseph insisted , “ As I said , you are spies !

ID:	3362
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hádą́ą'da doo Diyin God yiyiiłtsą́ą da ; biYe' t'ááłá'í bá yizhchínígíí éí aTaa' nilíinii ádíyóltą'ii , éí t'éiyá ájít'éegi haa ch'íhoní'ą́ .
PRED:	If anyone sees God , I have seen him , and I have given him the Son of one son whom the Father has read , as he has read .
GOLD:	No one has ever seen God . But the unique One , who is himself God , is near to the Father 's heart . He has revealed God to us .

ID:	3363
INPUT:	Áhoołts'óózígo yah ahóót'i'í góne' yah ahohkááh , háálá atí'oolníiłjį' hóteelgo yah ahóót'i' áádóó hóteelgo bich'į' honít'i' , áko diné lą'í ákóne' yah ahikááh .
PRED:	Go into the outer court , because there is no one to enter into the valley . There was a desert and a great crowd . Many people went into it .
GOLD:	“ You can enter God 's Kingdom only through the narrow gate . The highway to hell is broad , and its gate is wide for the many who choose that way .

ID:	3364
INPUT:	Ásaa' éí łeeshch'iih bii' yadahiikaah dooígíí , áádóó łeeshch'iih bee hadahakaahí , áádóó ásaa' dantsaaígíí , áádóó bíla'táa'ii danineezígíí índa tsííd bee naakáhí ádadoohłííł ; bił chodao'íinii t'áá ałtso béésh łitsoii bee ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the ashes , and the bowls , and the bowls , and the bowls , and the bowls , and the vessels thereof , and the vessels thereof , and all the vessels of brass .
GOLD:	Make ash buckets , shovels , basins , meat forks , and firepans , all of bronze .

ID:	3365
INPUT:	Áko David éí Ábigeil áyidííniid , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God baa ha'niih le' ; jó , éí díí jį́ shaa niníł'a'go shidááh yíníyá .
PRED:	David said to Nabal , “ Blessed be the Lord , the God of Israel , whom you sent me today .
GOLD:	David replied to Abigail , “ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who has sent you to meet me today !

ID:	3366
INPUT:	Áádóó nááda'iiłniihii Éran biye'ké éí nááhidoonihígíí bitsiits'iin índa bik'ah t'áá bił ałkéé' sinilgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi chizh diltłi'ígíí yikáá' nideidoonił .
PRED:	And the priest shall take the head of Aaron 's sons , and the head of his head , and the oil of the altar , and the wood upon the wood .
GOLD:	They will arrange the pieces of the offering , including the head and fat , on the wood burning on the altar .

ID:	3367
INPUT:	Záíyandi bąąhági ádaaníiłii nídaaldzid ; doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii éí yéé' yik'ee tsídadoolyiz . Háishą' nihitahgi kǫ' ó'oołdįįłii yił kééhat'į́į doo ? Háishą' nihitahgi hool'áágóó hodook'ą́ąłii yił kééhat'į́į doo ?
PRED:	The wicked will be afraid , and the wicked will be afraid of you . Who will dwell among you ? Who will dwell among you ? Who will dwell among you forever ?
GOLD:	The sinners in Jerusalem shake with fear.Terror seizes the godless. “ Who can live with this devouring fire ? ” they cry. “ Who can survive this all-consuming fire ? ”

ID:	3368
INPUT:	Éí bąą yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii díí bił ahąąh naa'nilgo baa nitsáhákees : éí aláahgo naat'áanii léi' bá nidaal'a'í yąąh hadeis'áago éí bá niná'doolyééł biniyé bá yídéeshtah niizį́į́' .
PRED:	Therefore the Kingdom of heaven is at war : and I sought that the king 's servants had sent him to be given to him .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , the Kingdom of Heaven can be compared to a king who decided to bring his accounts up to date with servants who had borrowed money from him .

ID:	3369
INPUT:	Áko diné nidaabaahii éí nááda'iiłniihii adee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádaanínígíí yilą́ąjį' yikah , índa akéé'dóó hada'ídíl'į́'ígíí éí tsits'aa' dílzinii yikéé'dóó yikahgo nááda<unk> niihii náás yikahgo éí adee' bee í'dílzoołí t'ááłáhígi át'éego yee ádaaní .
PRED:	And the men of the priests went before the voice of the priests , and the other priests went out before the ark , and they blew the sound of the ark , saying ,
GOLD:	Some of the armed men marched in front of the priests with the horns and some behind the Ark , with the priests continually blowing the horns .

ID:	3370
INPUT:	Náánáła'ígíí ánéidoo'niid , Nishą' éí díkwíí nąąh háá'á ? Áko ání , Tł'oh naadą́ą́' neeznádiin azis hadeezbingo bee shąąh háá'á . Nít'éé' ánéidoo'niid , Nąąh háá'áhígíí nídiiłtsóosgo t'áá tseebídiinígo ánílééh .
PRED:	The other said , “ How long are you few ? ” And he said , “ How long will you make me a hundred pieces of wheat ? ” And he said , “ Are you going ? ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ And how much do you owe my employer ? ' he asked the next man . ‘ I owe him 1,000 bushels of wheat , ' was the reply . ‘ Here , ' the manager said , ‘ take the bill and change it to 800 bushels . '

ID:	3371
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' łahgo át'éego tsíńdadeezkéezgo diné naalte' índa asdzání naalte' danilį́įgo béédazhdeezhchidii naalte' ánáádajiidlaa , áádóó hanaalte' danilį́įgo hak'eh dahół'į́įgo ánáádajiidlaa .
PRED:	After that , they turned back and made them slaves , slaves , slaves , slaves , and slaves .
GOLD:	but later they changed their minds . They took back the men and women they had freed , forcing them to be slaves again .

ID:	3372
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é yee ádaat'éii t'áadoo bídahooł'aahí . Wót'áahdi łahgo áńdahoo'níłígíí t'áadoo bik'ee nitsináhkahí ; jó , éí ał'ąą dine'é yik'ee nitsinákah , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the nations , ” says the Lord . “ Do n't be afraid of the nations .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do not act like the other nations , who try to read their future in the stars.Do not be afraid of their predictions , even though other nations are terrified by them .

ID:	3373
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ábijiní , Díí shił bééhózin : Bóhólníihii éí kéyah nihaididoo'ááł áádóó nihik'eda'íyée'go bik'ee nisiniikai , áádóó kéyah bikáa'gi diné kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá át'é nihik'ee bitah doo dahwiina' da .
PRED:	He said to the people , “ I know that the Lord will give you the land , and the people of the land will be afraid , and all the people of the land will be afraid .
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	3374
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí kin haal'áii yich'į' chánahgo biinéé' diits'a' áádóó diné éí nízhi' yidósingo hóyą́ ; tsihał índa éí niinítáanii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) shall hear the voice of the city , and fear his name , and fear his name , and keep his commandments .
GOLD:	Fear the Lord if you are wise ! His voice calls to everyone in Jerusalem : “ The armies of destruction are coming ; the Lord is sending them .

ID:	3375
INPUT:	Áko Rebékah ałdó' ajííghal , nít'éé' Áízak dziiłtsą́ągo ghą́ą́'ask'idii bik'i nijííyá .
PRED:	Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac , and saw his camels .
GOLD:	When Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac , she quickly dismounted from her camel .

ID:	3376
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bii' neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii bidááhjí ata'naníbaalídóó tł'óó' bich'į'go haz'ánígi Bóhólníihii binááł Éran áádóó biye'ké e'e'ááhdóó abíníjį' bee adinídíinii ninádei'nił doo . Díí hool'áágóó yee nihoní'áanii Ízrel dine'é náás da'ahideeshchį́į́góó yaa dahóyą́ągo yaa ádahalyą́ą doo .
PRED:	And at the entrance of the tent of meeting shall be at the entrance of the tabernacle of the Lord , and to his sons , and to the morning , until the morning , and to the morning , and to the morning , and to the children of Israel shall keep their generations .
GOLD:	The lampstand will stand in the Tabernacle , in front of the inner curtain that shields the Ark of the Covenant . Aaron and his sons must keep the lamps burning in the Lord 's presence all night . This is a permanent law for the people of Israel , and it must be observed from generation to generation .

ID:	3377
INPUT:	Hashchíinii éí Jew dine'é yináldzidgo ákódííniid , háálá diné ła'da , T'áá aaníí Christ át'į́ , jiníigo hadzoodzí'ígíí éí Jew dine'é áłah nádleehii bitahdóó ats'áhodi'doolt'eełgo t'áá íídą́ą́' Jew dine'é yee łá'í daazlį́į'go hondahaz'ą́ .
PRED:	He was afraid of the Jews , saying , “ If anyone says that he is the Messiah , the Jews would be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be separated from the synagogue . ”
GOLD:	His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders , who had announced that anyone saying Jesus was the Messiah would be expelled from the synagogue .

ID:	3378
INPUT:	Áko Paul éí diné ándaha'áii yéego yiníł'į́įgo ádííniid , [ Shahastóí áádóó] shik'isóó , Diyin God binááł yá'át'éhígi ááshníłígíí díí jį́įdi doo ła' shi'diił'áa da .
PRED:	Paul looked at the leaders and said , “ My brothers and sisters , I am not able to do what is good in the sight of God today .
GOLD:	Gazing intently at the high council , Paul began : “ Brothers , I have always lived before God with a clear conscience ! ”

ID:	3379
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́į́dą́ą́' Mózes ádee hadoodzíi'go ání , T'áá aaníí kéyah bikáá' nisíníyáhígíí ni áádóó na'áłchíní bi ł éí kéyah íí' dooleełii dani<unk> go ahool'áa doo , háálá t'áá sínízį́į́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God bikéé' yínááł nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that Moses swore unto Moses , saying , Surely thou hast taken the land , and thy children , and thy children , for thou hast followed the Lord my God .
GOLD:	So that day Moses solemnly promised me , ‘ The land of Canaan on which you were just walking will be your grant of land and that of your descendants forever , because you wholeheartedly followed the Lord my God . '

ID:	3380
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God nihítséedi kojį' shiníł'a' ; éí niha'áłchíní nahasdzáán bikáá'góó náás da'ahílchíih doo , índa shí shinahjį' ayóó át'éii bee dadoohdzih biniyé ádzaa .
PRED:	But God sent me before me , and your children have done so , that you may bear my glory in the earth .
GOLD:	God has sent me ahead of you to keep you and your families alive and to preserve many survivors .

ID:	3381
INPUT:	Hasbídí nahalingo diné ayóó'ííní'níinii bii' sizíinii t'ááká naaldlooshii dahashkéii baa dóó'ááł lágo . Nidine'é badahojoobá'íígíí hool'áágóó doo beidiyíínah da .
PRED:	Do n't give your soul to the beasts of a man , and you will not forget the poor for ever .
GOLD:	Do n't let these wild beasts destroy your turtledoves.Do n't forget your suffering people forever .

ID:	3382
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Jerúsalemdi , kin bii' sohodizin éí Diyin God bá ats'át'ánígíí bee bééhániihgo biniit'aa hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehígíí baa nááhoolzhiizh , áko íídą́ą́' hai ,
PRED:	At that time , in Jerusalem , because of the glory of God 's glory was at the appointed time , and it was at that time .
GOLD:	It was now winter , and Jesus was in Jerusalem at the time of Hanukkah , the Festival of Dedication .

ID:	3383
INPUT:	Héímath kin haal'áádóó índa Árpad kin haal'áádóó dadiyinii éí háájí ? Séfarvéíyim kin haal'áádóó , Híína kin haal'áádóó índa Áívah kin haal'áádóó dadiyiniishą' háájí ? Da' éísh Samériya kéyah shighadeideest'ą́ ?
PRED:	Where is the land of Hamath , and the people of Hamath ? Where is the land of Samaria ?
GOLD:	What happened to the gods of Hamath and Arpad ? And what about the gods of Sepharvaim , Hena , and Ivvah ? Did any god rescue Samaria from my power ?

ID:	3384
INPUT:	Ákót'ée nidi Diyin God yá dahalne'ii éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' ninádahodoo'ish biniyé ayiis'a' , áko éí hak'ijį' danilį́įgo nidahasne' , nidi doo dayíists'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	But he sent the prophets to bring them to the Lord , and they spoke against him , but they did not listen to him .
GOLD:	Yet the Lord sent prophets to bring them back to him . The prophets warned them , but still the people would not listen .

ID:	3385
INPUT:	Ákondi Manáseh dine'é éí kin hadaas'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí haa ch'ídahidoojahígíí doo bídazhneel'ą́ą da , nidi éí kéyah biyi' Kéínan dine'é t'áá kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	But the children of Manasseh could not go out of the cities of Manasseh , but the Canaanites dwelt in the land .
GOLD:	But the descendants of Manasseh were unable to occupy these towns because the Canaanites were determined to stay in that region .

ID:	3386
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Jó , yisdánídeeshtééł biniyé nił honishłǫ́ . Ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó adanihinííłkaadii éí ałtso ádeeshdįįł , nidi doo ałtso ánihideeshdįįł da : doo haada yit'éii bee hasht'éénihideeshdlííł , áádóó t'áá ánóht'é atínánihiish'įįh doo .
PRED:	“ Behold , I am with you , ” says the Lord , “ I will save you . I will destroy you from among the nations , but I will not destroy you , but I will destroy you , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	For I am with you and will save you , ” says the Lord. “ I will completely destroy the nations where I have scattered you , but I will not completely destroy you.I will discipline you , but with justice ; I can not let you go unpunished . ”

ID:	3387
INPUT:	kéyah yii' kéédahat'ínígíí ábidiní , Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí , Bóhólníihii Diyin God haa yáłti'go kóní , Ákwe'é diné t'áá ałtso t'áá na'níle'dii kéédahat'į́įgo biniinaa éí kéyah bikáá'góó dahólóonii ts'ídá ałtso baa nahodi'dooldahgo doo yidoolaałí da ; éí bąą hoł daayée'go habááh dazhdooyį́į́ł índa t'óó hoł adahayóigo hato' dazhdoodlį́į́ł .
PRED:	“ Thus says the Lord God to the inhabitants of Israel , ‘ Because of all the people who live in Jerusalem , ' says the Lord God , ‘ Because of all the people who live in this land will eat and drink bread .
GOLD:	Tell the people , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says concerning those living in Israel and Jerusalem : They will eat their food with trembling and sip their water in despair , for their land will be stripped bare because of their violence .

ID:	3388
INPUT:	Áko Gálilii binaashiijį' Gádara dine'é bikéyahdi hoł aní'éél .
PRED:	Then Jesus went to the region of Galilee , to the region of Galilee .
GOLD:	So they arrived in the region of the Gerasenes , across the lake from Galilee .

ID:	3389
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo dį́į́' náhááh góne' Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar éí Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígíí bíighahgi Kárkiimish hoolyéegi Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro-nííko bisiláo yik'eh deesdlį́į́' ; éí bídéét'i'go Diyin God Ííjip dine'é kót'éego yaa haadzíí' .
PRED:	In the fourth year of Josiah the son of Josiah king of Judah , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came up to meet him in the fourth year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Egypt . This is the word of the God of Egypt .
GOLD:	This message concerning Egypt was given in the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah , the king of Judah , on the occasion of the battle of Carchemish when Pharaoh Neco , king of Egypt , and his army were defeated beside the Euphrates River by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .

ID:	3390
INPUT:	Áko éí ashkii t'ah hach'į' yigáałgo , níłch'i bi'iiníziinii bik'iilwodgo naa'anáábiyííłhango ditsxizgo anáábiidlaa . Nidi Jesus éí níłch'i nichxǫ́'ígíí yideezteh , áádóó ashkii hadaałt'é ánáyiidlaago bizhé'é yaa néiníłtį́ .
PRED:	And when he came near to the boy , the devil went out and touched him with the devil . But Jesus began to rebuke the unclean spirits , and gave him a son .
GOLD:	As the boy came forward , the demon knocked him to the ground and threw him into a violent convulsion . But Jesus rebuked the evil spirit and healed the boy . Then he gave him back to his father .

ID:	3391
INPUT:	Nihokáá'góó diné ayóó át'é da'at'íinii t'áá ałtso da'dooyį́į́ł áádóó nidahałáa doo ; t'áá ałtso łeeshtahjį' náádleełii hadáahjį' yaa ádadoonííł ; bii' naazíinii dadínóonéełii hach'į' yaa ádadoonííł .
PRED:	All the mighty men of the earth shall eat , and they shall bow down before him ; and all the soul shall bow down before him , and they shall bow down before him .
GOLD:	Let the rich of the earth feast and worship.Bow before him , all who are mortal , all whose lives will end as dust .

ID:	3392
INPUT:	Díí jį́ yee' shí tseebídiin shinááhai . Da' ákoósh yá'át'éehii índa doo yá'át'éehii baa ákonisin ? Da' ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo yishánígíí , doodaii' yishdlánígíísh t'áá yish<unk> ? Da' diné dahataałígíí índa asdzání dahataałígíí biinéé'ésh t'áá diists'a' ? Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' naanishtsoh nishłį́į doo ?
PRED:	This day I am a hundred years old ? Do you know good and evil ? Did I hear the voice of your servant , or the women ? Why are I the king 's servant ? Why am I the king ?
GOLD:	I am eighty years old today , and I can no longer enjoy anything . Food and wine are no longer tasty , and I can not hear the singers as they sing . I would only be a burden to my lord the king .

ID:	3393
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Sáíman , daal'aadii ak'i dah dahidilníhígíí binahjį' Níłch'i Diyinii aa hidit'aahgo yiyiiłtsą́ągo , béeso yee yooskango
PRED:	Simon , when he saw the Holy Spirit , he cried out with the Holy Spirit ,
GOLD:	When Simon saw that the Spirit was given when the apostles laid their hands on people , he offered them money to buy this power .

ID:	3394
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Níłch'i Diyinii nihainíł'a' , áko nihits'íís éí Níłch'i Diyinii yii' hináago bikin bii' sohodizin át'éegoósh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Doo t'áá ádíí' danohłį́į da ,
PRED:	God has sent us into the Holy Spirit , and you do n't know that the Spirit lives in the temple of the living Spirit ,
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit , who lives in you and was given to you by God ? You do not belong to yourself ,

ID:	3395
INPUT:	Háálá nihí nihaa niikai yę́ędą́ą́' t'áá íiyisí nihich'į' k'é danohdzin nít'ée'ii éí diné t'áá ałtso yee nihaa nidahalne' , áádóó eda'alyaii bits'ą́ąjį' Diyin God bich'į' ninánohkaigo Diyin God hináanii índa t'áá aaníí nilíinii bá nidaał'a'go yee nihaa nidahalne' .
PRED:	For when you were come to you , they have preached to you all the people , and have come back to God , and have sent to you the living God and truth .
GOLD:	for they keep talking about the wonderful welcome you gave us and how you turned away from idols to serve the living and true God .

ID:	3396
INPUT:	Áłah nídaahdleehgo diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo hatsii' ná'ázti'go sozdilzingo , doodaii' Diyin God bá hojilne'go éí Christ hatsijį' sizíinii doo hoł nilį́į da ájílééh .
PRED:	Each man should pray for his head , and he must not be the head of God , or for Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	A man dishonors his head if he covers his head while praying or prophesying .

ID:	3397
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é dabito' diłgo áyiilaa , áko dabiłóó' dayííghą́ą́' .
PRED:	The Egyptians made the waters of Egypt , and they killed the fish .
GOLD:	He turned their water into blood , poisoning all the fish .

ID:	3398
INPUT:	Áko bee i'níłníihgo éí nízaadgóó nídiiłts'į́įhgo ha'a'aahjígo dah oonéłígíí dah nídii'néeh doo .
PRED:	When you hear the sound of the trumpet , you will set up the camp .
GOLD:	“ When you sound the signal to move on , the tribes camped on the east side of the Tabernacle must break camp and move forward .

ID:	3399
INPUT:	Naałniih na'ałtseedii ła' bidoolna'go sitį́ ; dziztį́į́dóó doo náázhdidoodáał da , daaní .
PRED:	He will be killed by pestilence , and he will not return to him again .
GOLD:	“ He has some fatal disease , ” they say. “ He will never get out of that bed ! ”

ID:	3400
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii shizéé' yideelchidgo áshidííniid , Shoo , shizaad ni<unk> lá .
PRED:	Then the hand of the Lord touched me , and said to me , “ Behold , my words is in your mouth . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord reached out and touched my mouth and said , “ Look , I have put my words in your mouth !

ID:	3401
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii éí asdzání haadzí'ígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go ak'ina'ooldláadgo tsé ahénátł'in bikáa'di joogáałgo diné dadéez'į́į́' nít'éé' , jó , tł'oh yishbizh ayaadi bii' dziztį́ .
PRED:	When the king heard the words of the woman , they tore their clothes on the wall , and looked upon the wall , and sat on sackcloth .
GOLD:	When the king heard this , he tore his clothes in despair . And as the king walked along the wall , the people could see that he was wearing burlap under his robe next to his skin .

ID:	3402
INPUT:	éí bá naal'a'í bizaad t'áá aaníigo áyósinígíí áádóó bá hane' nidei'áii yee yádááłti'ii áyoolíiłii nishłį́ ; t'áá éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áii ííłní , Diné nii' kéédahat'į́į doo , áádóó Júdah kéyah biyi' kin hadaas'áii ííłní , Áńdanihidi'doolnííł índa kints'iilgo nahaz'ánígóó ałdó' áńdadeeshdliił ;
PRED:	And I am the word of his servant , and his words , and his words , and said unto Jerusalem , The people shall dwell in Jerusalem , and the cities of Judah shall be built , and I will bless thee , and I will bless thee .
GOLD:	But I carry out the predictions of my prophets ! By them I say to Jerusalem , ‘ People will live here again , 'and to the towns of Judah , ‘ You will be rebuilt ; I will restore all your ruins ! '

ID:	3403
INPUT:	Diyin God yá dahalne'ii , Ná<unk> deiłníi dooleeł , daaní yę́ę bohodoolnííł biniyé Názareth kin haal'áagi jinínáago ákwii kééhojit'į́ .
PRED:	They said to the prophets , “ Come to Hebron , and dwelt in it . ”
GOLD:	So the family went and lived in a town called Nazareth . This fulfilled what the prophets had said : “ He will be called a Nazarene . ”

ID:	3404
INPUT:	Shi'ana'í danilíinii t'áadoo biniinaanígóó tsídii nanché nahalingo nidashineeshchą́ą́' .
PRED:	My enemies have no reason ; they have fled like a bird .
GOLD:	My enemies , whom I have never harmed , hunted me down like a bird .

ID:	3405
INPUT:	áádóó ni' hideesnáá'dóó bik'ijį' éí kǫ' hadíínáád , nidi Bóhólníihii éí kǫ' doo yee honíle' da , áádóó kǫ' hadíínáádóó bik'ijį' éí t'įįhdígo iinéé' diists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And after the earth came up , the fire came up , and the Lord did not touch the fire , and there came a voice on them .
GOLD:	And after the earthquake there was a fire , but the Lord was not in the fire . And after the fire there was the sound of a gentle whisper .

ID:	3406
INPUT:	Naadiin naakidóó náá'áłníí' ké silá ánízáádgóó tó néés'ąądgo dził ałtso yik'i diilkǫ' .
PRED:	The height of twenty cubits was far away from the mountain , and the fire was filled with fire .
GOLD:	rising more than twenty-two feet above the highest peaks .

ID:	3407
INPUT:	Áádóó éí yoołkáałdi Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii díí yee nich'į' ádííniid , Dadoohcha áádóó yínííł danohłį́į doo áádóó nihitsii' dadoohshih índa tł'oh azis danihi'ée' doo .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that the Lord of hosts spake unto you , saying , Ye shall weep , and weep , and mourn , and make your heads , and put on their heads , and put on their heads .
GOLD:	At that time the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , called you to weep and mourn.He told you to shave your heads in sorrow for your sinsand to wear clothes of burlap to show your remorse .

ID:	3408
INPUT:	Fríjiyagi áádóó Pamfíliyagi , Ííjipgi áádóó Líbiyagi Sairíinii binaagóó , índa Romedę́ę́' nidaanéego t'óó átsééd dabighanígíí , Jew dine'é índa Jew dine'é binahagha' yihidiikaígíí ,
PRED:	They were in Asia , and in Asia , and in Asia , and the Jews who were with the Jews , and Jews ,
GOLD:	Phrygia , Pamphylia , Egypt , and the areas of Libya around Cyrene , visitors from Rome

ID:	3409
INPUT:	Mą'iitsoh éí dibé yázhí yił kééhat'į́į doo , áádóó náshdóítsoh łikizhii éí tł'ízí yázhí yił t'ááłáhígi shitéezh doo , índa béégashii yáázh áádóó náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí biyázhí áádóó alį́į́' neesk'ahii yił t'ááłáhígi shijée' doo , áádóó áłchíní yázhí tábidi'éesh doo .
PRED:	And the sheep shall dwell with them , and two young goats shall be together with them , and two young goats , and a young lion , and a young lion , and a young lion , and a little child .
GOLD:	In that day the wolf and the lamb will live together ; the leopard will lie down with the baby goat.The calf and the yearling will be safe with the lion , and a little child will lead them all .

ID:	3410
INPUT:	wáin doo bee tsi'nijigháa da doo , doo ats'ííd ádąąh jit'į́į doo , na'adlo'go bee béeso ál'íinii doo bíchą́yízhdéelni' da doo , nidi ha'jólníi doo , doo saad íjí'áah da doo , índa doo adáninilníi da doo .
PRED:	They will not say , ‘ It is no wine , ' and they will not bear money , but they will not be able to say , ‘ It will not be bad . '
GOLD:	He must not be a heavy drinker or be violent . He must be gentle , not quarrelsome , and not love money .

ID:	3411
INPUT:	Éíbraham éí Abímelek yił aha'deet'ą́
PRED:	Abraham 's covenant with Abimelech
GOLD:	Abraham 's Covenant with Abimelech

ID:	3412
INPUT:	Féro bits'ą́ą́' ch'ééjíkaigo Mózes áádóó Éran haba' sizį́įgo baa jíkai .
PRED:	And they went out from Pharaoh , and stood before Moses and Aaron .
GOLD:	As they left Pharaoh 's court , they confronted Moses and Aaron , who were waiting outside for them .

ID:	3413
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Diltłish nihiniyé deeshtį́įłgo diné áádóó naaldlooshii nihits'ą́ą́dóó nideestsił , jó'akon .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold , I am going to kill you by the sword , and by the hand of men and beast .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring an army against you , O Egypt , and destroy both people and animals .

ID:	3414
INPUT:	Dah yisk'id bighą́ą'di ályaaígíí bich'į' ałnáádaahkahígíishą' , ha'át'íísh óolyé ? hodííniid . Áko dííshjį́įjį' bízhi' éí Bámah hoolyé .
PRED:	What do you sacrifice to the high places ? ” She said , “ What do you say ? ” That is why it is why today .
GOLD:	I said to them , ‘ What is this high place where you are going ? ' ( This kind of pagan shrine has been called Bamah — ‘ high place ' — ever since . )

ID:	3415
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iiláíjah diné áłah nilínígíí ííłní , Shí , t'áá shí t'éiyá , Bóhólníihii yá halne'ii nishłį́įgo yisdziih , nidi Béíyal yá dahalne'ii éí dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin yilt'é .
PRED:	Elijah said to the people , “ I am the Lord only the prophet , but the prophets are four hundred and fifty . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to them , “ I am the only prophet of the Lord who is left , but Baal has 450 prophets .

ID:	3416
INPUT:	Éí ak'ah biłgo sit'éhígíí dííkááł ; éí niheesti'go bááh nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo łikání halchingo nááhíłniih doo .
PRED:	And the fat that is with the oil , shall be with thee : and the bread of the bread shall be a sweet offering made by fire unto Jehovah .
GOLD:	It must be carefully mixed with olive oil and cooked on a griddle . Then slice this grain offering and present it as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	3417
INPUT:	Éí bąą ádíshní , Jó , Gílgal haz'ánígi Filístiya dine'é t'óó shik'i dah yijeehgi át'é ; Bóhólníihii doo náoshkąąhgóó , ákohgo t'áá shí t'áá bizááká didlidgo nááhániihii nááháłnii' .
PRED:	Therefore I said , Behold , the Philistines are against me at Gilgal ; and I called to the Lord , and he called for me , and I burnt offering .
GOLD:	So I said , ‘ The Philistines are ready to march against us at Gilgal , and I have n't even asked for the Lord 's help ! ' So I felt compelled to offer the burnt offering myself before you came . ”

ID:	3418
INPUT:	Nidi Christ t'ááłáhídi náá'ádiisnii'ígíí éí ádił ni'iidzííh biniyé hool'áágóó náá'ádiisnii' , áádóó índa Diyin God binish'náájígo dah neezdá .
PRED:	But Christ offered a sacrifice for sins forever , and on the right hand of God .
GOLD:	But our High Priest offered himself to God as a single sacrifice for sins , good for all time . Then he sat down in the place of honor at God 's right hand .

ID:	3419
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Néthinim daolyéii Ófel hoolyéedi kéédahat'ínígíí éí ha'a'aahjí tó bidáń'dítį́hí bíighahgóó haz'áníjį' áádóó ats'áhoní'ą́ądi ya'iitł'inígíí bíighahjį' tsé nídeiztł'in .
PRED:	And he built the temple of the temple gate of the east side of the gate , from the east side of the gate , and from the wall to the wall .
GOLD:	with the Temple servants living on the hill of Ophel , who repaired the wall as far as a point across from the Water Gate to the east and the projecting tower .

ID:	3420
INPUT:	Éí hakéyahgi nanise' t'áá ałtso índa nidazhniłt'ą'ígíí ałtso yaa nahodeeskai .
PRED:	And all the grass of the land was destroyed , and all the fruit of the earth , and all the fruit thereof .
GOLD:	They ate up everything green in the land , destroying all the crops in their fields .

ID:	3421
INPUT:	Kin haal'áagi kéédahoht'į́įgo nihik'idahojidlíi doo áádóó dadzígaigi kéédahoht'į́įgo nihik'idahojidlíi doo .
PRED:	Blessed be you that dwell in the city , and bless you in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Your towns and your fieldswill be blessed .

ID:	3422
INPUT:	Hadaałt'éii t'áá ałtso bá nidahwiizt'i'go yiiłtsą́ , nidi nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii éí doo bá nihonít'i' da .
PRED:	I have seen all their ways , but the commandment is not far from them .
GOLD:	Even perfection has its limits , but your commands have no limit .

ID:	3423
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham hajííghalgo nidzizghal , nít'éé' hane'jígo deenásts'aa' bidee' yee tsin yiih dinoolne' lá , áádóó Éíbraham éí deenásts'aa' néidiiłtį́įgo haye' bitsásk'ehgi didlidgo náádziisnii' .
PRED:	And Abraham looked up , and looked up , and lifted up his eyes , and lifted up the ram , and Abraham took the ram , and offered a burnt offering in his place .
GOLD:	Then Abraham looked up and saw a ram caught by its horns in a thicket . So he took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt offering in place of his son .

ID:	3424
INPUT:	Wóne'di ahééhool'áhígíí ha'a'aahjígo t'áá bíni' haz'ánígíí áádóó kin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí binaashiijí tsé yítł'inígíí bii' dahooghan .
PRED:	On the east side , on the east side , on the east side of the temple , and on the walls of the temple .
GOLD:	On the south side of the Temple there were two blocks of rooms just south of the inner courtyard between the Temple and the outer courtyard . These rooms were arranged just like the rooms on the north .

ID:	3425
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God ání , Éí bijį́ kin bii' sohodizin si'ánídóó sin éí cha nídoodleeł . Ats'íís daneeznáanii t'óó ahayóí t'áá ałtsogóó nihidadíl'áago t'áadoo íits'a'í éí ats'íís yóó'adayiiłtł'iid doo .
PRED:	And the Lord God said , “ On that day you will weep and mourn , and you will mourn . Many dead bodies will cast away all the body .
GOLD:	In that day the singing in the temple will turn to wailing . Dead bodies will be scattered everywhere . They will be carried out of the city in silence . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	3426
INPUT:	Díí biniinaa nihaa deeshááł nisin yę́ę lą'ídi shidi'neestł'ah .
PRED:	For this reason I will come to you , but I will be taught .
GOLD:	In fact , my visit to you has been delayed so long because I have been preaching in these places .

ID:	3427
INPUT:	Jó , éí bijį́ náá'iiłniihii á bee k'ééhoodǫǫłii nihá nááyiiłniihgo doo nihąąh chinígóó ánihizhdoolííł , áko ádił nida'iyoosí'ígíí t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii binááł ałtso nihąąh táázdoogis .
PRED:	For the priest shall make atonement for you on that day , and he shall wash the blood in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	On that day offerings of purification will be made for you , and you will be purified in the Lord 's presence from all your sins .

ID:	3428
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádíyi'ídi nitsíkeesígi át'éego t'áá ákót'éego hiná . <unk> áádóó ídlą́ , niłní , nidi bijéí biyi'dóó doo hánígo naa nitsíkees da .
PRED:	For in the heart of his thoughts , and in the same way , and in the heart thou shalt not understand .
GOLD:	They are always thinking about how much it costs. “ Eat and drink , ” they say , but they do n't mean it .

ID:	3429
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii Bóhólníihii bich'į' dah nídidoohkah , baa nánihi'dookąąh
PRED:	Israel , return to the Lord , and pray to him ,
GOLD:	Healing for the Repentant

ID:	3430
INPUT:	áádóó gáagii ał'ąą ádaat'éii
PRED:	The fig trees
GOLD:	ravens of all kinds ,

ID:	3431
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Shą́ą́' , Shí éí ásht'į́ , dishníigo nihił hweeshne' ; jó , shíkadanohtáá ládą́ą́' díí bił naashkaígíí bíni' nidaakai .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I say to you , ‘ I am the one who is with you . If you find me , you are looking for me . '
GOLD:	“ I told you that he , ” Jesus said . “ And since I am the one you want , let these others go . ”

ID:	3432
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Giving of Tithes

ID:	3433
INPUT:	Saul doo ak'eh hóół'įįd dago doo bidi'niidzį́į' da
PRED:	Saul 's Death
GOLD:	Saul Defeats the Amalekites

ID:	3434
INPUT:	Nídeiltihii t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá ałtsojį' ádaa áháyą́ yee nida'ádínítaah . Éidí woobįįhii ádoodįįłii bee dahodooleeł yiniyé ádaat'į́ , nidi nihí woobįįhii hool'áágóó hólóonii biniyé ádeiit'į́ .
PRED:	And every one of them that work in all things , that they may be an everlasting thing , but to the end of eternal life .
GOLD:	All athletes are disciplined in their training . They do it to win a prize that will fade away , but we do it for an eternal prize .

ID:	3435
INPUT:	T'áá ákwe'é naháatą́ągo lą'í yiską́ , áko Judíyadę́ę́' Diyin God yá halne'ii léi' , Ágabas yolyéego ákwe'é níyá .
PRED:	And there was many days there , and there came a prophet from Judea , and there was a certain man named Barnabas .
GOLD:	Several days later a man named Agabus , who also had the gift of prophecy , arrived from Judea .

ID:	3436
INPUT:	Índa éí tsé naakiígíí Ízrel biye'ké bee bééhániih doo biniyé íífad wolyéii bikáa'gi awostisgi t'áá ałch'ijí sinilgo ádíílííł ; Éran éí Ízrel biye'ké dabízhi' hawostisgi bik'i sinilgo bee Bóhólníihii yee hwénálniih doo biniyé binááł yah aníjídáah doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the two sons of Israel on the shoulder , and put them on the shoulder of the ephod ; and Aaron 's sons shall put their hands on his shoulder , that they may be remembered before the Lord .
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	3437
INPUT:	Áko kwe'é nahazt'i'gi diné ła' bik'is <unk> dólééł lágo , háálá ákódaat'íinii Bóhólníihii atíbidoolíłígíí t'áá bítséedi hazhó'ó bee nihida'ayeelnii' ni' .
PRED:	And let no man deliver his brother in the place , because we have sinned against the Lord , before the hand of the Lord .
GOLD:	Never harm or cheat a fellow believer in this matter by violating his wife , for the Lord avenges all such sins , as we have solemnly warned you before .

ID:	3438
INPUT:	shich'į' naho'diilnáago , ti'hwiisénii'ii ałdó' nił bééhózin . Ántiyakgi áádóó Aikóniyamgi índa Lístragi atíshi'dool'įįd , índa atíshi'dil'į́įgo bich'į' ha'iisisniidii baa ákoninizį́į́' ! Nidi éí t'áá ałtso bits'ąą Bóhólníihii yisdáshííłtį́ .
PRED:	You know what I had spoken to me , and I saw that I was in Antioch , and Antioch , and Antioch . But the Lord saved me from all .
GOLD:	You know how much persecution and suffering I have endured . You know all about how I was persecuted in Antioch , Iconium , and Lystra — but the Lord rescued me from all of it .

ID:	3439
INPUT:	áádóó ałtį́į́' nishtł'ajígo bee dah yítį́įłii nílák'ee habízhdeeshhałgo nish'náájí k'aa' dah yíjihii nílák'ee hadoołdas .
PRED:	And I will deliver him into the hand of his right hand , and he shall fall at the right hand of his right hand .
GOLD:	I will knock the bow from your left hand and the arrows from your right hand , and I will leave you helpless .

ID:	3440
INPUT:	Chahałheeł índa anoonééł bichaha'oh bii' diné doo ákwii ádajooníiłiit'áá hó nídazhdidoot'į́įłgi t'áá há ádin .
PRED:	They will make darkness and darkness , and the shadow of the wicked will be their own .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	3441
INPUT:	Áádóó ádabidi'dooldįįłígíí doo t'áá ákogi át'éii ałtah ádaat'éii yee yina'alo'go doogááł . Háálá t'áá aaníinii ayóó'ádayó'níi dooleeł yę́ę doo deiniizį́į́'góó biniinaa doo yisdáhidookah da .
PRED:	He will not escape the righteous with the righteous , because they will not escape because they love the truth .
GOLD:	He will use every kind of evil deception to fool those on their way to destruction , because they refuse to love and accept the truth that would save them .

ID:	3442
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Grieves over Jerusalem

ID:	3443
INPUT:	Áko éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Gálilii kéyah biyi'gi Názareth hoolyéédóó Jesus jiníyáago John éí Jórdan tooh biyi' tó yee hóósį́į́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass in those days , when Jesus came from Galilee , that Jesus came from Galilee , and John baptized them in the Jordan .
GOLD:	One day Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee , and John baptized him in the Jordan River .

ID:	3444
INPUT:	Nidi nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Christ nihiBóhólníihii nilį́įgo nihił dadiyin doo . Biniyé nihił chodahoo'ínígíí éí diné ła'da yíndanihídíłkidgo bee bił nídahodoołnihígíí áłahjį' bee hasht'e'áda'díínółzin , ákondi a'ohgo ída'díínółzingo índa Diyin God dadíínóhsingo bił dahołne' .
PRED:	But in your heart ye are the Lord Jesus Christ , that ye may be holy , that ye may be able to ask for him , but ye may know that there is no one in your heart .
GOLD:	Instead , you must worship Christ as Lord of your life . And if someone asks about your hope as a believer , always be ready to explain it .

ID:	3445
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bá ádaaht'į́įgo diné bi'óhólnííh t'áá ałtso bídahwíínółnííh : alą́ąjį' naat'áanii nilíinii , éí ts'ídá aláahdi nant'áii bi'óhólníihii bídahwíínółnííh ,
PRED:	If you do what is right to the Lord , do all the people . You are to rule over the king .
GOLD:	For the Lord 's sake , submit to all human authority — whether the king as head of state ,

ID:	3446
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ;
PRED:	The offering was a silver offering , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , and twenty shekels of fine flour mixed with oil .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	3447
INPUT:	Deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí áńdí'niihgo , Háháa , ní nahalin łeh . Doo nádíinágháníjį' anaa' dandzinii yiłchin ! Siláo binanit'a'í dadilwoshgoáádóó siláo ałt'ááh yijahgo yidiits'į́į́h .
PRED:	The sound of the trumpet is like a trumpet , saying , “ Come ! Listen ! Listen to the army ! Listen to the army ! Listen to the army ! ”
GOLD:	It snorts at the sound of the horn.It senses the battle in the distance.It quivers at the captain 's commands and the noise of battle .

ID:	3448
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Sádam áádóó Gomárah kin haal'áii índa binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí atélyaa yę́ęgi át'éego diné ła' índa ba'áłchínída doo ła' ákwii kééhat'į́į da doo .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ As Sodom , Sodom , Sodom , and its villages , so no one will dwell in it . ”
GOLD:	It will be like the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrahand their neighboring towns , ” says the Lord. “ No one will live there ; no one will inhabit it .

ID:	3449
INPUT:	Iiná bá honít'i'ígíí shił bééhózingo áshiinilaa ; honílǫ́ǫgi t'áá íiyisí bee ił hózhóonii hólǫ́ ; ninish'náájí baa honeeninii hólǫ́ǫgo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	Thou hast made me known the way of life ; thy peace is in thee ; thy right hand endures forever .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	3450
INPUT:	Bee nihoyíní'áanii baa honisą́ągo shidziilgo áshi'dólne' laanaa !
PRED:	If you obey my laws , I would be strong .
GOLD:	Oh , that my actions would consistentlyreflect your decrees !

ID:	3451
INPUT:	Binaagóó k'os índa chahałheeł hólǫ́ . T'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó doo haada yit'éii bee bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bohoníłdzilgo si'ą́ .
PRED:	He is in the clouds and darkness ; his throne is established in righteousness and justice .
GOLD:	Dark clouds surround him.Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne .

ID:	3452
INPUT:	Áko yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Diyin God nilíinii bich'į' łikání halchinii náádayiiłniih dooleeł áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii índa biye'ké bida'iina' yá sodadilzin doo .
PRED:	And they shall offer incense unto the God of heaven , and pray for the king and his sons , and for his life .
GOLD:	Then they will be able to offer acceptable sacrifices to the God of heaven and pray for the welfare of the king and his sons .

ID:	3453
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii joosdląąd , áko t'áá ákogi ájít'éego há haadzíí' .
PRED:	And the Lord believed him , and he spoke right .
GOLD:	And Abram believed the Lord , and the Lord counted him as righteous because of his faith .

ID:	3454
INPUT:	nihił dahadlee' , áko nihada'doodił ; le'dółt'e'go daneel'ą́ągo áádóó níłk'íbí'<unk> nii'go áádóó yaa yisdzidgo índa wó'ąha<unk> go bił áłká dasoołzaaz doo . Háálá t'áá ła' bá ída'nóoł'ąąd yę́ęgi ánéelt'e'go nihá ínídadí'nóol'ąął .
PRED:	You shall have peace , and you shall be filled with blood , and cast it out , and cast it out ; for it shall be for you , and it shall be for you .
GOLD:	Give , and you will receive . Your gift will return to you in full — pressed down , shaken together to make room for more , running over , and poured into your lap . The amount you give will determine the amount you get back . ”

ID:	3455
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ła' ch'il jidoonishgo biniyé halgaigóó ajííyáago ch'il t'áá bíni'dii da'ítł'óhígíí bik'ízhníyá ; éí bąąhdóó nidilkal yiyííbį́į'go bi'éénééz hadeezbingo néiníłtsoozgo abézhígíí yiih yiyííłgizh , nidi éí ádaat'éhígíí doo hoł béédahózin da .
PRED:	And when he came to a field , he found a vine in the field , and found it out of the field , and cut off the robe from her head , and cut it off , but they did not know what they are .
GOLD:	One of the young men went out into the field to gather herbs and came back with a pocketful of wild gourds . He shredded them and put them into the pot without realizing they were poisonous .

ID:	3456
INPUT:	Jesus yéego ádił hadzoodzolgo ájíní , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé díí k'ad ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii hadeintá ? T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Díí k'ad ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii doo ła' bá ádoolníił da .
PRED:	Jesus cried out and said to him , “ Why do these generation seek this generation ? I say to you , ‘ This generation will not be a sign for this generation . '
GOLD:	When he heard this , he sighed deeply in his spirit and said , “ Why do these people keep demanding a miraculous sign ? I tell you the truth , I will not give this generation any such sign . ”

ID:	3457
INPUT:	Ákohgo Sámuel áhodííniid , Át'ahálo , tł'éédą́ą́' Bóhólníihii áshidííniidígíí bee nił hodeeshnih . Áádóó áhozhdííniid , Haa'íyee' , baa hólne' .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to him , “ Come , I will tell you what the Lord has commanded me . ” And Samuel said , “ Let me tell you . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ Stop ! Listen to what the Lord told me last night ! ” “ What did he tell you ? ” Saul asked .

ID:	3458
INPUT:	Áko ádíshní , Hasbídí nahalingo shit'a' hólǫ́ǫ doo yę́ę , áko éí bee yóó'adeesht'ahgo háadida hanáshyį́įh doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then I said , “ There will be no rest in my wings , and I will not rest . ”
GOLD:	Oh , that I had wings like a dove ; then I would fly away and rest !

ID:	3459
INPUT:	Díí lą́ą : Filístiya dine'é éí binanit'a'í ashdlalt'éego yił bikin hadaas'á áádóó Kéínan dine'é t'áá ałtso kéyahgi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' áádóó Sáídan dine'é índa Háíva dine'é Dził Lébanangóó éí Dził Béí<unk> si'ánídóó Héímath kin haal'áii yah ahóót'i'jį' kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	These are the five kings of the Philistines , and all the Canaanites living in the land of Canaan , and from Lebanon to Lebanon .
GOLD:	These are the nations : the Philistines ( those living under the five Philistine rulers ) , all the Canaanites , the Sidonians , and the Hivites living in the mountains of Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon to Lebo-hamath .

ID:	3460
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii kóní , Jerúsalem baa a'áhí nídínéesdzįįł . T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Shikin ninádoot'ááł áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áii bee ída'neel'ąąhí bee bídí'nóol'ąął .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts , “ Jerusalem will be ashamed . The Lord of hosts says , “ My house will be rebuilt , and the wall will be divided with its line . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I have returned to show mercy to Jerusalem . My Temple will be rebuilt , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and measurements will be taken for the reconstruction of Jerusalem . '

ID:	3461
INPUT:	Da'agizhígíí t'ah táá' nídeezid hadziihgo doo nahałtingóó ádeeshłííł , áko t'ááłáhígo kin haal'áhígíí bik'i nahałtingo náánáłahgo kin haal'áhígíí éí doo bik'ijį' nahałtingóó ádeeshłííł . Kéyah t'ááłáhígo bik'i nahodoołtį́į́ł ; náánáłahgoígíí éí doo bik'ijį' nahałtingóó biniinaa hodoogą́ą́ł .
PRED:	I will send rain on the third months , and I will send rain on the city , and I will send rain on the city , and there will be no rain on one year .
GOLD:	“ I kept the rain from fallingwhen your crops needed it the most.I sent rain on one townbut withheld it from another.Rain fell on one field , while another field withered away .

ID:	3462
INPUT:	BiYe' ayóó'áyó'níinii biniit'aa bibee ajooba' ayóó át'éii yee nihik'ijisdli'go nánihidiinilígíí bee baa dahwii'niih doo .
PRED:	He will bless you in his love , and bless you in his love .
GOLD:	So we praise God for the glorious grace he has poured out on us who belong to his dear Son .

ID:	3463
INPUT:	Nihił yá'át'ééh daats'í dooleeł , éí doodaii' , doo daats'í nihił yá'át'éeh da dooleeł , nidi bich'į' dandeel'a'ígíí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ánínígíí bik'eh dahoniil'į́į doo , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ánínígíí bik'eh dahoniil'į́įgo nihá yá'át'éeh dooleeł .
PRED:	It is good to you , whether it is good or good or good , but to obey the word of the Lord our God , that we may obey the voice of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Whether we like it or not , we will obey the Lord our God to whom we are sending you with our plea . For if we obey him , everything will turn out well for us . ”

ID:	3464
INPUT:	Nidi há nidaal'a'í hwíighahjį' niikaigo hach'į' hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , Nihizhé'é nílíinii , Diyin God yá halne'ii t'áadoo le'é ayóó át'éii ádíílííł niłníigoósh doo ádíílíił da ? Tá'ádidíígisgo nídíídzih , niłnínígíí yee' doo nantł'a da .
PRED:	But his servants came near to him , and said , “ Your father , do you not make a great prophet ? Do you not make him clean ? ”
GOLD:	But his officers tried to reason with him and said , “ Sir , if the prophet had told you to do something very difficult , would n't you have done it ? So you should certainly obey him when he says simply , ‘ Go and wash and be cured ! ' ”

ID:	3465
INPUT:	éí yoołkááł ałtso bíighah da'azlį́į'go níjookah , nít'éé' ashkii Jesus t'áá Jerúsalemdi naagháá lá . Jóseph índa Mary éí doo bił bééhózin da ,
PRED:	Now it came to pass , when all the days were finished , that the boy was in Jerusalem , and Mary did not know that Joseph and Mary was in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	After the celebration was over , they started home to Nazareth , but Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem . His parents did n't miss him at first ,

ID:	3466
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii nant'áago tsosts'id náhááh góne' , ashdla' yiziłígíí binih Ézra éí Jerúsalemgi níyá .
PRED:	In the fifth year of the seventh year of King Ezra , Ezra went up to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Ezra arrived in Jerusalem in August of that year .

ID:	3467
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' bik'eh hoogáałii ádá ádeiilyaa ; éí t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh nihiDiyin God bikin si'ą́ągi oonishígíí bá shékel wolyéii ałníí' bich'į'dóó anídahii'nił doo ,
PRED:	And we shall do the statutes , which is in the first year of our God 's house , shall give the shekels of the house of our God .
GOLD:	“ In addition , we promise to obey the command to pay the annual Temple tax of one-eighth of an ounce of silver for the care of the Temple of our God .

ID:	3468
INPUT:	T'áá éí bijį́ ch'é'étiin gónaa naní'áii yáátis hijeehígíí índa bindanit'a'í dabikin bii' t'áá na'níle'dii áhoonííł áádóó na'adlo' hadadeezbingo ádayiilaii atídeeshłííł .
PRED:	On that day I will destroy the doors of the gate , and the princes of princes , and the house of their princes , and the house of their lies .
GOLD:	Yes , I will punish those who participate in pagan worship ceremonies , and those who fill their masters ' houses with violence and deceit .

ID:	3469
INPUT:	Áádóó siláo neeznádiin yilt'éego yinanit'a'í ła' bá naal'a'í ayóogo bił nilínígíí , éí daatsaahgo dadootsaałjį' ahoolzhiizh lá .
PRED:	And there was a certain officer who was with his servant , who was sick because of his death .
GOLD:	At that time the highly valued slave of a Roman officer was sick and near death .

ID:	3470
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí doo yá'ádaashóonii ayóó át'éego bee nihokáa'gi tsi'adeesdee'go áádóó bił ádaat'íinii t'áá ałtso bijéí yee t'ááłáhígi át'éego bąąhági át'éii yaa nitsídaakeesgo yoo'į́ .
PRED:	And the Lord hath made the wicked in the earth , and all his neighbour have sinned in one heart .
GOLD:	The Lord observed the extent of human wickedness on the earth , and he saw that everything they thought or imagined was consistently and totally evil .

ID:	3471
INPUT:	Éí'ai kin haal'áii yisnáago ábi'disdįįd
PRED:	The People of Ai
GOLD:	The Israelites Defeat Ai

ID:	3472
INPUT:	Tó doo nahasdzáán bił náádidoolkǫǫł da biniyé bich'ą́ą́h adínízoh , áko doo bilááhgóó anáázdoołhał da .
PRED:	I will cause the earth to fall , and it will be a desolation , and it will be no more .
GOLD:	Then you set a firm boundary for the seas , so they would never again cover the earth .

ID:	3473
INPUT:	Éí diné éédzíi'ii níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi nidanohłóosgo t'áá ałtso dahodiizts'ą́ą'ii éí hatsii'káa'gi dah dadidoolnihgo t'áá dah oonééł nít'éé' hoł nidazdoołniił .
PRED:	And the people shall bring them out of the camp , and they shall kill them , and they shall put their hands upon their head , and they shall stone him .
GOLD:	“ Take the blasphemer outside the camp , and tell all those who heard the curse to lay their hands on his head . Then let the entire community stone him to death .

ID:	3474
INPUT:	ákónít'į́įgo agha'ii'níiłii nahalingo té'é'į́ nik'i hwiidooleeł , áádóó té'é'į́ éí diné bee na'abaahii neijaahgo haatįįh yíyá nahalin doo .
PRED:	You will be like a thief , and you will be like a thief .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	3475
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalemgi dine'é t'áá át'é , naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó diné doo nídanilyéesii áádóó t'áadoo le'é dayiichįįhii índa da'atsidii éí t'áá neeznáadi míilgo deisnáago ayiizh'eezh ; doo ła' t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nidaakai da , t'áá hazhó'ó éí kéyahdóó a'ohgo ádaat'éii t'éiyá t'áá da'ákǫ́ǫ́ .
PRED:	And all the people of Jerusalem took the princes , and the men , and the mighty men , and the mighty men , and they brought them away , but they left none of the land alone .
GOLD:	King Nebuchadnezzar took all of Jerusalem captive , including all the commanders and the best of the soldiers , craftsmen , and artisans — 10,000 in all . Only the poorest people were left in the land .

ID:	3476
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago dį́į́' náhááh góne' Bóhólníihii kót'éego Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah in the fourth year of Josiah the son of Josiah , king of Judah , saying ,
GOLD:	During the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king in Judah , the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :

ID:	3477
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Sálaman yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Solomon , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave this message to Solomon :

ID:	3478
INPUT:	Bada'áłchíní doo bits'ąą dadíníil'į́įł da , nidi Bóhólníihii bee baa ha'niihii áádóó bibee adziilii índa naanish ayóó ádaat'éii yaa naayáhígíí akéédę́ę́' hanínááhinoot'į́įłii bee bił nidahodiilnih .
PRED:	You shall not hide your children , but tell them what the Lord has done , his power , and his mighty deeds .
GOLD:	We will not hide these truths from our children ; we will tell the next generationabout the glorious deeds of the Lord , about his power and his mighty wonders .

ID:	3479
INPUT:	Nidibé yázhí biką'ii ła' binááhaí hadaałt'éii ; dibé éí doodaii' tł'ízí bitahdę́ę́' nídidoohdzį́į́s .
PRED:	“ If your sheep were a male lamb , you must kill them from the flock or goats .
GOLD:	The animal you select must be a one-year-old male , either a sheep or a goat , with no defects .

ID:	3480
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii bikin si'ánígíí bii' yódí t'óó ahayóí hólǫ́ , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii bich'į' i'iideełígíí éí ach'į' nahwii'ná bił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The house of the righteous is great , but the day of the wicked is in trouble .
GOLD:	There is treasure in the house of the godly , but the earnings of the wicked bring trouble .

ID:	3481
INPUT:	Áádóó Páílat éí aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa diné áłah silį́'ígíí áyidííniid , Díí diné yee ádąąh dah hast'áanii doo ła' bá shił bééhoozin da .
PRED:	Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowd , “ I do n't know this man 's blood . ”
GOLD:	Pilate turned to the leading priests and to the crowd and said , “ I find nothing wrong with this man ! ”

ID:	3482
INPUT:	Bááh ályaaígíí diné bichaan bee niłt'eesgo binááł nánídį́įh doo .
PRED:	He shall eat some bread in front of the people , and he shall eat it before the people .
GOLD:	Prepare and eat this food as you would barley cakes . While all the people are watching , bake it over a fire using dried human dung as fuel and then eat the bread . ”

ID:	3483
INPUT:	Bijéí yídin nilíinii baa dííní'ą́ , áádóó yókeedii t'áadoo bits'ąą t'ą́ą́' íinilaa da . Síilah .
PRED:	You have given him my heart , and you have not turned back from him . Selah .
GOLD:	For you have given him his heart 's desire ; you have withheld nothing he requested.Interlude

ID:	3484
INPUT:	Áko Paul áádóó yił yikahígíí <unk> dóó bił dah náá'dii'éelgo Pérgagi Pamfíliya kéyahdi yíkai . Áádóó John hats'ą́ą́' dah diiyáago Jerúsalemgóó anáádzá ,
PRED:	So Paul and his men departed from there and came to Antioch . John went to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Paul and his companions then left Paphos by ship for Pamphylia , landing at the port town of Perga . There John Mark left them and returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	3485
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii náádoodááł
PRED:	The Lord 's People
GOLD:	The Hope of the Resurrection

ID:	3486
INPUT:	Háálá Jesus Christ atł'ááh nástł'inii nilį́įgo ábi'diilyaa . Áko diné ła'da atł'ááh nástł'inii náánáłahgo át'éii doo hanáájótł'in át'ée da .
PRED:	For Christ Jesus was raised up , and no one can build the foundation of the foundation .
GOLD:	For no one can lay any foundation other than the one we already have — Jesus Christ .

ID:	3487
INPUT:	Samériya kéyahdóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii doo hóshkał yaa nidaakaigo yiiłtsą́ . Béíyal diyin bidi'níinii yinahjį' dahoolne'go shidine'é da'asiihgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	I have seen the prophets of Samaria , and they have turned away my people away from the gods of Baal .
GOLD:	“ I saw that the prophets of Samaria were terribly evil , for they prophesied in the name of Baaland led my people of Israel into sin .

ID:	3488
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , t'áá Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí naaltsoos biyi'dóó yaa ííłta'ígíí t'áá át'é ánínígi át'éego díí kéyah nahós'a'gi índa ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí bik'ijį' doo yá'át'éehii bi'deeshnih ,
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord : Behold , I will bring evil upon this land , as I have written in the book of the king of Judah , and upon the inhabitants of this land , and upon the inhabitants of it .
GOLD:	‘ This is what the Lord says : I am going to bring disaster on this city and its people . All the words written in the scroll that the king of Judah has read will come true .

ID:	3489
INPUT:	áko éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó Jew dine'é kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá ałtso , Mózes bina'nitin bits'áhóhkáahgo , niha'áłchíní t'áadoo bąąh nídahinilgishí , índa Ízrel dine'é bi'é'él'į' t'áadoo bik'eh dayínóhkáhí , bidiní , ha'níigo bee naa hóóne' .
PRED:	so that you may turn away from all the Jews who live among the Gentiles who live in Moses , saying , “ Do n't obey the commandments of Moses and the commandments of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But the Jewish believers here in Jerusalem have been told that you are teaching all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to turn their backs on the laws of Moses . They 've heard that you teach them not to circumcise their children or follow other Jewish customs .

ID:	3490
INPUT:	Dooládó' shił bééhózingo Diyin God bik'íjóya' laanaa da ; dah sidáadi <unk> sha' laanaa da .
PRED:	How I know that I have found God , that I may not find him .
GOLD:	If only I knew where to find God , I would go to his court .

ID:	3491
INPUT:	Jó , łį́į́' nihik'eh hół'į́į doo biniyé biza'iilt'ihgo bee bits'íís neidlo' .
PRED:	For his body is cast into the body , so that the body may be filled with its mouth .
GOLD:	We can make a large horse go wherever we want by means of a small bit in its mouth .

ID:	3492
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é adooyį́į́ł biniyé t'áá ałtso yindaalnish , nidi doo yee hwiih daaleeh da .
PRED:	All the earth shall eat bread , but they shall not be filled with them .
GOLD:	All people spend their lives scratching for food , but they never seem to have enough .

ID:	3493
INPUT:	Dibé naakaidóó dibé agháago yá'át'éehii bits'ádííłtéełgo ásaah díínił , áko biyaagi ts'in éí chizh bił dididííłjah , áádóó ts'in ła'ígíí ásaah dííniłgo nizhónígo dííł bish .
PRED:	Take some sheep from the flock , and take the best of the flock , and put it on the wood , and put it on the head of the wood , and put it in the midst of the bones .
GOLD:	Use only the best sheep from the flock , and heap fuel on the fire beneath the pot.Bring the pot to a boil , and cook the bones along with the meat .

ID:	3494
INPUT:	Diné bahojoobá'íii áádóó diné ade áhósinii díí yee ahéédiit'ash : éí t'áá ájíłah Bóhólníihii hoł ch'í'diiłdlaad .
PRED:	The poor and needy go up to the place where the Lord sees them .
GOLD:	The poor and the oppressor have this in common — the Lord gives sight to the eyes of both .

ID:	3495
INPUT:	Kót'éego David éí Rííhob biye' Hadadíízer bik'eh jideesdlį́į́' ; éí Zóbah kéyahgi aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; hasiláo bił joonéełgo Yufréítiiz tooh nílíníjį' chánahgo bee ádíhwííníshníih doo jinízin .
PRED:	So David fought against them : and he reigned over his army , and he reigned over his army , from the river to the river .
GOLD:	David also destroyed the forces of Hadadezer son of Rehob , king of Zobah , when Hadadezer marched out to strengthen his control along the Euphrates River .

ID:	3496
INPUT:	Ła'da diné náánáła' diné jiisxíinii t'áá aaníí hodi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	If any man sins , he shall surely be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who takes another person 's life must be put to death .

ID:	3497
INPUT:	Bi'ana'í danilíinii baa honónééł laanaa nízinii ákódaalyaajį' bik'ee doo bił yée' da doo áádóó bijéí bidziil ályaa .
PRED:	You will not be afraid of their enemies , and the heart of their enemies will be afraid .
GOLD:	They are confident and fearlessand can face their foes triumphantly .

ID:	3498
INPUT:	Jéíkab dine'é bá aląąjį' nisoozíinii , t'áá éí Ízrel dine'é binanit'a'í danohłíinii , éí doo haada yit'éii dajiinohłáii áádóó aheełt'éego baa nitsáhákeesii t'áá ałtso áts'ą́ąjį' kódaoł'íinii , díí deísółts'ą́ą́' , nihidishní .
PRED:	Listen to this , O princes of Jacob , all Israel , who do what is right , and all your ways , and all your ways .
GOLD:	Listen to me , you leaders of Israel ! You hate justice and twist all that is right .

ID:	3499
INPUT:	éí eda'alyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii áádóó dił áádóó bizák'ídadii'nii'ii t'áadoo daohsání , índa na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá bits'ą́ąjį' ádanoht'é . Éí bits'ą́ąjį' ádanoht'éego yá'át'éehgi ádaahníił dooleeł . Diyin God nihił hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	You must not eat their idols and their sins . You must do what is right .
GOLD:	You must abstain from eating food offered to idols , from consuming blood or the meat of strangled animals , and from sexual immorality . If you do this , you will do well . Farewell . ”

ID:	3500
INPUT:	Nidi ch'ikę́ę́h éí doo haada dadoohłíił da ; hoł oodzí'ígíí biniinaa hodi'yoolyéełgi doo bą́ą́h ílį́į da ; jó , díí áhóót'įįdígíí éí diné bikwá'ásiní yik'iilwodgo yiyiisxínígíí bił ałk'eh ,
PRED:	But you shall not do any thing ; for it is not worthy to be put to death because of the words of this man , because he has cut off the hand of the man , and smote him .
GOLD:	Do nothing to the young woman ; she has committed no crime worthy of death . She is as innocent as a murder victim .

ID:	3501
INPUT:	Díí éí kin hadaas'áii nideet'ánígíí Ízrel dine'é t'áá a łtso bá áádóó bitahgóó dé'éyóní t'óó átsééd kéédahat'ínígíí bá ádaat'é , áko doo t'áá ákónéehgo diné yiyiisxínígíí ákǫ́ǫ́ nídidoolwoł áádóó áłah ná'ádleehgi doogáałgo haa náhódóot'įįłjį' dił biniinaa k'ééhodidoodlíiłii doo hodiyoołhéeł da .
PRED:	And these cities shall be for all the tribes of Israel , and for all the foreigners who live among them , and they shall go , and they shall come , and they shall not be guilty for the blood of the congregation .
GOLD:	These cities were set apart for all the Israelites as well as the foreigners living among them . Anyone who accidentally killed another person could take refuge in one of these cities . In this way , they could escape being killed in revenge prior to standing trial before the local assembly .

ID:	3502
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é éí kédaayahgóó tahwiidínéeshkałgo a ł'ąą dine'é bitahgóó tahwiidínéeshkał .
PRED:	I will scatter the Egyptians among all the nations . I will scatter them among all the nations .
GOLD:	I will scatter the Egyptians to many lands throughout the world .

ID:	3503
INPUT:	David biye'ké Hííbran kin haal'áagi nidabi'diizhchį́
PRED:	David 's sons in Hebron
GOLD:	David 's Sons Born in Hebron

ID:	3504
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' Hérad , naat'áaniishchíín jílíinii , Jesus baa hozdiizts'ą́ą'go
PRED:	At that time Herod , the governor , heard what Jesus had said .
GOLD:	When Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , heard about Jesus ,

ID:	3505
INPUT:	Diné doo áhályáanii aizdoo'į́įgo niyáháłtéehgo doo beełt'ée da , áádóó t'ah nááyówehígo naat'áanii biyooch'íidgo doo beełt'ée da .
PRED:	A fool is not ashamed in his eyes , and how much more is the king 's mouth ?
GOLD:	Eloquent words are not fitting for a fool ; even less are lies fitting for a ruler .

ID:	3506
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yóó'anídadoh'áahgo diyin bidi'níinii doo béédahózinii dadíínóhsin ládą́ą́' , ákohgo nihik'ijį' dooleeł , áádóó atínihił'į́įgo nanihídoołdįįł ; yá'át'éhígi ánihiilaadóó bik'ijį' ánihidoołdįįł .
PRED:	If you turn away from the Lord , do not know other gods , then he will destroy you and destroy you . He will destroy you .
GOLD:	If you abandon the Lord and serve other gods , he will turn against you and destroy you , even though he has been so good to you . ”

ID:	3507
INPUT:	Áko hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , John Tó Yee Asį́įhii yę́ę át'į́ , nidi ła' éí , Iiláíjah át'į́ , daaní ; náánáła' éiyá , Ałk'idą́ą́' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yę́ę ła' daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náádiidzáago át'į́ , daaní .
PRED:	They told him , “ John the Baptist is Elijah , but others say , ‘ He is one of the prophets who came from the dead . '
GOLD:	“ Well , ” they replied , “ some say John the Baptist , some say Elijah , and others say you are one of the other ancient prophets risen from the dead . ”

ID:	3508
INPUT:	Áko diné áłah silį́'ígíí ch'íneelkaadgo yah ajííyáago , at'ééd yę́ę bíla' jiiłtsoodgo nídii'na' .
PRED:	So he stretched out the crowd , and went in , and took her hand , and took her by the hand of her hand .
GOLD:	After the crowd was put outside , however , Jesus went in and took the girl by the hand , and she stood up !

ID:	3509
INPUT:	Áádóó Romegi niikaigo , [ siláo binanit'a'í éí awáalyaaí danilínígíí siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í yeinínil , ] nidi Paul éí t'áá sahdii siláo baa áhályánígíí yił bighan doogo baa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	And when they came to Rome , the captain of the guard gave them to the captain of the guard , but Paul gave him a charge of the guard .
GOLD:	When we arrived in Rome , Paul was permitted to have his own private lodging , though he was guarded by a soldier .

ID:	3510
INPUT:	Áko éí dinéhígíí hak'ijį' deeshłeełgo hadine'é bits'ą́ąjį' hodiyeeshxééł , háálá ha'áłchíní ła' Mólek diyin bidi'níinii bich'į' náájiisnii'go shihodiyingo haz'ánígíí jííłchxǫ' áádóó shízhi' diyinígíí doo dílzingóó ájiilaa .
PRED:	Then I will kill him from his people , because he offered an offering to the gods of Moab , and made his holy name holy .
GOLD:	I myself will turn against them and cut them off from the community , because they have defiled my sanctuary and brought shame on my holy name by offering their children to Molech .

ID:	3511
INPUT:	Azhą́ bik'isóó bitahgóó t'óó ahayóí bineest'ą' nidi , ha'a'aahdę́ę́' dooyoł ; éí honoojíídę́ę́' Bóhólníihii níyolgo íidoolííł áádóó tó háálíinii náhodooltsih índa tó ha'niłhoshii náhooltseii doo áádóó naalye'é da'ílíinii ałtso hats'ą́ą́' néididoolééł .
PRED:	Even though many of his brethren shall come out of the wilderness , the Lord will send a wind out of the wilderness , and the waters shall be dried up , and the waters shall take away from the wilderness , and all the spoil of the earth .
GOLD:	Ephraim was the most fruitful of all his brothers , but the east wind — a blast from the Lord — will arise in the desert.All their flowing springs will run dry , and all their wells will disappear.Every precious thing they ownwill be plundered and carried away .

ID:	3512
INPUT:	Átséédą́ą́' Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo hinishnáá nít'éé' yę́ę , áádóó t'áá ii' shíłjaa'ígi bee t'áá shizááká Diyin God dayoodlání áłah nádleehii atésh'į́įgo ádeeshdįįł nisin nít'é'ígíí baa dahosidoots'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But we have heard that I am going to destroy the church of God according to the beginning of the Jews .
GOLD:	You know what I was like when I followed the Jewish religion — how I violently persecuted God 's church . I did my best to destroy it .

ID:	3513
INPUT:	Dziil nihigháanii áádóó nihiyéél dandaazii t'áá ánółtso hágo , shaa hohkááh , áko háádaałyį́įhgo ánihideeshłííł .
PRED:	Come to me , and all your yoke , and I will make you rest . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	3514
INPUT:	Áko diné bitahgi t'áá hazhó'ó haa saad aghą́ . Ła' éí , Diné yá'át'éehii nilį́ , daaní , náádaała' éí , Dooda , éíyee' t'áá ádzaagóó diné iinii'áahii nilį́ , daaní .
PRED:	And there is a word in the midst of the people , and some say , It is not a man ; but they say , No , it is a man of life .
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	3515
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáłígíí biyi' bidine'é tídadiilyaii yik'i da'deezdizgo áádóó adadeeznehígíí náyííłdzíi'go tł'éhonaa'éí éí jį́honaa'éí nahalingo adiníłdíin doo , áádóó jį́honaa'éí bee adinídínígíí éí tsosts'id jį́ adinídíín bíighahdi ahą́ą́h nániiláago adiníłdíin doo .
PRED:	In those days there shall be light upon his people , and the moon shall be light as the sun , and the moon shall give light for seven days .
GOLD:	The moon will be as bright as the sun , and the sun will be seven times brighter — like the light of seven days in one ! So it will be when the Lord begins to heal his people and cure the wounds he gave them .

ID:	3516
INPUT:	bik'eh hodeesdlį́į́' , áko yá'ąąshdi doo bá haz'ą́ą da hazlį́į́' .
PRED:	The Lord gave them victory , and there was no place for heaven .
GOLD:	And the dragon lost the battle , and he and his angels were forced out of heaven .

ID:	3517
INPUT:	Áko hwíídíiską́ą́dóó náhást'éidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	And all the days of his life were nine hundred and five years old , and he died .
GOLD:	Enosh lived 905 years , and then he died .

ID:	3518
INPUT:	T'áá háiida shitsį' jiyánígíí áádóó shidił jidlánígíí éí shiyi' hojílǫ́ , áádóó bidiníná hayi' honishłǫ́ .
PRED:	Whoever eats my flesh and blood is in me , and I am in him .
GOLD:	Anyone who eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me , and I in him .

ID:	3519
INPUT:	T'áá háiida éí tséhígíí bik'ijį' ajíígo'ígíí nihizhdooltǫǫł , nidi t'áá háiida hak'ijį' naalts'idígíí ch'íhodoołk'ááł .
PRED:	Anyone who touches the rock will be broken , but whoever touches it will fall on it .
GOLD:	Everyone who stumbles over that stone will be broken to pieces , and it will crush anyone it falls on . ”

ID:	3520
INPUT:	Hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii náánáła' dadoohts'į́į́h . Diné ła' kéyah bee bóhólníihii jílį́įgo , ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'izhdííláago tsé binaa ahénátł'ingo ájiilaa , áádóó ákwii ch'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizh dooleełgi hahodziiznil , índa bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí hajíítł'ingo nízaadgóó yaa'áago ájiilaa , áko ch'il na'atł'o'ii yaa ádahalyą́ą dooleełii baa dzisįįdgo náánáła' kéyahgóó ajííyá .
PRED:	“ Listen to another parable . He built a vineyard , a man of his kingdom . He put it on a wall , and put it in the vineyard , and put it in the vine , and gave it to the vine , and gave it to the vineyards .
GOLD:	“ Now listen to another story . A certain landowner planted a vineyard , built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	3521
INPUT:	Díí táyi' nidaaldeehii t'áá ałtso kódaat'éhígíí daohsą́ : bit'a' dahólónígíí índa bikágí ałk'i dadoo<unk> hígíí éí daahsą́ .
PRED:	These are the things that are in the water : Take up the wings of the living creature , and the skin , and the skin .
GOLD:	“ Of all the marine animals , you may eat whatever has both fins and scales .

ID:	3522
INPUT:	Nít'éé' t'áá bí yee nahas'áanii ła' yinahjį' hak'i dahodii'ą́ą́ lágo shił bééhoozin , nidi biniinaa hodiyoolyéełgi , éí doodago biniinaa yah ahodi'doolt'eełgi t'áadoo ła' bee há ha'oodzíi' da .
PRED:	And I know that there is no one to put him in charge of the law , but because of the law , that no one could be put to death .
GOLD:	I soon discovered the charge was something regarding their religious law — certainly nothing worthy of imprisonment or death .

ID:	3523
INPUT:	Bikáá' adání ałdó' tsin nitł'izii yee áyiilaa ; táadi ké silá áníłnééz , áádóó naaniigo t'ááłá'í ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go áníłtéél , índa dego naakidi ké siláádóó táá' asdzoh ánízah ;
PRED:	And he made the altar of acacia wood , and the breadth thereof was three cubits , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the table of acacia wood , 36 inches long , 18 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	3524
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ayóó át'éego deeyol , áádóó tó náádadiidáhígíí tsinaa'eeł biih yilk'oołgo tsinaa'eeł k'adę́ę tó bii' hadibin .
PRED:	And there was a great wind , and the waters were filled with water , and the waters were filled with water .
GOLD:	But soon a fierce storm came up . High waves were breaking into the boat , and it began to fill with water .

ID:	3525
INPUT:	Éí óola biláahgo , óola t'áá íiyisí yá'át'éehii nidzinígíí nidi , biláahgo da'ílį́ ; tsés'ná bitł'izh bits'a' bąąhdę́ę́' tsés'ná bitł'izh nidahidilch'ą́łígíí nidi biláahgo ayóó ádahalniih .
PRED:	They are greater gold than gold , but they are better than honey . They are better than honey .
GOLD:	They are more desirable than gold , even the finest gold.They are sweeter than honey , even honey dripping from the comb .

ID:	3526
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go Mózes hodiyeeshxééł niizį́į́' . Nidi Mózes éí Féro bits'ą́ą́' yóó'ajoolwodgo Mídiyan kéyahgi kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' , áko tó hahadleeh léi'gi dzineezdá .
PRED:	When Pharaoh heard this , he wanted to kill Moses . But Moses fled from the land of Midian , and he sat there in a well .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	3527
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é bich'é'é t'óó haa yáhásinígi áho'di'doolnííł ; náhookǫsdę́ę'go dine'é bílák'ee hodi'dooltééł .
PRED:	The daughter of Egypt will be ashamed ; the north will be delivered into the hand of his people .
GOLD:	Egypt will be humiliated ; she will be handed over to people from the north . ”

ID:	3528
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo ha'át'íhída dadííniid da . Áko diné jiiłtsoodgo náábizdiisá , áádóó béézh'níłnii' .
PRED:	But they did not say anything . So the man took him away , and sent him out of his hand .
GOLD:	When they refused to answer , Jesus touched the sick man and healed him and sent him away .

ID:	3529
INPUT:	Naalte' nahaaznii'ii nilį́į nidi Bóhólníihii háká ániihgo éí Bóhólníihii <unk> dííchidii jileeh . T'áá ákót'éego diné doo naalte' nahaaznii'ii nilíinii bíká áhodoo'niidii éí t'áá aaníí Christ yíí' yileeh .
PRED:	He is a slave , but he called to the Lord . So the servant of the free is called , and he is the Messiah .
GOLD:	And remember , if you were a slave when the Lord called you , you are now free in the Lord . And if you were free when the Lord called you , you are now a slave of Christ .

ID:	3530
INPUT:	Shízhi' biniinaa sháháchį'ígíí átsé nahjį' kóshłaa , áádóó shaa ha'niihígíí biniyé ná t'ą́ą́' kwíínísin , áko doo ándeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	Because of my anger I have cut off my name , and I will not destroy you .
GOLD:	Yet for my own sake and for the honor of my name , I will hold back my anger and not wipe you out .

ID:	3531
INPUT:	Áko yádiłhił biyaagi t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii áádóó yee nant'áii índa yee ayóó át'éii éí Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii bidiyį́į́' bidine'é danilíinii baa didoot'ááł ; bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí hool'áágóó bee bóhólníih doo áádóó bídahólníihii bá nidaal'a' doo índa bik'eh dahół'į́į dooleeł .
PRED:	And all the kingdoms of heaven shall be given to the saints , and to the kingdom of the Most High , and to the kingdom of the Most High , and to serve him for ever and ever .
GOLD:	Then the sovereignty , power , and greatness of all the kingdoms under heaven will be given to the holy people of the Most High . His kingdom will last forever , and all rulers will serve and obey him . ”

ID:	3532
INPUT:	Háálá lą'í a'ídeeł biniyé Diyin God bizaad yił tádadijeeh , ákondi nihí doo ákódeiit'į́į da ; nihí t'áádóo nídí t'áá aaníí ádeiit'į́įgo índa Diyin God dabííł'aadii daniidlį́įgo Diyin God binááł Christ binahjį' dahwiilne' .
PRED:	For we are not able to speak with the word of God , but we are not able to do this , but we are sure that we are faithful in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	You see , we are not like the many hucksters who preach for personal profit . We preach the word of God with sincerity and with Christ 's authority , knowing that God is watching us .

ID:	3533
INPUT:	Háálá shi'dizhchį́į́dóó tseebíí jį́į́ góne' shąąh náhineeshgizh , áádóó Ízrel dine'é ahoolchíiłii nishłį́ , Bénjamin bidine'íígíí nishłį́ , índa dashizhé'é yę́ę Hííbrew dine'é danilį́į́ nít'éé' , áko shí ałdó' Hííbrew dine'é nishłį́ . Jew dine'é bibee haz'áanii k'ehgo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é bił haz'ą́ą́jí éí Férisii nishłį́į́ nít'éé' ,
PRED:	For on the eighth day of the eighth day I was circumcised , and I am the father of Israel , and I am a Jew , and I was a Jew in the law of the Jews .
GOLD:	I was circumcised when I was eight days old . I am a pure-blooded citizen of Israel and a member of the tribe of Benjamin — a real Hebrew if there ever was one ! I was a member of the Pharisees , who demand the strictest obedience to the Jewish law .

ID:	3534
INPUT:	Nihidił bee dahinohnáanii nihits'ádaazlį́įgo ánihiilaii ts'ídá t'áá k'ééhodideeshdlíłí ; naaldlooshii éí diné yiyiisxį́įgo éí diyoolyéełgo bee hwiideesh'aał , doodaii' diné dziisxį́įgo hodi'yoolyéełgo bee hwiideesh'aał ; t'áá háiida hak'is dziisxį́įgo hodi'yoolyéełgo bee hwiideesh'aał .
PRED:	I will make you guilty of the blood of your sins , and I will make you guilty of the beast . I will send a man to kill him , or he shall kill him , or he shall kill him .
GOLD:	“ And I will require the blood of anyone who takes another person 's life . If a wild animal kills a person , it must die . And anyone who murders a fellow human must die .

ID:	3535
INPUT:	Áádóó dah didookahgo ła' bee haz'áanii dayiizti'ii éí bits'íís daneeznánígíí deiníł'į́į doo ; jó , baa da'ashch'oshígíí doo dadínóonéeł da áádóó dadéek'ą́ąhii doo dadínóotsis da índa bits'íís danił<unk> go diné t'áá ałtso doo hat'áahjį' na'aldeeh da doo .
PRED:	And when they come , they shall see the dead bodies of the law : for they shall not die , and they shall not die , neither shall they go near to the top of all the people .
GOLD:	And as they go out , they will seethe dead bodies of those who have rebelled against me.For the worms that devour them will never die , and the fire that burns them will never go out.All who pass bywill view them with utter horror . ”

ID:	3536
INPUT:	Áádóó Job ánááhodoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	Job answered ,
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	3537
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Solomon 's Prayer of Dedication

ID:	3538
INPUT:	Íísa dízdiin binááhaigo Het dine'é Biyérai wolyéii bitsi' <unk> hwe'asdzą́ą́ ájiilaa ; Het dine'é Íílan wolyéii bitsi' Báshiimath ałdó' hwe'asdzą́ą́ ájiilaa .
PRED:	When Esau was forty years old , he took his wife , the daughter of Esau , the Hittite , the daughter of Esau , the Hittite .
GOLD:	At the age of forty , Esau married two Hittite wives : Judith , the daughter of Beeri , and Basemath , the daughter of Elon .

ID:	3539
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , T'áadoo nił yé'í . Ha'át'íishą' yiniłtsą́ ? Áko asdzání éí Saul áyidííniid , Nahasdzáán biyi'dę́ę́' diyin ła' haagháahgo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	The king said to him , “ Do n't be afraid ! What do you see ? ” The woman said to Saul , “ I have seen a god from the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid ! ” the king told her . “ What do you see ? ” “ I see a god coming up out of the earth , ” she said .

ID:	3540
INPUT:	Aghaa' áádóó na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo bee éé' ályaaígi át'éii doo biih díínáał da .
PRED:	You shall not enter the linen cloth and linen .
GOLD:	“ You must not wear clothing made of wool and linen woven together .

ID:	3541
INPUT:	Bináá' atíjiilaago hanáá' atínídoolnííł ; biwoo' atíjiilaago hawoo' atínídoolnííł ; bíla' atíjiilaago hála' atínídoolnííł ; bikee' atíjiilaago hakee' atínídoolnííł ;
PRED:	He will punish his eyes with his eyes , and he will punish his teeth ; he will punish his hands , and his feet will fall upon his feet .
GOLD:	an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth , a hand for a hand , a foot for a foot ,

ID:	3542
INPUT:	Áko tł'ée'go ní'jiilwosh áádóó jį́įgo náázhdii'nah , áádóó álástsii' hadaneesą́ áádóó dadínéesą́ , áko hada'neesánígíí índa dadí'néesánígíí t'áadoo hoł bééhoozin da .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the night , that he rose up early , and rose up early in the night , and the seed grew up , and did not know that they were alone .
GOLD:	Night and day , while he 's asleep or awake , the seed sprouts and grows , but he does not understand how it happens .

ID:	3543
INPUT:	Gííba kin shijaa'dóó Jerúsalem shádi'áahjigo Ríman kin haal'áajį' kéyah t'áá át'é honíteelgo áhodoolnííł . Nidi Jerúsalem éí Bénjamin bich'é'étiinídóó áłtsé ch'é'étiin nít'é'íjį' áádóó nástł'ahgi ch'é'étiiníjį' , índa Hanániyel bá ya'diitł'inii íí'áhídóó níléí naat'áanii bich'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizhgo bąąh haha'níhíjį' kin hanáánáál'áa doo .
PRED:	And all the land of Ekron shall be made in the valley of Ekron , and in the valley of Benjamin ; but the gate of Benjamin shall be at the door of the gate of the gate , and from the gate of the gate of the gate thereof , and from the gate of the gate thereof .
GOLD:	All the land from Geba , north of Judah , to Rimmon , south of Jerusalem , will become one vast plain . But Jerusalem will be raised up in its original place and will be inhabited all the way from the Benjamin Gate over to the site of the old gate , then to the Corner Gate , and from the Tower of Hananel to the king 's winepresses .

ID:	3544
INPUT:	Áádóó Athaláíyah deisiłgo aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bich'į'go łį́į́' bee yah aná'áldahí góne' ch'élwodgo ákwe'é bi'diisyį́ .
PRED:	And they took her , and went into the house of the king 's house , and they found her there .
GOLD:	So they seized her and led her out to the gate where horses enter the palace grounds , and she was killed there .

ID:	3545
INPUT:	Nidi łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hąąh hazlį́į'go áádóó t'áá át'é łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii t'áá hatsiit'áádóó hakétł'áahjį' haa diiłnii'go náá'iiłniihii éí t'áá át'é łigaigo yiyiiłtsą́ągo
PRED:	But when the priest saw that it is leprosy , and all the leprosy of leprosy , and when he sees him out of his land , the priest shall look upon him ,
GOLD:	“ Now suppose the disease has spread all over the person 's skin , covering the body from head to foot .

ID:	3546
INPUT:	Bíni'dii t'áá ádzíłtso agééh hoł danilį́į le' , áádóó ahé'áské dílzin le' . Na'ageh bee tsi'nidajikaii , índa dazh'diléii éí Diyin God há nihodiyoo'ááł .
PRED:	Let all be put to shame , and let them be ashamed , and let them give to her daughters , and women .
GOLD:	Give honor to marriage , and remain faithful to one another in marriage . God will surely judge people who are immoral and those who commit adultery .

ID:	3547
INPUT:	Áádóó Jiiháshafat éí dabizhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego i'ííłhaazhgo hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi dahazhé' é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaa yę́ęgi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áko haye' Jiihóram hatsásk'eh góne' aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat died , and was buried in the city of David his father , and Jehoram his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Jehoshaphat died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Jehoram became the next king .

ID:	3548
INPUT:	Shidine'é shíká ádáát'įįdígíí bá Shéran honíteelgi dibé bighango haz'ą́ą doo , índa Éíkor honíts'aa' góyaa éí dibé nídanjah doo .
PRED:	My people will be like a flock of sheep , and they will go down to the valley of my people .
GOLD:	The plain of Sharon will again be filled with flocksfor my people who have searched for me , and the valley of Achor will be a place to pasture herds .

ID:	3549
INPUT:	Íífad wolyéii biyaadi éé' agod ta'jį' nineel'ánígíí ałdó' t'áá át'é yá nahalingo dootł'izhgo ádeidoolíiłgo íínísin .
PRED:	You shall make all the robe of the ephod , like a garment , like a garment .
GOLD:	“ Make the robe that is worn with the ephod from a single piece of blue cloth ,

ID:	3550
INPUT:	<unk> dilt'éego John yáłti'go jidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá áko Jesus bikéé' dashdii'ázhígíí éí ła' Andrew át'į́ , Sáíman Peter yił háá'áázh .
PRED:	When John heard these words , he followed Jesus , and one of his brother Peter , Simon 's brother .
GOLD:	Andrew , Simon Peter 's brother , was one of these men who heard what John said and then followed Jesus .

ID:	3551
INPUT:	Áko díí bich'į' doo t'ą́ą́' háádadzódziih át'ée da .
PRED:	And they did not answer him .
GOLD:	Again they could not answer .

ID:	3552
INPUT:	Ííshją́ą́ tsosts'id nááhaigo t'ááłá'í nootínígo Hííbrew diné nihinaalte' nilį́į dooleeł biniyé nihich'į' nidahaaznii'ii éí nihá nidaalnishgo hastą́ą́h nááhaigo béédadidoohchił . Danihizhé'é yę́ę t'áadoo shá deidiizts'ą́ą' da , índa t'áadoo nidi yíká da'íists'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	And in the seventh year , every man who sent you to be slaves , to give you six years old when you hear , but they did not listen to me .
GOLD:	I told them that every Hebrew slave must be freed after serving six years . But your ancestors paid no attention to me .

ID:	3553
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso yik'ee ti'dahooznii'ígíí bik'ee ti'hodzooznii' áádóó t'áá hó hojílónígi hadiyingo naal'a'í yisdábíínil ; hwe'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' áádóó baa a'ááh jinízingo bee bik'é niná'jídlá ; ałk'idą́ą́' hoolzhishii bik'ehgo bił ha'jólníigo náás jiníjaa' .
PRED:	He saved all those who were sick , and he saved the angel who was in his own place . He gave them mercy , mercy , mercy , and mercy , according to the time of old .
GOLD:	In all their suffering he also suffered , and he personally rescued them.In his love and mercy he redeemed them.He lifted them up and carried themthrough all the years .

ID:	3554
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi nááhíłniih dooígíí éí díí : dibé yázhí ła' binááhaii naakigo t'áá ákwíí jį́ nááhíłniihgo hoolzhish doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt offer upon the altar : two lambs a year old , and two lambs a year old .
GOLD:	“ These are the sacrifices you are to offer regularly on the altar . Each day , offer two lambs that are a year old ,

ID:	3555
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , doo ak'eh dahóół'įįd da índa nich'į' nidaalteehgo nibee haz'áanii yaa dáádiikai áádóó nich'į' dah nídahizhdidookah biniyé doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii éí ná dahalne'ii yee bił nídahoolne' yę́ę nideistseed índa ayóó át'éego doo ílį́į́góó ádáát'įįdígíí yee ná dahóółchįįd .
PRED:	But they did not obey him , and they rebelled against the law , and they killed the prophets , that they might bring them back to meet him , and that they might return to him .
GOLD:	“ But despite all this , they were disobedient and rebelled against you . They turned their backs on your Law , they killed your prophets who warned them to return to you , and they committed terrible blasphemies .

ID:	3556
INPUT:	Áádóó sédáa dooleełgi ałdó' t'áá áłdįįłt'éego shá ádíílííł ; shá sodadołzingo t'ah nít'ée'da lá t'áá ánółtso nihaa nánísdzáa łeh nisingo bíká shił chohoo'į́ .
PRED:	And thou shalt make me a little while I sit down , as I have not come to thee , and I hope in thee .
GOLD:	One more thing — please prepare a guest room for me , for I am hoping that God will answer your prayers and let me return to you soon .

ID:	3557
INPUT:	Nidi háishą' t'áá bí ni'iisíihgo ádaa ákondzin ? Sha'át'e' néés'į́į'ii shąąh áníłdįįh .
PRED:	But who would sin against himself ? But who did n't destroy me ? ”
GOLD:	How can I know all the sins lurking in my heart ? Cleanse me from these hidden faults .

ID:	3558
INPUT:	Áko Abáíjah éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazhgo David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áádóó haye' Éísa hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' . Áko bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' kéyahgi hodéezyéelgo neeznáá nááhai .
PRED:	And Abijah died in the city of David , and Asa his son reigned in his place for ten years .
GOLD:	When Abijah died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Asa became the next king . There was peace in the land for ten years .

ID:	3559
INPUT:	Asdzání naaki ak'áa doo ; ła' nídidooltééł , ła'ígíí éí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	There will be two women , and the other will be left .
GOLD:	Two women will be grinding flour at the mill ; one will be taken , the other left .

ID:	3560
INPUT:	Jó , ak'idajishdliih doogo bee shich'į' ha'oodzíí' ; ak'idzisdli'ígíí doo łahgo áńdeeshdlíił da .
PRED:	For he will bless me , and I will not make a blessing .
GOLD:	Listen , I received a command to bless ; God has blessed , and I can not reverse it !

ID:	3561
INPUT:	Nidi nihí doo ákódanoht'ée da ; nihitahgóó aláahgo ayóó át'éhígíí bíni'dii éí akéédę́ę́' naagháhígíí nahalin dooleeł , áádóó naat'áanii nilíinii bíni'dii naal'a'í nahalin dooleeł .
PRED:	But it is not so , that ye may be greater than you ; and let the prince be like the morning , and let his servant be like a prince .
GOLD:	But among you it will be different . Those who are the greatest among you should take the lowest rank , and the leader should be like a servant .

ID:	3562
INPUT:	Áko diné yíl'áhígíí hódahooł'aahii bił hágo bizhdííniidgo ájíní , Diné t'áá háiida shikéé' dashdiigháahgo ádeizhdiyoo'nah , hatsin ałnáoszid nízhdidootį́į́ł áádóó shikéé' joogáał doo .
PRED:	And he called to his disciples , saying , If any man follow me , he shall take away his cross , and follow me .
GOLD:	Then , calling the crowd to join his disciples , he said , “ If any of you wants to be my follower , you must give up your own way , take up your cross , and follow me .

ID:	3563
INPUT:	Esther éí aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Héíman yá áda'íísįįdjį' hágo yidííniid
PRED:	Esther called for the king and Haman and Haman , and said to him ,
GOLD:	Esther 's Request to the King

ID:	3564
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné bił nijikaígíí bił da'jííyą́ą́' , índa t'áá ákwii jineezhjéé' . Abínígo nízhdiijée'go ájíní , Shinanit'a'í bich'į' náshidoł'á .
PRED:	So the men who were with him were with him , and they rose up early in the morning , and said , “ Bring me to my master . ”
GOLD:	Then they ate their meal , and the servant and the men with him stayed there overnight.But early the next morning , Abraham 's servant said , “ Send me back to my master . ”

ID:	3565
INPUT:	Áádóó Kapérniyamgi jíkaigo hooghangi yah ajííyáago hódahooł'aahii nayízhdééłkidgo ábijiní , Níláhdę́ę́' wohkahgoshą' ha'át'íí baa nídaaht'į́į́ nít'éé' ?
PRED:	When he came to Capernaum , he asked his disciples , “ Why did you come here ? ”
GOLD:	After they arrived at Capernaum and settled in a house , Jesus asked his disciples , “ What were you discussing out on the road ? ”

ID:	3566
INPUT:	Díí Náftalai biye'ké bada'áłchíní náás ahideeshchínígíí ádaat'į́ : Náftalai biye' <unk> ziyel ba'áłchíní <unk> ziyel dine'é danilį́ . Náftalai biye' <unk> ba'áłchíní <unk> dine'é danilį́ .
PRED:	These are the sons of Naphtali according to their families : the sons of Naphtali , the sons of Naphtali , the tribe of Naphtali .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Naphtali : The Jahzeelite clan , named after their ancestor Jahzeel.The Gunite clan , named after their ancestor Guni .

ID:	3567
INPUT:	háálá t'áá aaníinii nihii' dahólǫ́ , áádóó hool'áágóó nihił hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	For the truth is in you , and he will be with you forever .
GOLD:	because the truth lives in us and will be with us forever .

ID:	3568
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsodę́ę́' ách'į' na'ódlíigo náldzidgo yigááł ; t'áá éí binoołchéeł doo .
PRED:	He will come down from every side , and he will help him .
GOLD:	“ Terrors surround the wickedand trouble them at every step .

ID:	3569
INPUT:	éí asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nilíinii naat'á ch'ah bich'ahgo aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó bił nidazhdookah , áko bee yá'ájít'éehii éí diné danilíinii áádóó aláahgo bídahólníihii bich'į' ádééhozdoolzįįł , háálá asdzání baa dzólníinii jílį́ .
PRED:	And the queen shall stand before the king , and they shall stand before the king ; and they shall cry unto the people , and to the Lord , for he is a woman .
GOLD:	to bring Queen Vashti to him with the royal crown on her head . He wanted the nobles and all the other men to gaze on her beauty , for she was a very beautiful woman .

ID:	3570
INPUT:	Mk . 6 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts His Death

ID:	3571
INPUT:	Áko bee aha'deet'áanii éí dadine'é t'áá ałtso bá íishłaa nít'ée'ii k'ídeeshtih biniyé shitsihał Ił Hóshóonii bee yíníshí yę́ę k'íníti' .
PRED:	And I have broken my rod , that I may be found for all the peoples .
GOLD:	Then I took my staff called Favor and cut it in two , showing that I had revoked the covenant I had made with all the nations .

ID:	3572
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii éí t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yizéé' yidoot'įįł yiniyé naayik'íghal .
PRED:	He sees the mouth of the wicked , that he might judge the righteous .
GOLD:	The wicked wait in ambush for the godly , looking for an excuse to kill them .

ID:	3573
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii Béíyal yich'į' deidiłidgo doo yá'áshónígi ádáát'įįdgo shá dahashchįįdígíí biniinaa t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii k'indííláii doo yá'áshónígi áńdi'doolníłígíí yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	The people of Israel and Judah burned incense to Baal because of the evil things that the Lord of hosts had spoken to him .
GOLD:	“ I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who planted this olive tree , have ordered it destroyed . For the people of Israel and Judah have done evil , arousing my anger by burning incense to Baal . ”

ID:	3574
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii ánáshidoo'niidgo ání , Nił ádzaaígíí t'áá bééhózínígo bee ak'e'íłchí , áádóó naaltsoos bikáá' hazhó'ó ánílééh , áko t'áá háiida haneetehee yíídóołtah .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Take this book and write it in the book of your deeds , and let him go out to her . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Write my answer plainly on tablets , so that a runner can carry the correct message to others .

ID:	3575
INPUT:	Tł'óo'jigo ahééhool'áhígíí bich'į'go ch'é'étiingi ałts'ą́ą́hjí tsin yadaa'áhígíí bąąhjį' páam sikaadii bééda'alyaago naask'ęę' , áádóó dah náhást'ánígíí bich'į' tseebíigo ałk'i hoo'niłí haaz'á .
PRED:	And there were palm trees on the side of the gate , and on the side of the gate , and on the side of the gate were eight cubits .
GOLD:	Its entry room faced into the outer courtyard , and it had palm tree decorations on the columns . There were eight steps leading to its entrance .

ID:	3576
INPUT:	Áádóó t'óó baa dahodisiits'ą́ą́' yę́ędą́ą́' t'óó nihił ádahasdįįd ; t'áadoo yee diné hada'óolní'ígóó nihiniinaa ákódeiidzaa , háálá Bóhólníihii éí nihí aají nihiDiyin God éí Diyin God nilį́įgo wódahdi yá'ąąshdi índa wóyahdi nihokáa'gi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And when we heard of it , we destroyed it , because it was a God who is in heaven and in heaven .
GOLD:	No wonder our hearts have melted in fear ! No one has the courage to fight after hearing such things . For the Lord your God is the supreme God of the heavens above and the earth below .

ID:	3577
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii áháłní , Nikee' hadiidlé , háálá sínízínígi hodiyingo haz'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ Take away your feet from your feet , because you are holy in the sanctuary . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord said to him , ‘ Take off your sandals , for you are standing on holy ground .

ID:	3578
INPUT:	Áko éí asdzání doo saad biiłhéégóó ádzósingo bízhneel'áanii doo níyolgóó ádzósingo ałdó' bízhneel'ą́ą doo , áádóó nish'náájí hála' bee ak'ah tó nahalinígíí dziiłtsoodgo hálágiizhdę́ę́' doo hadadeesxį́į́góó ádzósingo bízhneel'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	If a woman does not have a woman who does not stand with a word , then he will take the fat from her right hand , and the oil will not be able to kill her .
GOLD:	Stopping her complaints is like trying to stop the windor trying to hold something with greased hands .

ID:	3579
INPUT:	áko náá'iiłniihii éí asdzání ádee hayididoołdzihgo íididooniił , Bóhólníihii éí ni'dódziihgo áádóó nidine'é bitahgi ni'dit'į́įgo ándoolííł , Bóhólníihii éí nitsoosk'id yididoołdził índa nibid yidínóołchał .
PRED:	And the priest shall make a vow to the woman , saying , The Lord shall make thee an oath among thy people , and the Lord shall make thee an oath among thy people .
GOLD:	“ At this point the priest must put the woman under oath by saying , ‘ May the people know that the Lord 's curse is upon you when he makes you infertile , causing your womb to shrivel and your abdomen to swell .

ID:	3580
INPUT:	Dził danohłíinii , haash daohdzaago deenásts'aa' naalgeed nahalingo dah nidasinoodee' ? Dah daask'id danohłíinii , haash daohdzaago dibé yázhí naalgeed nahalingo dah nidasinoodee' ?
PRED:	You mountains , you mountains ! How do you say , ‘ You mountains like a ram ? How do you say , ‘ How are you like a sheep ? '
GOLD:	Why , mountains , did you skip like rams ? Why , hills , like lambs ?

ID:	3581
INPUT:	Dinééh nílíinii , ániid nanináhígíí baa nił hózhǫ́ áádóó ániid nanináago níyoołkáłígíí nijéí bił hóshǫ́ǫ le' ; nijéí yídin nilíinii áádóó nináá' bee yíní'íinii bik'ehgo yínááł , nidi díí biniinaa naa náhódóot'įįłjį' Diyin God andoolósígíí nił bééhózin le' .
PRED:	Son of man , rejoice in the days of thy youth , and let thy heart be glad in the days of thy youth : but know that thou art in the sight of thy heart , but know that God is with thee .
GOLD:	Young people , it 's wonderful to be young ! Enjoy every minute of it . Do everything you want to do ; take it all in . But remember that you must give an account to God for everything you do .

ID:	3582
INPUT:	Díí naalyéhé baa nidahaniihii hats'ą́ą́dóó da'ast'įįdii , bee atího'diilyaaígíí yéédaaldzidgo , ayóó ánízáádę́ę́' naazį́įgo ayóó íits'a'go daachxa áádóó atíńdadinidleeh doo ,
PRED:	They will cry out of these things , and they will cry out , crying , crying , crying , and crying .
GOLD:	The merchants who became wealthy by selling her these things will stand at a distance , terrified by her great torment . They will weep and cry out ,

ID:	3583
INPUT:	Ayidgi dah siłtsooz dooígíí bá tł'óół ałk'ésgizígi át'éego óola t'áá bízhání da'ahólzha'ígíí ałk'ésgizgo ádeidoolíiłgo íínísin ;
PRED:	And thou shalt make the rings of pure gold , and shalt make them of pure gold .
GOLD:	“ To attach the chestpiece to the ephod , make braided cords of pure gold thread .

ID:	3584
INPUT:	Diyin God shił ííshją́ą́ áyiilaii bik'ehgo ákǫ́ǫ́ níyá . Áko doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó hane' yá'át'éehii baa hashne'ii da'oodlání yá naazíinii bee bił dahweeshne' . Nidi doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bił nahosisne'ii doo t'áadoo biniyéhígóó baa niséyáa da áádóó baa nináánáshdáa dooleełii bił t'áá da'áko doo biniyé t'áá bí t'éiyá bił dahweeshne' .
PRED:	I went to the way of God , just as he showed me . I told the Good News among the Gentiles . But I did not want to tell the Gentiles . But I did not want to tell them what I did to the Gentiles .
GOLD:	I went there because God revealed to me that I should go . While I was there I met privately with those considered to be leaders of the church and shared with them the message I had been preaching to the Gentiles . I wanted to make sure that we were in agreement , for fear that all my efforts had been wasted and I was running the race for nothing .

ID:	3585
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah hótsaago nihá yínéidoozohgo , jó , ákót'éego danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' áádóó éí kéyah t'áá át'é nihaididoo'áałgo , danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí'
PRED:	The Lord your God will give you the land that he swore to your ancestors , and he will give you all the land he swore to your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ And if the Lord your God enlarges your territory , as he swore to your ancestors , and gives you all the land he promised them ,

ID:	3586
INPUT:	Díí naaltsoos nihich'į' yéélta'go índa , Leiyodisíyadi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii ałdó' bich'į' dayízhdóołtah . Leiyodisíyagóó naaltsoos íishłaaígíí ałdó' ts'ídá dayídóołtah .
PRED:	This is the letter that I wrote to you , and to the church of Asia , and to the church in Antioch .
GOLD:	After you have read this letter , pass it on to the church at Laodicea so they can read it , too . And you should read the letter I wrote to them .

ID:	3587
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán ts'ídá łą́ągo nooh nídaachíihgo tsosts'id nááhaijį' hodichingo chodao'į́į doo biniyé yah anídahayéeh doo ; éí Ííjip kéyahgi ákót'éego hwiidoo'aał , áko kéyahgi diné doo dichin yiih dínóodah da .
PRED:	He will drive out the land of Egypt for seven years , and he will destroy the land of Egypt for seven years . He will send the famine in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	3588
INPUT:	Áádóó nináá' éí bąąhági ánít'į́ ánóhsingo , éí hani'aahgo yóó'ahíłhan ; nináá' t'ááłá'í nidi iiná biih yíníyáájígo doo ná yá'át'éeh da , nidi nináá' t'áá ałch'ijígo hool'áágóó kǫ' bii' ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'ą́ąjį' andi'yoolghą́ą́łjí agháago doo ná yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	If your eye causes you to sin , cast away your eyes . It is better for you to enter into life . It is better for you to enter into hell . It is better for you to be thrown into hell .
GOLD:	And if your eye causes you to sin , gouge it out and throw it away . It 's better to enter eternal life with only one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell .

ID:	3589
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó Ámor dine'é ch'íininíłkaadígíí éí yaa naaskaii t'áá át'é bik'ehgo bida'alyaii bich'į' nahojiłáago bee t'áá íiyisí doo yildinii baa nijiyá .
PRED:	And he served them all the abominations of the Amorites which the Lord had brought out of Israel , and served them , according to all that he had brought out of the Amorites .
GOLD:	His worst outrage was worshiping idols just as the Amorites had done — the people whom the Lord had driven out from the land ahead of the Israelites . )

ID:	3590
INPUT:	Amínadab bá Náshan yizhchį́ , Náshan bá Sálman yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	Nadab was the father of Shelah , who was the father of Amminadab .
GOLD:	Amminadab was the father of Nahshon.Nahshon was the father of Salmon .

ID:	3591
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jííhu Jézriyelgi níyáago Jézebel yaa hodiizts'ą́ą́' , áko binii' yizhchíi'go índa bitsii' neizhch'ąą'go tsésǫ'dę́ę́' déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	And Jehu came to Jezreel , and heard it , and she hid his face , and sat upon her head , and covered her head .
GOLD:	When Jezebel , the queen mother , heard that Jehu had come to Jezreel , she painted her eyelids and fixed her hair and sat at a window .

ID:	3592
INPUT:	Áko ákwii Zórah kin haal'áádóó diné léi' Dan dine'é jílį́įgo Manówah joolyéé lá . Áko hwe'asdzą́ą́ doo ałchíígóó ha'áłchíní doo haleeh da .
PRED:	And there was a certain man of Dan , who was of the tribe of Dan . And his wife had no children .
GOLD:	In those days a man named Manoah from the tribe of Dan lived in the town of Zorah . His wife was unable to become pregnant , and they had no children .

ID:	3593
INPUT:	áádóó ch'ah dijoolí bee ál'ínígíí hatsiinídííłt'ih , índa átáa'gi dah sitą́ą dooígíí hátáa'gi dah díítį́į́ł .
PRED:	And thou shalt put on his head , and upon his head , and three cubits shall be three cubits .
GOLD:	Place the turban on his head , and fasten the sacred medallion to the turban .

ID:	3594
INPUT:	Áko hazhé'é David yę́ę yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo nááda'iiłniihii ałkéé' níjaa'go nidaalnish doo índa Líívai dine'é éí nááda'iiłniihii binááł t'áá ákwíí jį́ naanish hólǫ́ǫgi aa dahojiniih doo áádóó nidajil'a' doo biniyé nihonínil , áádóó dáń'da'ditį́į́h yaa ádahalyánígíí ałdó' ałkéé' níjaa'go t'áá dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó yaa ádahalyą́ą doogo niinínil ; kót'éego Diyin God yá naal'a'í David yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	And he gave them the priests according to the commandment of David his father , and the Levites , and the Levites , in the sight of the priests , and in the sight of the priests , and in the gate , as David commanded the servant of the prophets .
GOLD:	In assigning the priests to their duties , Solomon followed the regulations of his father , David . He also assigned the Levites to lead the people in praise and to assist the priests in their daily duties . And he assigned the gatekeepers to their gates by their divisions , following the commands of David , the man of God .

ID:	3595
INPUT:	Atł'ohí atł'óogo bee a<unk> tsxį́įłgo choyooł'ínígíí nahalingo shíyoołkááł , áko t'áá ákwíí jį́ t'áadoo bee ił chohoo'ínígóó i'ii'aah .
PRED:	My days are like a vine , and my hope is in the morning .
GOLD:	“ My days fly faster than a weaver 's shuttle.They end without hope .

ID:	3596
INPUT:	tó áhásdįįd nahalingo ásiidįįd doo nít'éé' , tooh nílínígíí nihik'i diilkǫ' doo nít'éé' ,
PRED:	If we had destroyed us like water , we would burn us like a flood .
GOLD:	The waters would have engulfed us ; a torrent would have overwhelmed us .

ID:	3597
INPUT:	Haleebee bigaan yee naalnishii éí bóhólníih doo , nidi bił hóyée'ii éí naanish bídidi'nilchéeh doo .
PRED:	He will rule over his arm , but he who does what he wants to do .
GOLD:	Work hard and become a leader ; be lazy and become a slave .

ID:	3598
INPUT:	T'áá náábíláahgo naalyéhé yá naazdáii áádóó naalyéhé baa nidahaniihígíí índa Aréíbiya kéyahdę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá ałtso áádóó kéyahdóó naat'áanii danilíinii ałdó' óola áádóó béésh łigaii éí Sálaman yaa nídeigééh .
PRED:	In the same way , the king of Assyria , and all the kings of Assyria , and gold , and gold .
GOLD:	This did not include the additional revenue he received from merchants and traders . All the kings of Arabia and the governors of the provinces also brought gold and silver to Solomon .

ID:	3599
INPUT:	Ruth áádóó Neiyómii
PRED:	Naomi and Naomi
GOLD:	Elimelech Moves His Family to Moab

ID:	3600
INPUT:	Áko áádóó Bó'az ííyą́ą́' áádóó oodlą́ą'go bijéí bił hózhǫ́ǫgo tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í t'óó ałk'i yanáa'á bíighahgi neeztį́ . Áádóó hazhóó'ógo yah aji'yíí<unk> go bikee'jį' bik'izdííłtsoozgo ákwii dzineeztį́ .
PRED:	And Boaz ate and drank , and sat by the heart of grain , and sat by the midst of the wheat ; and he set his feet at his feet , and sat down .
GOLD:	After Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in good spirits , he lay down at the far end of the pile of grain and went to sleep . Then Ruth came quietly , uncovered his feet , and lay down .

ID:	3601
INPUT:	Índa éí yoołkáłígíí doo áłts'ísí ánályaagóogo , nihokáá' dine'é doo ła' doodzih da , nidi bitah haasdláa'ii biniinaa éí yoołkáłígíí áłts'ísí áńdoolnííł .
PRED:	And if the days are many , no one will say , but the days of the one who is among them will be worse .
GOLD:	In fact , unless that time of calamity is shortened , not a single person will survive . But it will be shortened for the sake of God 's chosen ones .

ID:	3602
INPUT:	Áko t'áá éí bijį́ Féro éí naanish binanit'a'í danilíinii índa bik'ehgo nida'anishí yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	And Pharaoh spake unto the princes of Pharaoh , and to the princes of his work , saying ,
GOLD:	That same day Pharaoh sent this order to the Egyptian slave drivers and the Israelite foremen :

ID:	3603
INPUT:	Ałjiłnii diné bił yah anídaakah nít'é'ígi át'éego diné bił yah anídaakah nít'éé' ; kót'éego bidáhonooníinii yaa nidaakai dooleeł biniyé Ahólah índa Ahólibah , asdzání t'óó baa'ihii nilíinii , yił yah anídaakah nít'éé' .
PRED:	They went into the wilderness , like a prostitute , and they went in to the wilderness , to go in to the wilderness , to take away her sister , like a prostitute .
GOLD:	And that is what they did . They had sex with Oholah and Oholibah , these shameless prostitutes .

ID:	3604
INPUT:	Áko kót'é daaníinii yich'į' nida'iiléego hak'ijį' danilį́įgo biniyé ádajit'íinii deineestł'ago Pérzha dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Sáíras bíiníłką́ , áádóó Pérzha dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Daráíyas nídíníit'ą́ąjį' dahoníłtł'a nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they did all these things unto him , that they might fight against him all the days of Cyrus king of Persia , and they made a curse to Darius king of Persia .
GOLD:	They bribed agents to work against them and to frustrate their plans . This went on during the entire reign of King Cyrus of Persia and lasted until King Darius of Persia took the throne .

ID:	3605
INPUT:	Ne'asdzą́ą́ yił háá'áázh niniinaa doo yił ahoolch'į́įd da doo biniyé doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da ; ła'ígíí t'ah hináago doo bił ahíidííłtsoł da .
PRED:	“ You shall not have sex with your wife because of your wife , and you shall not have sexual relations with the other .
GOLD:	“ While your wife is living , do not marry her sister and have sexual relations with her , for they would be rivals .

ID:	3606
INPUT:	Jó , bitsé éí doo nihí nihiTsé Niłdziliigi át'ée da ; éí nihi'ana'í t'áá bí ándahwii'aahgo ádaa ákodandzin .
PRED:	For he is not like a stone of stone , and our enemies are ashamed .
GOLD:	But the rock of our enemies is not like our Rock , as even they recognize .

ID:	3607
INPUT:	Kéyah Shádi'ááh hoolyéedi asdzání naat'áanii jílį́į́ nít'é'ígíí díí k'ad ahoolchíłígíí ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi bił náázhdidoojahgo bá nihozhdoo'ááł , háálá éí Sálaman bibee hódzáanii yízdóołts'įįł biniyé , ni' nineel'ą́ą́dę́ę́' jiníyá , nidi jó'akon , Sálaman yiláahgo ayóó át'éii éí kǫ́ǫ́ naaghá .
PRED:	And the princes of the south shall come to the judgment of this generation in the day of judgment , and they shall hear the wisdom of Solomon , and behold , Solomon is greater than Solomon .
GOLD:	The queen of Sheba will also stand up against this generation on judgment day and condemn it , for she came from a distant land to hear the wisdom of Solomon . Now someone greater than Solomon is here — but you refuse to listen .

ID:	3608
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii doo haada yit'ée da
PRED:	The Lord 's Law
GOLD:	Yodh

ID:	3609
INPUT:	Áko Peter yah ajííyáago , Korníílyas hadááh yílwodgo hach'į' nitsidinígo'go tsé'yaa neeshjool .
PRED:	Peter went in and fell down to meet him , and fell down before him .
GOLD:	As Peter entered his home , Cornelius fell at his feet and worshiped him .

ID:	3610
INPUT:	Áko Máíkal éí Saul bitsi' nilį́įgo David ayóó'áyó'ní , áko Saul yił dahoolne'go yaa bił hóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	Saul loved Saul 's daughter , and they told him that Saul had told Saul .
GOLD:	In the meantime , Saul 's daughter Michal had fallen in love with David , and Saul was delighted when he heard about it .

ID:	3611
INPUT:	shí ałdó' nihik'ijį' nishłį́į doo , áádóó nida'ayoohsí'ígíí biniinaa t'ah yówehgo tsosts'idi ahą́ą́h nániiláago atínáánihideeshdlííł .
PRED:	I also will be against you , and I will forgive you seven times more .
GOLD:	then I myself will be hostile toward you . I will personally strike you with calamity seven times over for your sins .

ID:	3612
INPUT:	<unk> dilt'éego t'éiyá hata' sizínígíí hólǫ́ǫ doo . Jó nidi Diyin God éí t'ááłá'í .
PRED:	There will be two people who stand there , but God is one .
GOLD:	Now a mediator is helpful if more than one party must reach an agreement . But God , who is one , did not use a mediator when he gave his promise to Abraham .

ID:	3613
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii áháłní , Bídahonołníihii bá nidaal'a'í bił dohkáahgo shiye' Sálaman t'áá shí shidzaanézígíí bikáá' dah dabinoołdáago Gáíhan góyaa bił doohkah ,
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ Go with his servants , my son Solomon , who is on my side , and go down to the camp of my camp . ”
GOLD:	the king said to them , “ Take Solomon and my officials down to Gihon Spring . Solomon is to ride on my own mule .

ID:	3614
INPUT:	Nidi Peter áhodííniid , Ananáíyas , ha'át'éegoshą' Níłch'i Diyinii díníí'ah biniyé níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í Séítan yolyéii níni' ná áhoolaago , kéyah bą́ą́h azlį́'ígíí ła'jį' ádá áásínísįįd ?
PRED:	But Peter said to him , “ Woman , why have you prepared Satan the devil for a field for a field ? ”
GOLD:	Then Peter said , “ Ananias , why have you let Satan fill your heart ? You lied to the Holy Spirit , and you kept some of the money for yourself .

ID:	3615
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii ayóó ábóodziilii bik'e'íyé'ígi át'éego shił hólǫ́ . Éí bąą atídashijił'íinii ádił dazdoosih , áádóó doo shik'eh dazhdidoodleeł da . T'áadoo a<unk> ádadziidzaaígíí biniinaa t'óó baa yádaznízin doo . Hool'áágóó ádił tsétah da'dziztł'ónígíí éí ts'ídá doo baa hodiyoo'nah da .
PRED:	But the Lord is with me as a mighty hand ; therefore they shall sin against me , and they shall not turn away from me , because they have sinned , and they shall not be forgotten for ever .
GOLD:	But the Lord stands beside me like a great warrior.Before him my persecutors will stumble.They can not defeat me.They will fail and be thoroughly humiliated.Their dishonor will never be forgotten .

ID:	3616
INPUT:	Áádóó nihik'ijį' nishłį́įgo nihi'ana'í binááł nidanihi'ditseedgo danihijoołáii nihindant'áa doo , índa t'áadoo nidanihiniłchéhígóó nidanochée doo .
PRED:	And I am against you , those who are killed before your enemies , shall rule over you , and they shall flee among you .
GOLD:	I will turn against you , and you will be defeated by your enemies . Those who hate you will rule over you , and you will run even when no one is chasing you !

ID:	3617
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Aadę́ę́' diltłish shá nídoohtįįh . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii binááł diltłish nídeidiitą́ .
PRED:	The king said , “ Bring me here ! ” So they took the sword before the king .
GOLD:	All right , bring me a sword. ” So a sword was brought to the king .

ID:	3618
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí Jóseph ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , éí Íífreiyim dine'é áádóó Manáseh dine'é danilį́įgo áyidííniid , Nihí t'óó ahonohyóí áádóó ayóó át'éego bee adziilii nihee dahólǫ́ ; doo t'ááłá'í yáá'iilt'e' t'éiyá bíighahgo kéyah nihíí' dadooleeł da ,
PRED:	Then Joshua said to the descendants of Joseph , “ The people of Ephraim , Ephraim , Manasseh , Manasseh , and Manasseh , have many power , and we will not have any inheritance .
GOLD:	Then Joshua said to the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh , the descendants of Joseph , “ Since you are so large and strong , you will be given more than one portion .

ID:	3619
INPUT:	Hats'ą́ą́jí danilíinii éí hananit'a'í daazlį́į́' ; hwe'ana'í k'ee'ąą dadeeshzhiizh , háálá lą'ídi ni'dziisí'ígíí biniinaa Bóhólníihii hach'į' ho<unk> náá' ; ákót'éego hwe'ana'í bilą́ąjį' ha'áłchíní deisnáago deinééłkaad .
PRED:	The princes of his princes became many , because they had many nations , because they had no power to the Lord because of the multitude of many things ; and they brought them before his enemies .
GOLD:	Her oppressors have become her masters , and her enemies prosper , for the Lord has punished Jerusalemfor her many sins.Her children have been capturedand taken away to distant lands .

ID:	3620
INPUT:	Áko yóó'ájiilaadóó bik'ijį' haye'ké bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Dasétsą́ągo díí Diyin God yá halne'ii tséní'ootséél góne' yóó'ályaaígi bits'in bíighahgóó shits'in yóó'ádadoohłííł ,
PRED:	After he had buried him , he said to his sons , “ If I see this , you will bury my bones in the tomb of the prophet .
GOLD:	Afterward the prophet said to his sons , “ When I die , bury me in the grave where the man of God is buried . Lay my bones beside his bones .

ID:	3621
INPUT:	Áko kót'ée dooleeł : deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí nízaadgóó yee ádadidooniił , áko yee ádadidooniiłígíí éí dasidoots'ą́ą'go diné ts'ídá t'áá ałtso hahodidoołdlałgo ayóó át'éego hahóó'áa doo , áádóó kin haal'áhígíí ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inígíí naa'ahiłdaasgo éí bitis gó'ąą Ízrel dine'é t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá k'éhézdon yah adoojah .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when they hear the sound of the trumpet , that the sound of the trumpet shall be lifted up , and all the people shall hear , and all the people shall be lifted up , and every man shall go through the wall .
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	3622
INPUT:	Bił kéédahwiit'íinii bich'į'go bá nahat'i'ii ánihiinilaa . Nihinaagóó kéédahat'íinii nihá nida<unk> i'go índa t'óó nihaa daadlohgo íinilaa .
PRED:	You have made us a way for our neighbor ; you have made us a reproach for us , a reproach for us .
GOLD:	You let our neighbors mock us.We are an object of scorn and derision to those around us .

ID:	3623
INPUT:	Asdzání hahastiin bighangi ádee hazdoodzíi'go , doodaii' hwii' sizíinii ádá nihodiní'ą́ągo
PRED:	If a woman makes a vow or a vow ,
GOLD:	“ But suppose a woman is married and living in her husband 's home when she makes a vow or binds herself with a pledge .

ID:	3624
INPUT:	éí bąą ał'ąą dine'é nihinaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí bá nidahat'i'go yik'ee ti'dahwiidoonih ; kót'éego ádee haasdzíí' , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	Therefore the nations shall be ashamed of the nations that dwell in thee , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have taken a solemn oath that those nations will soon have their own shame to endure .

ID:	3625
INPUT:	Áádóó ak'áán dibahí bee bááh naakits'áadahgo ádíílííł ; éí ómer bee í'neel'ąąhí bee ak'áán dibahí naakidi haaką́ągo bááh bik'eh níką́ą doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt make twelve loaves of fine flour mixed with oil : two ephah of fine flour mixed with oil .
GOLD:	“ You must bake twelve flat loaves of bread from choice flour , using four quarts of flour for each loaf .

ID:	3626
INPUT:	Jó , kwe'é kót'é , diné bá aa áhojilyáanii éí hananit'a'í ha'ólíi dooleełgo bee haz'ą́ .
PRED:	For this is the law of the wise man , that he may trust in his master .
GOLD:	Now , a person who is put in charge as a manager must be faithful .

ID:	3627
INPUT:	diné éí ch'ikę́ę́h bił jineezhtézhígíí bizhé'é béésh łigaii shékel wolyéii ashdladiingo baazhdoonił áádóó ch'ikę́ę́h hwe'asdzą́ą́ dooleeł , háálá baa yáhásinígi ájiilaa ; nizhníłdįįd bijį́įjį' doo yóó'azhdidoo'áał da .
PRED:	The man who is with her father shall give thirty shekels of silver and fifty shekels of silver , because he has done what she has done . He will not leave her until the day of his life .
GOLD:	he must pay her father fifty pieces of silver . Then he must marry the young woman because he violated her , and he may never divorce her as long as he lives .

ID:	3628
INPUT:	Díí dah oonéłígíí bits'ánóh'aash , áko t'óó hodíínáá'ígo áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	Turn away from the camp , and I will destroy them again .
GOLD:	“ Get away from all these people so that I may instantly destroy them ! ”

ID:	3629
INPUT:	ádahałní , Ha'át'íí bee óhólnííh shį́įshą' bik'ehgo díidí baa naniná , áádóó háishą' díí bee óhólnííh neidiní'ą́ągo bik'ehgo baa naniná ?
PRED:	They said to him , “ What authority do you do these things ? Who do these things according to these authority ? ”
GOLD:	They demanded , “ By what authority are you doing all these things ? Who gave you the right to do them ? ”

ID:	3630
INPUT:	Éidíígíí ákót'éego hasht'edaalyaago níbaal bii' hodílzinii átsé haz'ą́ą́ góne' nááda'iiłniihii Diyin God yá nidaalnish yiniyé t'áá ahą́ą́h yah anídaakah nít'éé' ;
PRED:	These things were prepared for themselves in the sanctuary , and the priests went in to work for the work of God .
GOLD:	When these things were all in place , the priests regularly entered the first room as they performed their religious duties .

ID:	3631
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad , díí tł'éé' nílááh yínááł ; diné nił naakaígíí bił halgaidi baa hínóhjéé' .
PRED:	Now therefore , go , and stand before the people who are with you in the field .
GOLD:	Come by night with an army and hide out in the fields .

ID:	3632
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ayóó íits'a'go ádííniid nahalingo áníigo ii'ni' tsosts'idígíí dadiists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The voice of a lion cried out like a lion , and the seven are heard .
GOLD:	And he gave a great shout like the roar of a lion . And when he shouted , the seven thunders answered .

ID:	3633
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' ch'íníyáago Bóhólníihii bizaad yee hach'į' hahaasdzí'ígíí bee bił nahodzisne' , áádóó tsosts'idiingo hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii ahíjiinilgo níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaagóó ahéénízį́įgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	Then Moses went out to the children of Israel and told them what the Lord had commanded him , and he set the elders standing in front of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	So Moses went out and reported the Lord 's words to the people . He gathered the seventy elders and stationed them around the Tabernacle .

ID:	3634
INPUT:	Mózes haadzí'ígi át'éego Éran éí ajéíts'iin áádóó ajáád nish'náájíígíí náásee bił nídi'dilnihgo nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii binááł náásee bił jidideesnii' .
PRED:	As Moses had commanded , Aaron took the breast and the right hand , and put them in front of the Lord .
GOLD:	Aaron then lifted up the breasts and right thighs as a special offering to the Lord , just as Moses had commanded .

ID:	3635
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'éiyá Diyin God nilį́
PRED:	The Lord
GOLD:	The Foolishness of Idols

ID:	3636
INPUT:	éí diné ayóoda ádaat'éii áádóó t'óó adahayóí nít'éé' índa Ánakim dine'égi ádaníłnééz nít'éé' , nidi Ámon dine'é nilíinii dabinááł Bóhólníihii ábísdįįdgo yighadahodeest'ą́ągo kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgóó bighan ádahoolaa .
PRED:	And the great and great , and all the remnant of the people , and all the remnant of the children of Ammon , but they destroyed them in the sight of the Lord , until they destroyed them .
GOLD:	They were also as strong and numerous and tall as the Anakites . But the Lord destroyed them so the Ammonites could occupy their land .

ID:	3637
INPUT:	Áádóó bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní , T'ááká shaa ch'ídahooh'ááł lágo .
PRED:	He answered them , “ Do n't let them tell me . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus sternly commanded the spirits not to reveal who he was .

ID:	3638
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é nohłíinii , t'áá ánółtso nihiinéé' nídididla'go Diyin God bich'į' nihił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	Sing to God , all the earth , all you earth !
GOLD:	Shout joyful praises to God , all the earth !

ID:	3639
INPUT:	T'áá ákwíí tł'éé' áádóó t'áá ákwíí jį́ nihinídaas'áá nít'éé' ; dibé baa ádahwiilyą́ągo bił ákódaniit'éé nít'éé' .
PRED:	In the morning and night we took all our sheep and all night .
GOLD:	In fact , day and night they were like a wall of protection to us and the sheep .

ID:	3640
INPUT:	Índa ákwii didlidgo náádahołniihii , áádóó nááhidoonihgo náádahołniihii , áádóó t'áadoo le'é neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' , Bóhólníihii baa nídahidoh'aahii , áádóó bił yádi'diilnihgo náádahołniihii , áádóó bee ádee hadasoohdzíi'go náádahołniihii , áádóó t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo náádahołniihii , índa nihilį́į́' áádóó nihidibé alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii náádahołniihii ninádahohjih doo .
PRED:	And ye shall offer a burnt offering , and a tenth offering , and a tenth offering unto the Lord , and offer a vow unto the Lord ; and ye shall offer an oath unto the Lord , and the firstborn , and the firstborn , and the firstborn of your flock .
GOLD:	There you will bring your burnt offerings , your sacrifices , your tithes , your sacred offerings , your offerings to fulfill a vow , your voluntary offerings , and your offerings of the firstborn animals of your herds and flocks .

ID:	3641
INPUT:	T'áadoo nánídlíiniísh hadínííltsééł ? Háálá yót'áahdi atsá naat'a'ígíí nahalingo dajit'íinii bit'a' ádayiił'įįhgo yóó'adahat'ah .
PRED:	Do n't you see your face ? For they see the riches of the sky like the wings of the sky .
GOLD:	In the blink of an eye wealth disappears , for it will sprout wingsand fly away like an eagle .

ID:	3642
INPUT:	Áko doo bagha'dót'ááł át'éégóó niiltee'go nihí t'óó dadiilyeelgo ádadii'niid , Bóhólníihii yee íinízinii bohodoolnííł .
PRED:	And we began to speak against him , and said , We have sinned against the will of the Lord .
GOLD:	When it was clear that we could n't persuade him , we gave up and said , “ The Lord 's will be done . ”

ID:	3643
INPUT:	Áko Abínowam biye' Bérak éí Kéí<unk> lai kin haal'áagi kééhat'íinii bíká ajííł'a'go ábizhdííniid , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God díí yee ná haadzíí' : Nílááh , Náftalai dine'é índa Zébyulan dine'é bisiláo neeznáadi míilgo nił yinéeł doo .
PRED:	Then Sisera sent for Sisera son of Baruch , who lived in Naphtali , saying , “ This is the word of the Lord , the God of Israel , saying , ‘ Go , and Zebulun and Zebulun . ' ”
GOLD:	One day she sent for Barak son of Abinoam , who lived in Kedesh in the land of Naphtali . She said to him , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , commands you : Call out 10,000 warriors from the tribes of Naphtali and Zebulun at Mount Tabor .

ID:	3644
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá át'é éí dayiiłtsą́ągo ni'jį' tsé'yaa daneeshjoolgo ádaaní , Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God nilį́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God nilį́į́ lá .
PRED:	When all the people saw it , they fell down to the ground , saying , “ The Lord is God . ”
GOLD:	And when all the people saw it , they fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ The Lord — he is God ! Yes , the Lord is God ! ”

ID:	3645
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	King Hezekiah of Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	3646
INPUT:	Mózes daaztsą́
PRED:	Moses and Moses
GOLD:	The Death of Moses

ID:	3647
INPUT:	Jó'akon , aa hideeshłéełii tsį́įłgo bił nishááh ! T'ááłá'í jinítínígo baa nidadziskaii bik'ehgo haa da'diyeeshłééł .
PRED:	Behold , I will come quickly to you ; I will give you every man according to his works .
GOLD:	“ Look , I am coming soon , bringing my reward with me to repay all people according to their deeds .

ID:	3648
INPUT:	Díík'ǫsh bił bááh ályaii éí náádahołniihii t'áadoo bił daohsání ; tsosts'id jį́ díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii éí bááh ach'į' nahwii'náago ályaii nídaohdį́įh doo , háálá t'óó hatsxį́įłgo Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínooná . Kót'éego Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínoonánígíí náás nihídeídíiską́ą́góó béédaołniih doo .
PRED:	You shall not eat the bread of unleavened bread , for seven days you shall eat bread , for seven days you shall eat the bread of Egypt , because all the days of your years come out of Egypt .
GOLD:	Eat it with bread made without yeast . For seven days the bread you eat must be made without yeast , as when you escaped from Egypt in such a hurry . Eat this bread — the bread of suffering — so that as long as you live you will remember the day you departed from Egypt .

ID:	3649
INPUT:	Diné ła' ne'iina' íidoołdįįł biniyé há nidéez'į́į'go nich'į' nídiilwodgo , nidi shinanit'a'í nílíinii , nii' sizíinii éí as'ahgóó iináanii bee hólǫ́ǫgo Bóhólníihii niDiyin God t'áá bí yaa áhályą́ą dooleeł . Áko ni'ana'í danilíinii éí bee aditł'į́į́h yee iijíítł'inígi át'éego yee azdootł'į́į́ł .
PRED:	If a man comes to destroy his life , my lord , but the Lord your God is a long life , and the Lord your God will keep his life , and he will keep his enemies like a wall .
GOLD:	“ Even when you are chased by those who seek to kill you , your life is safe in the care of the Lord your God , secure in his treasure pouch ! But the lives of your enemies will disappear like stones shot from a sling !

ID:	3650
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é danilíinii bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Danihizhé'é yę́ę shich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdígíí bee doo anishłį́į́góó ádashiilaa .
PRED:	“ Therefore , son of man , say to the house of Israel , ‘ Thus says the Lord God : You have made me sin against my fathers .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , son of man , give the people of Israel this message from the Sovereign Lord : Your ancestors continued to blaspheme and betray me ,

ID:	3651
INPUT:	Áádóó nihikéyahgi da'ohizhgo dá'ák'eh nídaastł'ahgóó t'áadoo ałtso daohizhí ; da'ohizhgo nidahineezdee'ígíí t'áadoo nídahohłáhí .
PRED:	And when we are in our land , we shall not be left in all your towns ; ye shall not be gathered together , and ye shall not be gathered .
GOLD:	“ When you harvest the crops of your land , do not harvest the grain along the edges of your fields , and do not pick up what the harvesters drop .

ID:	3652
INPUT:	Nidi ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bee azéédéetání ázéédazhdéetą́ągo bá nidajil'a'ii éí t'áá dahakéyah bii' kéédahojit'į́į dooleełgo haa dideesh'ááł , áko t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ kéédahojit'į́įgo ninádahojiiłdla'go k'éédazhdidléeh dooleeł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But I will give them the yoke of the nations , the king of Babylon , that they may dwell in the land , and they shall possess it , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	But the people of any nation that submits to the king of Babylon will be allowed to stay in their own country to farm the land as usual . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	3653
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é éí diné ayóó át'éii nidahalin dooleeł , áko wáin bee ił hózhónígi át'éego bijéí bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo ; bada'áłchíní ałdó' éí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo ; bijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Bóhólníihii yee bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	Ephraim will be like a mighty man , and they will rejoice like wine , and their children will rejoice , and they will rejoice in the heart of the Lord .
GOLD:	The people of Israel will become like mighty warriors , and their hearts will be made happy as if by wine.Their children , too , will see it and be glad ; their hearts will rejoice in the Lord .

ID:	3654
INPUT:	Háishą' náháchį'ígíí ábóodziilgi índa nits'ąą hasti'ígíí bik'ehgo t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'éł'íinii bił bééhózin ?
PRED:	Who knows the anger of your anger , and the fierce anger of your commandments ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	3655
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éego nibik'eh hoogáałii biniinaa tł'é'ííłnihgo náádiish'nahgo ahé<unk> nándish'niih doo .
PRED:	In the evening I will call you in righteousness , because of your righteousness , and I will shout for you .
GOLD:	I rise at midnight to thank youfor your just regulations .

ID:	3656
INPUT:	Dabitooh diłgo áyiilaa , áko doo dayódlą́ą́' át'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	He made the rivers , and they did not drink .
GOLD:	For he turned their rivers into blood , so no one could drink from the streams .

ID:	3657
INPUT:	T'áá ahą́ą́h diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bits'ą́ą́' bee hool'iní dahiniltséés índa atídabi'dil'į́ ! Diyin God éísh báháchį'ii bik'ehgo adiniih neiłniih ?
PRED:	A wicked man cast out the lamp of the wicked , and cast it into the hand of God ?
GOLD:	“ Yet the light of the wicked never seems to be extinguished.Do they ever have trouble ? Does God distribute sorrows to them in anger ?

ID:	3658
INPUT:	Shizéé' nideii'áhígíí háni'dii t'áadoo danilínígóó áádóó t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádabi'dilnééh ! Doo yá'át'ééhgóó shindahagizgo atídashiléhígíí bíni' t'ą́ą́' anábidi'nilkaadgo yaa yádaniizįįh !
PRED:	Let those who seek my mouth be ashamed , and let them be ashamed ; let those who seek evil turn back their face , and let them fall .
GOLD:	Bring shame and disgrace on those trying to kill me ; turn them back and humiliate those who want to harm me .

ID:	3659
INPUT:	Éí Mózes bidááhdóó Ízrel dine'é yił nídahidiikaigo naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiingo naat'áanii ánéelą́ą́' ; dah deínéehii béédaho'dílzinii yił ałtah ahiisdláá' .
PRED:	And the children of Israel took up before Moses , two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and fifty .
GOLD:	They incited a rebellion against Moses , along with 250 other leaders of the community , all prominent members of the assembly .

ID:	3660
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' éí adeídi haz'ánígi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáádílkał ániidíii bíighahgi Shéífan naaltsoos ííł'íní nilíinii biye' Gemaráíyah bighan góne' Bérak éí Jeremáíyah bizaad naaltsoos yisdisii biká'ígíí t'áá át'é diné t'áá ałtso bich'į' jííłta' .
PRED:	And they read all the words of Jeremiah the son of Shaphan , in the court of the Lord , which was in the house of the Lord , in the book of the Lord , in the book of Jeremiah the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , in the book of Shaphan .
GOLD:	Baruch read Jeremiah 's words on the scroll to all the people . He stood in front of the Temple room of Gemariah , son of Shaphan the secretary . This room was just off the upper courtyard of the Temple , near the New Gate entrance .

ID:	3661
INPUT:	Áko bik'ee t'óó bił adahóóyóí áádóó t'áadoo hanáádaasdzíi' da , índa t'áadoo yánáádááłti' da .
PRED:	And they were amazed , and did not speak , nor speak his words .
GOLD:	You sit there baffled , with nothing more to say .

ID:	3662
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Mídiyan dine'é biniinaa Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii nídayookąąhgo
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the children of Israel cried out to the Lord for help ,
GOLD:	When they cried out to the Lord because of Midian ,

ID:	3663
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá aaníí saad t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo bee hadahaadzíi'ii bida'diilnííł ; t'áá nihí índa danihizhé'é yę́ę áádóó aláahgo nihindant'áii índa nihinanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó Jerúsalemgi kintah da'nítiingóó didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihii éí wót'ááhdę́ę́' asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh bidi'níinii bich'į' náádahiilnii'ii t'áá ákót'éego náádahiilniih doo ; íídą́ą́' t'éiyá nihich'iyą' bee áda'azįįd nít'éé' índa doo nihąąh daatéeh da nít'éé' índa doo nihich'į' nidahwii'náa da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But as we have commanded one word , we will do unto you , our fathers , our princes , and our princes , and their princes , and in the streets of Judah , and in the streets of the heavens , and in the streets of heaven , and in the midst of the heavens .
GOLD:	We will do whatever we want . We will burn incense and pour out liquid offerings to the Queen of Heaven just as much as we like — just as we , and our ancestors , and our kings and officials have always done in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem . For in those days we had plenty to eat , and we were well off and had no troubles !

ID:	3664
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii wooch'ííd yijoołxá , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii éí nádį́'ídi t'óó haa'ih , áádóó t'óó haa yánáhásįįh .
PRED:	The righteous hate lies , but the wicked are evil .
GOLD:	The godly hate lies ; the wicked cause shame and disgrace .

ID:	3665
INPUT:	Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi e'elyaii naaldlooshii noolningo , doodaii' yót'áahdi tsídii nidaat'a'ii noolningo ,
PRED:	And the image of the earth was like an image , or the birds of the sky , and the birds of the sky ,
GOLD:	an animal on the ground , a bird in the sky ,

ID:	3666
INPUT:	Éí bąą Christ Jesus nihiBóhólníihii nihee dahazlį́'ígi át'éego baa dadzíínóhłíigo bee dayínóhkááh ,
PRED:	Therefore , put your trust in the Lord Jesus Christ , as you have received your Lord .
GOLD:	And now , just as you accepted Christ Jesus as your Lord , you must continue to follow him .

ID:	3667
INPUT:	Háálá Ízrel dine'é éí Ííjip kéyahdi aláahgo naat'áanii Féro biyaadę́ę́' Bóhólníihii haDiyin God ch'ééhoní'eezhígíí bich'į' ádił nida'jiisíi'go diyin dabidi'níinii dazhdósin nít'éé' .
PRED:	For the people of Israel sinned against the Lord , the God of Egypt , who brought them out of the land of Egypt , and served other gods .
GOLD:	This disaster came upon the people of Israel because they worshiped other gods . They sinned against the Lord their God , who had brought them safely out of Egypt and had rescued them from the power of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt .

ID:	3668
INPUT:	Ákót'éego haadzíi'go , łeezh yik'ídeezhée'go bizhéé' yee hashtł'ish áyiilaago diné doo oo'ínígíí binák'eegi yííztłéé' ,
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he had spoken , that he put it on the dust , and put it on the dust , and it was filled with the clay ,
GOLD:	Then he spit on the ground , made mud with the saliva , and spread the mud over the blind man 's eyes .

ID:	3669
INPUT:	Héírim ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idts'áadah .
PRED:	The children of Tobiah , one thousand and seven .
GOLD:	The family of Harim1,017

ID:	3670
INPUT:	Shich'į' haadzíi'go níłch'i shiih hóóle' áádóó shiisį'go yee shich'į' haadzí'ígíí diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	He spoke to me , and I heard what he said to me .
GOLD:	The Spirit came into me as he spoke , and he set me on my feet . I listened carefully to his words .

ID:	3671
INPUT:	Áko jííchxǫ'go shił bééhoozin ; éí asdzání t'áá áłah t'ááłáhí góne' ałkéé' íí'áázh .
PRED:	And I know that they have known , and the women followed one .
GOLD:	I saw the way she was going , defiling herself just like her older sister .

ID:	3672
INPUT:	Diné ájooníłígíí binahoji'á , nidi Bóhólníihii hoyoołááł .
PRED:	The one who does what is good , but the Lord will heal him .
GOLD:	We can make our plans , but the Lord determines our steps .

ID:	3673
INPUT:	Háadishą' nidiné dahóyáanii ? Áko háni'dii k'ad nił dahalne' áádóó háni'dii t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Ííjip dine'é <unk> ijį' yinahaz'áanii bił béédahoozįįh .
PRED:	Where are the wise men ? Let them tell you , and let them know that the Lord of hosts has given to Egypt .
GOLD:	Where are your wise counselors , Pharaoh ? Let them tell you what God plans , what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is going to do to Egypt .

ID:	3674
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Sálaman éí Jerúsalemdi Dził Moráíyahgi éí hazhé'é David yę́ę Bóhólníihii bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaaígi David yę́ę éí Jííbas dine'é <unk> habí'íná'ál'isígi hasht'ehoolaaígi ákwii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin áyi'niilaa .
PRED:	And Solomon built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem , the son of David , the father of David , which he had prepared for him in Jerusalem , which he had prepared for the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	So Solomon began to build the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah , where the Lord had appeared to David , his father . The Temple was built on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite , the site that David had selected .

ID:	3675
INPUT:	Nihijéí bił dahózhóonii doo át'ée da silį́į́' índa da'azhish yę́ę t'óó cha násdlį́į́' .
PRED:	Your heart has become glad , and your sorrow has become desolate .
GOLD:	Joy has left our hearts ; our dancing has turned to mourning .

ID:	3676
INPUT:	Hasbídí nidayiiłniihii ábizhdííniid , Díidí ch'ídahohjááh ; shiTaa' bikin biyi' góne' t'áadoo na'iiniih bá haz'ą́ągo ádaał'íní .
PRED:	He said to his disciples , “ Send these things , and do not remember them in my Father 's house . ”
GOLD:	Then , going over to the people who sold doves , he told them , “ Get these things out of here . Stop turning my Father 's house into a marketplace ! ”

ID:	3677
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí naadiin naakidi mííl béégashii índa neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi míilgo dibé éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááyiisnii' . Kót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó diné t'áá ałtso Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin diyingo nideideez'ą́ .
PRED:	And king Solomon offered two hundred oxen and twenty thousand sheep , and a thousand sheep , and a burnt offering unto the Lord : and the king and all the people gave the temple of God .
GOLD:	King Solomon offered a sacrifice of 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep and goats . And so the king and all the people dedicated the Temple of God .

ID:	3678
INPUT:	Nít'éé' náánáła' atsá ayóida ánáánát'éé léi' , bit'a' ayóida át'éédóó bits'os ahineestihgo hólǫ́ǫ́ léi' náánát'a'go ; éí á'íí'áhídóó behétł'óól índa bits'áoz'a' tó yił niyiikaah doo biniyé bich'į'go dínéesą́ .
PRED:	And there was a great beast , and a great horn , and a great wings , and a branch , and a branch , and a branch , and a branch , that they might bear its branches , that they might bear it .
GOLD:	But then another great eagle camewith broad wings and full plumage.So the vine now sent its roots and branchestoward him for water ,

ID:	3679
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó diné ádaa dahojoolbá'íii t'áá ałtso yisdéidoonił biniyé Diyin God deesdzilgo na'ak'íyáshti' yę́ędą́ą́' ákódzaa . Síilah .
PRED:	In the time of my mouth I spoke , that God might save all the needy . Selah .
GOLD:	You stand up to judge those who do evil , O God , and to rescue the oppressed of the earth.Interlude

ID:	3680
INPUT:	áádóó asdzání hahastiin yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo náánáła' diné hahastiin ánáájiidlaago , éí ałdó' azhdíílá .
PRED:	And if her husband takes away her husband , and another man also hath married her husband .
GOLD:	And if a woman divorces her husband and marries someone else , she commits adultery . ”

ID:	3681
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hach'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áháłní , Ts'ídá aláahgoígíí éí díí , Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , da'íísółts'ą́ą́' : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí Bóhólníihii t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	Jesus answered and said to them , “ Listen , O house of Israel , listen to the Lord your God , one Lord ,
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ The most important commandment is this : ‘ Listen , O Israel ! The our God is the one and only .

ID:	3682
INPUT:	Díí naaltsoos bii' bee haz'áanii bee ak'e'ashchínígíí nídooh'aahgo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii bíighahgi ninoh'aah ; nihidiilkaalgo yáłti' doo biniyé ákwii si'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ Take this book in the book of the law , which is by the ark of the Lord your God , that it may be a place for you .
GOLD:	“ Take this Book of Instruction and place it beside the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord your God , so it may remain there as a witness against the people of Israel .

ID:	3683
INPUT:	Áádóó Gethsémanii hoolyéhígi jíkaigo hódahooł'aahii ábizhdííniid , T'áá kwe'é nahísóotą́ , shí nahí sodideeszįįł .
PRED:	And they went to a place called the place of Olives . And he said to his disciples , “ Stay here , and pray . ”
GOLD:	They went to the olive grove called Gethsemane , and Jesus said , “ Sit here while I go and pray . ”

ID:	3684
INPUT:	Shoo , Job , díí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , ge' , t'óó bida'ayóigo Diyin God binaanish danilíinii baa nitsíníkees .
PRED:	Behold , Job , hear this , and understand the works of God .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention to this , Job.Stop and consider the wonderful miracles of God !

ID:	3685
INPUT:	Yéé' bik'ee índa nahasdzáán bikáa'gi báhádzidii nawólníinii bik'ee háni' áńdaadįįh doo , háálá yá'ąąshdi bee dahółdzilii dadoogał .
PRED:	The fear of fear and the earth shall be destroyed ; for the fear of heaven shall be afraid .
GOLD:	People will be terrified at what they see coming upon the earth , for the powers in the heavens will be shaken .

ID:	3686
INPUT:	Ázgad ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin naaki .
PRED:	the sons of Zin , one thousand and two hundred and two .
GOLD:	The family of Azgad1,222

ID:	3687
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí béésh nídaazbąsii bik'ehgo dah adiyiidleehígíí binda'adlo'ii índa bee ída'neel'ąąhí bee ha'iikaahii bina'adlo'ii éí t'áá áłah doo yíłdin da .
PRED:	The Lord shall not gather the vessels of the Lord , and the rod of an ephah , and an ephah of an ephah .
GOLD:	False weights and unequal measures — the Lord detests double standards of every kind .

ID:	3688
INPUT:	Sámuel éí Bénjamin dine'é t'ááłá'í hooghandóó danilíinii át'áahjį' áłah ánáájiidlaa , áádóó <unk> ba'áłchíní nídii'nil , áadi índa Sámuel éí <unk> ba'áłchíní át'áahjį' áłah ánáájiidlaago Kish biye' Saul nídiiltį́ . Nidi Saul há dahozdéez'į́į́' nít'éé' t'áadoo shójoozt'e' da .
PRED:	And Samuel gathered together all the house of Benjamin , and gathered together their children , and gathered them together to the house of Samuel , and set up the son of Saul . But Saul did not look for Saul .
GOLD:	Then he brought each family of the tribe of Benjamin before the Lord , and the family of the Matrites was chosen . And finally Saul son of Kish was chosen from among them . But when they looked for him , he had disappeared !

ID:	3689
INPUT:	Háálá ánihidishní , Bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii áádóó Férisii danilíinii biláahgo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádanoht'éego t'éiyá yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biih hidoohkah .
PRED:	For I say unto you , Ye shall enter into the kingdom of heaven , and ye shall enter into the kingdom of heaven .
GOLD:	“ But I warn you — unless your righteousness is better than the righteousness of the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees , you will never enter the Kingdom of Heaven !

ID:	3690
INPUT:	Áko David ni'dóó nídii'na'go táádeesgis áádóó ak'ah yee ádeestłahgo éé' ła' yiih náádzá . Áádóó índa Bóhólníihii bikin góne' yah ííyáago yich'į' nahasá . Áádóó bighangi nádzáago ch'iyáán yiyííkeedgo biyaa ni'íką́ągo ííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	So David rose up and washed them with oil , and anointed them with oil . Then he went into the house of the Lord . And when he came to his house , he ate bread .
GOLD:	Then David got up from the ground , washed himself , put on lotions , and changed his clothes . He went to the Tabernacle and worshiped the Lord . After that , he returned to the palace and was served food and ate .

ID:	3691
INPUT:	Áko kót'ée dooleeł : ła'da nighandóó ch'íníyáii kintaa atiinjį' ííyáago éí t'áá bí dił bik'ee chxii'go ánábi'diilyaago dadootsaał ; nihí éí doo bee ádidahodidiilt'ih da , áádóó t'áá háiida nighan góne' bił nahíínítánígíí bidił bik'ee chxii'go ályaii daaztsą́ągo nihí éí bá naniideeh doo ; ła'da atíbiilaago ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when any man has gone out of thy house , that he shall die in his blood , and shall die in his blood , and he shall die in his blood , and he shall put it in the blood of the house , and he shall not be upon it .
GOLD:	If they go out into the street and are killed , it will not be our fault . But if anyone lays a hand on people inside this house , we will accept the responsibility for their death .

ID:	3692
INPUT:	Áko díí biniyé t'áá áłahjį' nihá sodadiilzin , éí nihiDiyin God yee nihá íinízinii yee nihíká ádííniidii bą́ą́h da'nohłį́įgo ánihidoolííł . Áádóó t'áá ałtsojį' yá'át'ééh ádaahníił dooleełígíí biniyé , índa oodlą' bee baa dadzíínóhłíigo baa nidaahkaígíí bibee adziilii yee nihá ła'yidoolííł .
PRED:	And so that we may pray for you all times , that your God may give you the will of his will , and that you may do all things , and that you may do all things .
GOLD:	So we keep on praying for you , asking our God to enable you to live a life worthy of his call . May he give you the power to accomplish all the good things your faith prompts you to do .

ID:	3693
INPUT:	Áko Híífer biye' Ziilófehad t'áadoo biye'ké hazlį́į' da , nidi hatsi'ké t'éí hólǫ́ . Díí Ziilófehad bitsi'ké kódaolyé : Mála , Nóah , Hágla , Mílka índa Térza .
PRED:	The sons of Manasseh , the sons of Manasseh , had no daughters . These are the names of his daughters : Noah , Noah , and Noah .
GOLD:	( One of Hepher 's descendants , Zelophehad , had no sons , but his daughters ' names were Mahlah , Noah , Hoglah , Milcah , and Tirzah . )

ID:	3694
INPUT:	Éí bąą shoo , nik'ijį' k'ídíshnii'go ch'iyáán naa hidish'aahii áłch'į́į́dígo áshłaa áádóó Filístiya dine'é bitsi'ké t'óó baa'ihgo hinínánígíí yaa yá danízinii , éí nik'ee dadiniihígíí baa nidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	Therefore , behold , I have stretched out my hand upon you a little food , and I have given them to the daughters of the Philistines .
GOLD:	That is why I struck you with my fist and reduced your boundaries . I handed you over to your enemies , the Philistines , and even they were shocked by your lewd conduct .

ID:	3695
INPUT:	Áádóó náhookǫsjigo hak'ijį' k'ídidoolchiłgo Asíriya dine'é atíidoolííł índa Níneveh kin haal'áii t'áá ádzaaí íidoolíiłgo honoojíígóó hóółtsei nahalingo haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	And he shall stretch out his hand against the north , and Assyria shall make Assyria a desolation , a desert , and a wilderness .
GOLD:	And the Lord will strike the lands of the north with his fist , destroying the land of Assyria.He will make its great capital , Nineveh , a desolate wasteland , parched like a desert .

ID:	3696
INPUT:	áko Beth-hágla haz'ání bíighahgóó náhookǫsjí ch'ínááhoodzo áádóó Tónteel Dók'ǫ́ǫzhii náhookǫsjí táłts'á hiníyínígi nihoodzo ; éí shádi'ááhjígo Jórdan tooh nílínígíí nineel'ą́ ; díí éí shádi'ááhjígo hodeesdzo .
PRED:	And the border went out from the north side of Jericho , and from the north side of the sea , and from the south side of the Jordan . This is the south side of the Jordan .
GOLD:	ran past the north slope of Beth-hoglah , and ended at the north bay of the Dead Sea , which is the southern end of the Jordan River . This was the southern boundary .

ID:	3697
INPUT:	Hódzą́ bee yáshti' doo . Áádóó shijéí biyi'di bik'i'diitáanii éí nabik'ítséskees doo .
PRED:	I will speak wisdom , and I will understand my heart three times .
GOLD:	For my words are wise , and my thoughts are filled with insight .

ID:	3698
INPUT:	áko ájíní , T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Doo łahgo át'éego dahinohnáágóó índa doo áłchínígi át'éego ída'doołyaagóó , yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ts'ídá doo biih dadoohkah da .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I tell you , you will not enter the Kingdom of heaven . You will not enter the kingdom of heaven .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ I tell you the truth , unless you turn from your sins and become like little children , you will never get into the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	3699
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí jooba' áádóó aa a'ááh hasin bii' hadeezbin ; doo hah báháchįįh da índa bił hadlee'go aa a'ááh nízin .
PRED:	The Lord is full of mercy and mercy ; anger , and mercy .
GOLD:	The Lord is merciful and compassionate , slow to get angry and filled with unfailing love .

ID:	3700
INPUT:	Áádóó nik'isóó Líívai dine'é danilíinii éí nizhé'é yę́ę bidine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó danilį́įgo bił nídííkah , áko éí nihíká anájahgo ni áádóó niye'ké biłgo níbaal bii' hodílzinii bii' neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níi łii bee bééhániihii si'ání góne' nihá nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt bring the Levites out of the tribe of thy father 's house , and they shall help thee , and thy sons , and thy sons , and thy sons shall serve thee in the tabernacle of the testimony .
GOLD:	“ Bring your relatives of the tribe of Levi — your ancestral tribe — to assist you and your sons as you perform the sacred duties in front of the Tabernacle of the Covenant .

ID:	3701
INPUT:	Daastee'ii danohłíinii áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii nízaadi bits'ąą dahonohłóonii , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' ;
PRED:	Listen to me , you who say , “ Listen to me , you who are far away from the righteous .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you stubborn peoplewho are so far from doing right .

ID:	3702
INPUT:	Nidi áshidííniid , I'dí'nííltsąął , jó'akon , áádóó ashkii dííłchííł , áko wáin , doodaii' tó tsi'na'iiłáii t'áadoo nidlání , índa doo daadą́ą́góó bee nihá haz'áanii doo ła' dííyį́įł da , háálá ashkii t'áá yizhchį́į́dóó daaztsą́ąjį' Diyin God bich'į' Názarait nilį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	But he said to me , “ Behold , you are pregnant , and you will give birth to a son , and you will not drink wine , nor drink wine , nor drink wine , for you will be a child to God . ”
GOLD:	But he told me , ‘ You will become pregnant and give birth to a son . You must not drink wine or any other alcoholic drink nor eat any forbidden food . For your son will be dedicated to God as a Nazirite from the moment of his birth until the day of his death . ' ”

ID:	3703
INPUT:	Áko yił nidaal'a'í áhóót'įįdígíí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí yik'ee bíni' dei'a' , áko binanit'a'í yaa yíkaigo t'áá át'é yee yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	When the servants saw what had happened , they served him and told him all that had happened to him .
GOLD:	“ When some of the other servants saw this , they were very upset . They went to the king and told him everything that had happened .

ID:	3704
INPUT:	Háálá ándííniid , Ałtánídiisghasgo shee ádaa daha'niihii t'áadoo shaa bił dahózhóní .
PRED:	For I said to you , “ My thoughts are not pleased with me . ”
GOLD:	I prayed , “ Do n't let my enemies gloat over meor rejoice at my downfall . ”

ID:	3705
INPUT:	Nidi bich'į' nihił dahadlee'go yídin nilínígíí bíighahgo béeso baa nída'ohniłgo bił yá'át'éeh doo .
PRED:	But if you give to him , you will give it to him , and it will be better .
GOLD:	Instead , be generous and lend them whatever they need .

ID:	3706
INPUT:	Nikwá'ásiní bibéégashii , doodaii' bitéliida atiin bąąhgóó diniite'go doo t'óó dínííł'į́įł da , nidi bíká adíílwołgo bił nídidíídzį́į́s .
PRED:	“ You shall not take an ox or a donkey or a donkey or a donkey or a donkey , but you shall strike him .
GOLD:	“ If you see that your neighbor 's donkey or ox has collapsed on the road , do not look the other way . Go and help your neighbor get it back on its feet !

ID:	3707
INPUT:	Dahóyáanii dabizaad éí béésh bee adilzhishí nidahalin , áádóó saad nawólta' áłah ályaaígíí éí ił adaalkaałí niłdzilgo eelkaalígíí nahalin ; t'ááłá'í dibé yaa áhályáanii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ályaa .
PRED:	The words of the wise are mine ; and the words of the wise are like a shepherd , and the end of the flock is like a shepherd .
GOLD:	The words of the wise are like cattle prods — painful but helpful . Their collected sayings are like a nail-studded stick with which a shepherd drives the sheep .

ID:	3708
INPUT:	Diyin God adinídíín jílį́
PRED:	The light of God
GOLD:	Living in the Light

ID:	3709
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' chánahgo bił ahadadi'nisht'ą́ągo Kéínan kéyah nihaa dideesh'ááł , bidííniid ni' ; t'áá éí kéyah t'óó átsééd yikáá' naasdee'go dé'éyóní danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę baa dideesh'áałgo bee haasdzíí' .
PRED:	And I made a covenant with them , and said unto them , I will give thee the land of Canaan , that I may give them the land of the strangers .
GOLD:	And I reaffirmed my covenant with them . Under its terms , I promised to give them the land of Canaan , where they were living as foreigners .

ID:	3710
INPUT:	Diné t'óó ahayóí ałjeeh nídanilniihgo ahił dahalne' . T'áá ałtsodę́ę'go shił dahółyée'go yádaałti' . Shik'isóó bił ahéédahasinii t'áá ałtso ádił adeesihígíí yiniyé shaa nidahaakaigo t'áá doodahígo shá hadahadziihgo ádaaní , Haa'íyee' t'áá doodahígo bá hadadiidzih ; binda'diidlohgo da'át'é . Ákódzaago hak'eh dadidiidleełgo k'éédahodidiilnííł .
PRED:	Many people say to me , “ Let 's speak with me ! ” All the brothers and sisters come to me and say , “ Let 's make a curse for me . ”
GOLD:	I have heard the many rumors about me.They call me “ The Man Who Lives in Terror. ” They threaten , “ If you say anything , we will report it. ” Even my old friends are watching me , waiting for a fatal slip. “ He will trap himself , ” they say , “ and then we will get our revenge on him . ”

ID:	3711
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bá naal'a'í jílíinii doo saad hojíłǫ́ǫ da doo , nidi diné t'áá ałtso bich'į' há áhwiinít'į́'í doo , na'nitin jiichįįh doo , ha'jólníi doo ,
PRED:	For he is not in the word of the Lord , but he will be able to teach all people , and he will teach them all .
GOLD:	A servant of the Lord must not quarrel but must be kind to everyone , be able to teach , and be patient with difficult people .

ID:	3712
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ák'ina'ooldláadgo ání , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ła' ch'ínáádahót'aah doo ?
PRED:	The high priest tore his clothes , and said , “ Why should there be another ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest tore his clothing to show his horror and said , “ Why do we need other witnesses ?

ID:	3713
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , Jesus hadááh níyáago , Nihił hózhǫ́ǫ le' ! hałní . Áko baazhní'áazhgo bikee' dziiłtsoodgo bich'į' nitsizhdinígo' .
PRED:	And behold , Jesus came out to meet him , and said unto him , Be glad . And he took his feet , and bowed down before him .
GOLD:	And as they went , Jesus met them and greeted them . And they ran to him , grasped his feet , and worshiped him .

ID:	3714
INPUT:	<unk> baa'níłdįįdgo t'ááká nahjį' kóshólééh yíila' . Doo shidziil da sélį́į'go yóó'ashidóó'ááł lágo .
PRED:	Do n't destroy me until I am weak , and do n't turn away from me .
GOLD:	And now , in my old age , do n't set me aside.Do n't abandon me when my strength is failing .

ID:	3715
INPUT:	Ádaa hojoolbá'ígo yínííł naagháii nááyiiłniihii éí Diyin God bił nilį́ ; Diyin God nílíinii , ádaa hojoolbá'ígo t'áá bijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' ádił ni'iisíi'go yąąh bíni'go yínííł naagháii éí doo nahjį' kódíílíił da .
PRED:	He is the God of the proud ; he is the God of the proud , O God ; thou shalt not take away the wicked from his heart .
GOLD:	The sacrifice you desire is a broken spirit.You will not reject a broken and repentant heart , O God .

ID:	3716
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' ajooba' saad éí áshįįh halnihígi át'éego bee yádaałti' , ákódaaht'į́įgo diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo bich'į' t'ą́ą́' háá'doodzihgi nihił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	They will always speak like salt , and we will speak to each man . ”
GOLD:	Let your conversation be gracious and attractive so that you will have the right response for everyone .

ID:	3717
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ámalek dine'é Réfidim hoolyéegi yíkaigo Ízrel dine'é yił da'ahoogą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then the Amalekites came to Beersheba , and fought against Israel .
GOLD:	While the people of Israel were still at Rephidim , the warriors of Amalek attacked them .

ID:	3718
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Paul ádííniid , K'adę́ę dinínígíí éí dooda , nidi t'áá aaníí oodlání nílį́į laanaa nisin , áádóó doo t'áá ni t'éiyá da nidi díí jį́ dashidiizts'ą́'ígíí t'áá ałtso shígi ádaone' laanaa nisin , t'áá hazhó'ó díí shílátsíín aznilígíí éí doo át'ée dooleeł yę́ę nisin .
PRED:	Then Paul said , “ It is not enough to come to you , but you have been the church , but you have heard all that I have heard , but I want you to do all that you have heard me today .
GOLD:	Paul replied , “ Whether quickly or not , I pray to God that both you and everyone here in this audience might become the same as I am , except for these chains . ”

ID:	3719
INPUT:	E'e'aahjí kin bii' sohodizin bich'į'go kin ła' náánást'ą́ ; éí kin si'ánígíí naaniigo t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'éíts'áadah ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákóníłtéél , nááseego éí t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindóó ba'aan táá' ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákóhonízah ; kin bá nástł'inígíí t'áá dį́į́'dę́ę'go tseebíí ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódeidéetą́ą́' .
PRED:	The length of the east side of the temple was a hundred cubits long and twenty cubits wide , and the breadth of the temple .
GOLD:	A large building stood on the west , facing the Temple courtyard . It was 1221/2 feet wide and 1571/2 feet long , and its walls were 83/4 feet thick .

ID:	3720
INPUT:	Ahééh danohsingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' dahohtaał ; tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii bee bá nidaahnéego nihiDiyin God baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , and sing praise to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Sing out your thanks to the Lord ; sing praises to our God with a harp .

ID:	3721
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii ashdladiin dooleełjį' ashdla' bee bi'ohgoshą' , da' ashdla' bee bi'oh nidiísh kin haal'áii t'áá át'é ałdó' ádííłdįįł ? Áko ádííniid , Dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' bik'íníyáago lá kin haal'áii doo ádeeshdįįł da ni .
PRED:	How long will you destroy five hundred righteous men ? Do you destroy all the city ? ” He answered , “ I will not destroy the city . ”
GOLD:	Suppose there are only forty-five righteous people rather than fifty ? Will you destroy the whole city for lack of five ? ” And the Lord said , “ I will not destroy it if I find forty-five righteous people there . ”

ID:	3722
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii yéego ajiiłhaazhígi é'ét'éego índa danółch'ilgo ánihiilaa ; danihináá' áádóó danihitsiits'iin éí áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii áádóó nihá bił éédahózinii danilíinii yik'é'ésti' .
PRED:	For the Lord has made us like a loud voice , and we have seen , our eyes , our heads , our heads , and a sign for us .
GOLD:	For the Lord has poured out on you a spirit of deep sleep.He has closed the eyes of your prophets and visionaries .

ID:	3723
INPUT:	Díí óola bee ch'ozh bééda'alyaii éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii át'éego Filístiya dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádayiisnii'ii át'é : ła' éí Áshdad kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Géíza kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Áshkelan kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Gath kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Ékran kin haal'áii bá náádayiisnii' .
PRED:	This is the offering of gold offering which the Philistines offered to the Lord : one for Ekron , Ekron , Ekron , Ekron , Ekron , and Ekron .
GOLD:	The five gold tumors sent by the Philistines as a guilt offering to the Lord were gifts from the rulers of Ashdod , Gaza , Ashkelon , Gath , and Ekron .

ID:	3724
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Barziléíyai áyidííniid , Wónaanígóó shił díí'ash , áko Jerúsalem kin haal'áadi shits'ą́ą́' ííyą́ą doo .
PRED:	The king said to Abishai , “ Bring me up to the top of the hill , so that you may hear me in Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	“ Come across with me and live in Jerusalem , ” the king said to Barzillai . “ I will take care of you there . ”

ID:	3725
INPUT:	Ayóó áníínílninígíí bąą t'áá íiyisí ádaa hó'niih nít'éé' ; naa ha'niihígíí biniinaa bee honíyáanii ałtso yíníłchxǫ' . Aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii daniníł'į́į doo biniyé ni' bikáa'jį' hadaniyííłhan .
PRED:	You were very proud , because you were very proud . You have destroyed all your laws because you have destroyed them . You have destroyed the kings of the earth .
GOLD:	Your heart was filled with pridebecause of all your beauty.Your wisdom was corruptedby your love of splendor.So I threw you to the groundand exposed you to the curious gaze of kings .

ID:	3726
INPUT:	Síriya dine'é áádóó Íífreiyim dine'é índa Remeláíyah biye' nilíinii ahił ch'odaasne'go t'óó baa'ihgo nindahaz'ą́ągo ádaaní ,
PRED:	The people of Aram , Ephraim , Edom , and Rebekah 's son , spoke against us , saying ,
GOLD:	Yes , the kings of Syria and Israel are plotting against him , saying ,

ID:	3727
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné ádashidííniid , Díí baa nanináhígíishą' ha'át'íí nihiłní ? Da' éísh doo bee nihił hodíílnih da ?
PRED:	The people asked me , “ What do you say to me ? What do you tell you ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people asked , “ What does all this mean ? What are you trying to tell us ? ”

ID:	3728
INPUT:	Áko tágí jį́ aleeh góne' Ízrel dine'é dah náádiikaigo Bénjamin dine'é yik'i náánéijéé' áádóó t'áá átsé ádaadzaa yę́ęgi át'éego Gíbiyah kin haal'áii yaa ninááhaakai .
PRED:	On the third day the children of Israel went up to Benjamin on the children of Benjamin , and they went down to Gibeah as the first day .
GOLD:	They went out on the third day and took their positions at the same place as before .

ID:	3729
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel yił hoolne'go t'ááłá'í yiską́ hadziihgo Saul doogáałgo ání ,
PRED:	And the word of the Lord came to Samuel , saying ,
GOLD:	Now the Lord had told Samuel the previous day ,

ID:	3730
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' Bóhólníihii baa hashniih doo ; t'ááłáhígi át'éego baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord always ; I will praise him as one .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord at all times.I will constantly speak his praises .

ID:	3731
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó danilíinii bits'ą́ąjį' dínísh'į́įgo áshíínísin , áádóó náshiiłnaahgo nik'ehgo áhoot'ééjí shiyíí<unk> dooleeł .
PRED:	Look at my face , and I will hide my face from those who hate me , and I will set my way in your ways .
GOLD:	Turn my eyes from worthless things , and give me life through your word .

ID:	3732
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , kin bii' sohodizin t'áá bee hódahólníih doo , índa ákwe'é naanish nidaat'i'ígíí t'áá ałtso baa nidajikai doo , índa wóne'é naanish danilíinii éí t'áá ałtso baa nidajikai doo .
PRED:	But they will rule over all the work of the temple , and they will do all the work that are in this place .
GOLD:	They are to serve as the Temple caretakers , taking charge of the maintenance work and performing general duties .

ID:	3733
INPUT:	Áádóó dé'éyóní nílį́įgo kéyah biyi' kééhót'ínígíí naa dideesh'ááł ; Kéínan kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áádóó na'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii hool'áágóó daabíí' dooleeł , áádóó biDiyin God nishłį́į doo .
PRED:	And I will give you a stranger who lives in the land of Canaan , and all the land of Canaan , and their seed for ever , and I will be their God .
GOLD:	And I will give the entire land of Canaan , where you now live as a foreigner , to you and your descendants . It will be their possession forever , and I will be their God . ”

ID:	3734
INPUT:	K'idoolyáago íí'áhígi tooh binázlį́ , áádóó éí tó bits'ádaazlį́įgo binaagóó tsin yíl'áhígíí t'áá ałtso da'adlą́ , áko éí gad íí'áhígíí t'óó ahayóí tó baa nílį́ , áádóó éí tóhígíí yee wót'ááh níísą́ .
PRED:	When he came to the river , they drink all the trees of the waters , and all the trees of the waters were covered with water , and the waters was filled with water .
GOLD:	Deep springs watered itand helped it to grow tall and luxuriant.The water flowed around it like a river , streaming to all the trees nearby .

ID:	3735
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Peter , ándishní , díí tł'éé' naa'ahóóhai biką'í t'áadoo ániihí táadi doo hwééhasin da shididííniił .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I say to you , ‘ I tell you this day , you will not know me three times . '
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ Peter , let me tell you something . Before the rooster crows tomorrow morning , you will deny three times that you even know me . ”

ID:	3736
INPUT:	Áko dadzitsaahígíí yiyíínii'go , t'áá ákwii naagháago naaki náánéíską́ .
PRED:	And when he heard that there was a great death , he built two days there .
GOLD:	he stayed where he was for the next two days .

ID:	3737
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalem góne' ajííyáago t'áá át'éé nít'éé' hahodíídláád , Díishą' háí át'į́ , ha'níigo .
PRED:	When he went into Jerusalem , he said , “ Who is this ? ”
GOLD:	The entire city of Jerusalem was in an uproar as he entered . “ Who is this ? ” they asked .

ID:	3738
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Solomon 's Agreement with Hiram

ID:	3739
INPUT:	Tł'iish bik'aasda' nahalingo hwe'ánít'į́į́h dahólǫ́ . Tł'iish jé'áhodilkałii nidahojílin .
PRED:	Their eyes are like the voice of the mouth of the tongue ; they are like the voice of the mouth of the mouth .
GOLD:	They spit venom like deadly snakes ; they are like cobras that refuse to listen ,

ID:	3740
INPUT:	Éí bíighah góne' Símiyan dine'é niná'néeh doo ; Zúrishádai biye' Shiilúmiyel éí Símiyan dine'é yinanit'a'í nilį́ .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass on the day of the tribe of Simeon , the prince of the tribe of Simeon , the prince of the tribe of Simeon .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	3741
INPUT:	Tsé yóó'adahaltł'iid baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó tsé áłah ál'į́ baa hwiilzhíísh ; ałzéé' ásnii' baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó doo ałzéé' ásnii' da baa hwiilzhíísh .
PRED:	A time to cast down the stone , and a time to be gathered , and a time to open , and a time to rest .
GOLD:	A time to scatter stones and a time to gather stones.A time to embrace and a time to turn away .

ID:	3742
INPUT:	Mó'ab kéyahgi kéédahoht'íinii kin hadaas'áádóó hah wohkáahgo tséníí'góó kéédahoht'į́ áádóó hasbídí a'áándáa'gi bit'oh áyiił'įįhígi át'éego ída'dołnééh .
PRED:	Go out of the cities of Moab , and dwell in the midst of the field , as a field in the field .
GOLD:	“ You people of Moab , flee from your towns and live in the caves.Hide like doves that nestin the clefts of the rocks .

ID:	3743
INPUT:	Áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́į́'dóó biiskání damį́įgo aleeh góne' naaniiníłką́ągo , Mary Mágdaliin áádóó Mary ła'ígíí tséní'ootséelgo Jesus yóó'ályaadi jidínóoł'įįł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ jiní'áázh .
PRED:	On the first day of the Sabbath , on the first day of the Sabbath , Mary , and Mary , went to see the tomb .
GOLD:	Early on Sunday morning , as the new day was dawning , Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went out to visit the tomb .

ID:	3744
INPUT:	Éí t'áadoo baa nídaaht'íní ; doo da'oo'į́į́góó nida'a'eeshígíí ádaat'į́ . Áko diné doo oo'íinii náánáła' diné doo oo'íinii yoolóosgo , t'áá áłah a'ą́dínóodah .
PRED:	Do n't be sure that you are blind . If you do n't see a blind man , you will not find a blind man who is blind .
GOLD:	so ignore them . They are blind guides leading the blind , and if one blind person guides another , they will both fall into a ditch . ”

ID:	3745
INPUT:	Áko bidee' neeznáá yadaa'áhígíí bee óhólnííh bił haz'áanii bii'dóó éí aláahgo naat'áanii neeznált'éego nídahidiikáhígíí át'é . Díí bikéédę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii nínáádidoodáałgo neeznált'éhígíí doo yił aheełt'ée da dooleełgo éí aláahgo naat'áanii tált'éhígíí yik'eh didoodleeł .
PRED:	And the ten horns of the kingdom shall be the ten kings : this shall not be like ten kings that come from the beginning of the king 's house .
GOLD:	Its ten horns are ten kings who will rule that empire . Then another king will arise , different from the other ten , who will subdue three of them .

ID:	3746
INPUT:	Ádaa ádahołyą́ągo t'ááká didlidgo nááhániihii t'áá áhoodzaagi náádahołniih lágo .
PRED:	Take heed , and do not offer as a burnt offering .
GOLD:	Be careful not to sacrifice your burnt offerings just anywhere you like .

ID:	3747
INPUT:	Mt . 3 : 1-12
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The First Disciples

ID:	3748
INPUT:	Diné hóyáanii íists'ą́ą' doo , áádóó náásgóó óhooł'aah doo ; diné bił ééhózinii hódzą́ągo yáti' t'éí hát'į́į doo ,
PRED:	A wise man shall hear , and teach wisdom : and a man shall speak knowledge .
GOLD:	Let the wise listen to these proverbs and become even wiser.Let those with understanding receive guidance

ID:	3749
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí Jésii áyidííniid , Na'áłchíníísh t'áá ałtso kwe'é ? Áko ázhdííniid , Akéédę́'ígíí t'éiyá t'ah doo yígháah da ; éí dibé yaa áhályą́ . Áádóó Sámuel éí Jésii ánéidoo'niid , Ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ díł'áago áádę́ę́' doogááł , háálá doo díníibįįł da , jiníyáago índa .
PRED:	Samuel said to Jesse , “ Are all your children here ? ” And he said , “ The last is not the last . ” And Samuel said to Jesse , “ Come , and you will not come . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel asked , “ Are these all the sons you have ? ” “ There is still the youngest , ” Jesse replied . “ But he 's out in the fields watching the sheep and goats. ” “ Send for him at once , ” Samuel said . “ We will not sit down to eat until he arrives . ”

ID:	3750
INPUT:	Éí bąą ashja'ósingo haa'íshą' diné t'áá ałtso baa dajiiniiba'go nizhónígo bindeiilnish doo , Christ dayoodlání danilíinii íiyisí agháago bindeiilnish doo .
PRED:	So let us do what we want to do to all people , so that we may do the same work of Christ .
GOLD:	Therefore , whenever we have the opportunity , we should do good to everyone — especially to those in the family of faith .

ID:	3751
INPUT:	Áko hadáahgi t'áá nidaho'diizhchínígi át'éego dah deidineesbin , áko diné ałch'į' yik'ee t'óó bił adahayóí .
PRED:	And the people sat before him as they were born , and the people were amazed at him .
GOLD:	Joseph told each of his brothers where to sit , and to their amazement , he seated them according to age , from oldest to youngest .

ID:	3752
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , dízdiin nááhaijį' honoojíidi didlidgo náádahaniihígíí áádóó náádahaniihiísh shich'į' náádahołniih nít'éé' ?
PRED:	For forty years , Israel , did you offer burnt offering and burnt offering in the wilderness ?
GOLD:	“ Was it to me you were bringing sacrifices and offerings during the forty years in the wilderness , Israel ?

ID:	3753
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí dahaníbaal ninádaji'nił doo ; diné t'ááłá'í nízínígo t'áá hó haníbaal ninát'áahgi , t'áá hó hadah na'at'a'í bíighahgi ninádaji'néeh doo .
PRED:	And the children of Israel shall set their tents at their tents , each man shall stand near his own tent .
GOLD:	Each tribe of Israel will camp in a designated area with its own family banner .

ID:	3754
INPUT:	Áádóó níbaal bii' dahozdísinii índa bikáá' náá'iiniihí bita'gi bii' tá'ádígisí niiní'ą́ągo tó bee tá'ádazdigis dooleełígíí niiníką́ .
PRED:	And he put the water between the tabernacle of meeting and the altar , and the water that were between the altar , that they may wash water .
GOLD:	Next Moses placed the washbasin between the Tabernacle and the altar . He filled it with water so the priests could wash themselves .

ID:	3755
INPUT:	Shidine'é Ízrel bitahgi éí shízhi' diyinii bééhózingo ádeeshłííł , áádóó shízhi' diyinii doo ílį́į́góó ts'ídá doo bee hanáá'doodzih da , áko índa Ízrel dine'é bitahgi Bóhólníihii Diyinii nishłį́įgo ał'ąą dine'é bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And I will make my name known among my people Israel , and they shall know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	“ In this way , I will make known my holy name among my people of Israel . I will not let anyone bring shame on it . And the nations , too , will know that I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	3756
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí Jériko kin haal'áádóó Éí'ai kin haal'áajį' diné ła' dah dahizhdiił'a' ; Éí'ai éí Beth<unk> kin shijaa' bíighahgi Béthel ha'a'aahjígo kin haal'áhígóó dazdees'a'go ábizhdííniid , Nihílááh , kéyah hadaahsííd . Áko éí diné naalchi'í danilį́įgo Éí'aigóó eekaigo hada'íísid .
PRED:	So Joshua sent some men from Jericho to Ai . He sent them to Ai at Bethel . He said to them , “ Go and see the land , and see it . ” So they went to Ai .
GOLD:	Joshua sent some of his men from Jericho to spy out the town of Ai , east of Bethel , near Beth-aven .

ID:	3757
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáłígíí adayiiską́ą́dóó bik'ijį'díí bee aha'deet'ą́ nilíinii Ízrel dine'é bee bił ahadadi'deesht'ááł , ní Bóhólníihii : Bee hoséł'áanii bintsíkees biih dadeeshłééłáádóó dabijéí biyi'di bee bik'eda'deeshchííł . BiDiyin God nishłį́į doo , áádóó bí shidine'é danilį́į doo .
PRED:	After that time I will make a covenant with the children of Israel , says the Lord : I will put them in their hearts , and they will be their God , and they will be my people .
GOLD:	But this is the new covenant I will makewith the people of Israel on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their minds , and I will write them on their hearts.I will be their God , and they will be my people .

ID:	3758
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ą́ą́dóó diyin dabidi'níinii áádóó e'elyaii ch'íyiizhjaa' . Índa dziłgi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígi áádóó Jerúsalemgi bikáá' nááda'iiniihí ádayiilaii t'áá át'é kin haal'áádóó ch'íyiizyį́ .
PRED:	And he brought them out of the house of the Lord , and the image of the god , and the image of the Lord ; and he brought them out of the mountain of the Lord , and all the altars that he had built in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Manasseh also removed the foreign gods and the idol from the Lord 's Temple . He tore down all the altars he had built on the hill where the Temple stood and all the altars that were in Jerusalem , and he dumped them outside the city .

ID:	3759
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso bił k'é da'ahidoh'níi dooleełígíí , áádóó diyingo dahinohnáa dooleełígíí bidadoołkaal . T'áá háiida doo ákójít'į́į́góó éí Bóhólníihii doo yizdoołtséeł da .
PRED:	You will say , ‘ The Lord will not see what is right . '
GOLD:	Work at living in peace with everyone , and work at living a holy life , for those who are not holy will not see the Lord .

ID:	3760
INPUT:	Áko tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł o'oolkaalígi t'áá éí nahós'a'gi tsin bił dah náháltso , áko ákwe'é ániidígo tséní'ootséelgo ts'ídá t'ah doo áajį' diné ła' yóó'álnéeh da .
PRED:	And the cross was crucified with him , and there was no man there .
GOLD:	The place of crucifixion was near a garden , where there was a new tomb , never used before .

ID:	3761
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee ajooba' t'áá íiyisí nihilááh neel'ą́ągo nihee dahólónígíí bąą , nihídin danilį́ índa nihá sodadilzin .
PRED:	For we have the grace of God , which we have , and pray for us .
GOLD:	And they will pray for you with deep affection because of the overflowing grace God has given to you .

ID:	3762
INPUT:	Díí k'ad hoolzhishígíí biyi' t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo ííshją́ą́ í'dólzin dishní , háálá ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo bééhózin áádóó t'áá háiida Jesus joodlą́ągo beijólíhígíí ádił ni'dziisíi'ii há yóó'iidiiz'ą́ągo , k'ad t'áá ákogi ádajít'é hałníigo há haadzíi'go bééhózin .
PRED:	Now I say to you in this time , because he knows that he is righteous , and he that believes in him shall be forgiven .
GOLD:	for he was looking ahead and including them in what he would do in this present time . God did this to demonstrate his righteousness , for he himself is fair and just , and he makes sinners right in his sight when they believe in Jesus .

ID:	3763
INPUT:	Héínan ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Gídel ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Géíhar ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	the sons of Ammon , the sons of Merari , the sons of Merari ,
GOLD:	Hanan , Giddel , Gahar ,

ID:	3764
INPUT:	T'áá honoojíidi Mózes éí tł'iish dah hizhdiiłt'e' yę́ęgi át'éego , Diné Silį́į'ii dah hididoolt'eeł ,
PRED:	As Moses did in the wilderness , so the Son of Man will be taken away from you .
GOLD:	And as Moses lifted up the bronze snake on a pole in the wilderness , so the Son of Man must be lifted up ,

ID:	3765
INPUT:	Díí Ízrel ba'áłchíní Ííjip kéyahdi nínánígíí dabízhi' ; Jéíkab áádóó biye'ké : Jéíkab há alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí Rúben wolyé ,
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Israel who were born in Egypt : Jacob , Jacob 's firstborn , the firstborn of Jacob ,
GOLD:	These are the names of the descendants of Israel — the sons of Jacob — who went to Egypt : Reuben was Jacob 's oldest son .

ID:	3766
INPUT:	Haadzihgo wót'áahdi t'óó ahayóí tó yileeh ; nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' siil dego dah nída'diijołgo ánáyiil'įįh . Nahałtingo atsiniltł'ish t'áá bił anídahata'go ánáyiil'įįh . Binaalye'é bitahdę́ę́' níyolgo ánáyiil'įįh .
PRED:	He brings rain to the sky ; He makes the rain of the earth rain ; He makes the rain to rain , and send rain to the lightning , and send them out of his hand .
GOLD:	When he speaks in the thunder , the heavens roar with rain.He causes the clouds to rise over the earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	3767
INPUT:	Áko hodi'yoolyéełgo bee honahast'ánígíí bee shił hóóne'go , t'áá áko akǫ́ǫ́ nich'į' ahóół'a' , áko hak'i dahodii'aahii yee hak'i dahodii'áanii t'áá ninááł yee hadahidoodzih dishníigo bee haasdzíí' . [ K'adí , t'áá ákót'éhí dooleeł . ]
PRED:	And he told me , and he sent me , and I sent him to you . And I said to you , “ Now I have told you all the laws that I have commanded you , and it will be well . ”
GOLD:	But when I was informed of a plot to kill him , I immediately sent him on to you . I have told his accusers to bring their charges before you . ”

ID:	3768
INPUT:	Łinishzhíínígo biniinaa t'áadoo dashinół'íní , háálá jį́honaa'éí shiishį́į́' . Shimá biyáázhké shich'į' bá nídahachįįhgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áii baa áháshyą́ągo ádashiilaa . Nidi t'áá shí shich'il na'atł'o'ii doo baa áháshyą́ą da nít'éé' .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of me because I am afraid of the sun , because they have given me the vineyard of my mother 's sons . But I would not keep my vineyard .
GOLD:	Do n't stare at me because I am dark — the sun has darkened my skin.My brothers were angry with me ; they forced me to care for their vineyards , so I could n't care for myself — my own vineyard .

ID:	3769
INPUT:	Díí bił síníkéego t'ááłáhídi damóo adooleeł , áádóó índa ła'ígíí naa náádadiiltééł ; éí bik'é shá nanilnishgo tsosts'id nínáádoohah .
PRED:	And these shall be one hour , and the other shall be for thee ; and the other shall be for me for seven years .
GOLD:	“ But wait until the bridal week is over ; then we 'll give you Rachel , too — provided you promise to work another seven years for me . ”

ID:	3770
INPUT:	<unk> ni'įįhii ts'ídá doo náázhdí'nóo'į́įł da , nidi hanaanish ílį́įgo joołt'ihgo éí bee badahojoobá'íígíí baa jijooba' doo .
PRED:	The thief shall not steal ; but he shall have mercy on the poor .
GOLD:	If you are a thief , quit stealing . Instead , use your hands for good hard work , and then give generously to others in need .

ID:	3771
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'idi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́į́'dóó biiłkáhíjį' ashdladiin jį́ azlį́į'go deínółta' doo , áko náádadi'yoołnihgo náánáła' ak'áán nááhániihii éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the seventh day of the Sabbath , you shall offer a grain offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Keep counting until the day after the seventh Sabbath , fifty days later . Then present an offering of new grain to the Lord .

ID:	3772
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Heziikáíyah yidiizts'ą́ą'go diné nídayííłdzíí' .
PRED:	And the Lord listened to Hezekiah , and the people said ,
GOLD:	And the Lord listened to Hezekiah 's prayer and healed the people .

ID:	3773
INPUT:	Yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo kéyah ahádaasdzo
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	The Tribe of Reuben

ID:	3774
INPUT:	Áádóó doo adą́ą da daaníigo yee dahooł'a'go Néíbath éí diné bitahdóó alą́ąjį' dah deineesdá .
PRED:	And when they had not eaten , they said , Naboth was among the people .
GOLD:	They called for a fast and put Naboth at a prominent place before the people .

ID:	3775
INPUT:	Éí ha'át'íí shį́į́ t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ yiizį' , nidi ga' ch'ééh bééhonisįįh ; t'áadoo bahat'aadí kǫ́ǫ́ shidááhgóó sizį́ , nidi ga' doo íits'a'í da , áko ła' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní ,
PRED:	He stood there , but he could not know , but he could not stand before me , but a voice answered ,
GOLD:	The spirit stopped , but I could n't see its shape.There was a form before my eyes.In the silence I heard a voice say ,

ID:	3776
INPUT:	Abáíjah bits'ą́ą́dóó Zíkrai , Mowadáíyah áádóó Mínyamin bits'ą́ą́dóó Píltai ,
PRED:	And of Abijah , Abijah , and Abishai , and upon the rest of them :
GOLD:	Zicri was leader of the family of Abijah.There was also a leader of the family of Miniamin.Piltai was leader of the family of Moadiah .

ID:	3777
INPUT:	Áko biye'ké danilíinii anaa' dahodoohłeeł biniyé siláo t'óó ahayóí áłah ádeidoolííł ; ła' éí t'áá yilááh neel'ą́ągo náás oo'ishgo yinéełgo bidziilgo bił haz'áanii yik'ijį' anaa' ánááhodoodlííł .
PRED:	And the sons of Israel shall gather together a great army , and they shall bring them forth , and they shall go forth , and they shall fight against the law .
GOLD:	However , the sons of the king of the north will assemble a mighty army that will advance like a flood and carry the battle as far as the enemy 's fortress .

ID:	3778
INPUT:	Hach'é'é éí tábąąhdi nidaakaii diltłish bee nidabi'didootsił , áko Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	Your daughter shall fall by the sword , and they shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	and its mainland villages will be destroyed by the sword . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	3779
INPUT:	Máíyamin , Meiyadáíyah , Bílgah ,
PRED:	Benjamin , Hananiah , Hananiah ,
GOLD:	Miniamin , Moadiah , Bilgah ,

ID:	3780
INPUT:	Tł'oh łitsooí háánít'į́hígíí nahalingo diné doo yá'ádaashóonii k'ee'ąą dínít'į́įhgo , áádóó diné doo ákwii ádaaníiłii k'ee'ąą dilzhishgo , éí hool'áágóó ábidi'dooldįįłgo át'é .
PRED:	I have sent the wicked away like grass , and the wicked will be destroyed forever .
GOLD:	Though the wicked sprout like weedsand evildoers flourish , they will be destroyed forever .

ID:	3781
INPUT:	Nits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' adinídíinii índa nit'áá aaníinii bee i'díłdlaadgo bíni'dii shiyoołááł ; nidiyingo dah yisk'idgi kééhót'į́įjį' bíni'dii shił iikááh .
PRED:	Let this be a light and truth ; let me go down to the holy mountain .
GOLD:	Send out your light and your truth ; let them guide me.Let them lead me to your holy mountain , to the place where you live .

ID:	3782
INPUT:	béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh , índa łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo éí shékel wolyéii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh ; béésh łigaii łeets'aa' t'áá át'é ahídawóltą'go éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii naakidi mííldóó ba'aan dį́įdi neeznádiin dah hidiidloh .
PRED:	The silver was one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , and one hundred shekels of silver , and one shekels of silver ; all the vessels of silver was twenty shekels of silver , two hundred shekels of silver .
GOLD:	Each silver platter weighed 31/4 pounds , and each silver basin weighed 13/4 pounds . The total weight of the silver was 60 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) .

ID:	3783
INPUT:	doo da'oo'íinii t'áá aaníí yish'ish índa chahałheeł yii' dayíkáhígíí bá adinídíín nishłį́ nínízin .
PRED:	I am the light of the blind , and the light of darkness .
GOLD:	You are convinced that you are a guide for the blind and a light for people who are lost in darkness .

ID:	3784
INPUT:	Ákohgo Heziikáíyah áhodííniidgo ání , K'ad Bóhólníihii bich'į' diyingo ats'ánída'asidoht'ą́ ; áyídíjį' ninohkáahgo nááhidoonihii áádóó ahééh hasinjí nááhániihii áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah adaahjááh . Áko áłah nilínígíí éí didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ahééh hasinjí nááhániihii nidayiizhjaa' índa t'áá bí ádeinízinígíí didlidgo nááhániihii nidayiizhjaa' .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to them , “ Now you are holy to the Lord . Go and offer sacrifices , burnt offering , burnt offering , burnt offering , burnt offering , burnt offering , and burnt offering . ” So they brought the burnt offering and burnt offering .
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah declared , “ Now that you have consecrated yourselves to the Lord , bring your sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings to the Temple of the Lord. ” So the people brought their sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings , and all whose hearts were willing brought burnt offerings , too .

ID:	3785
INPUT:	Jesus Christ bi'dizhchį́
PRED:	The Death of Jesus Christ
GOLD:	The Birth of Jesus

ID:	3786
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihaa bił hózhǫ́ǫgo díí kéyah nihaididoo'áałgo yiih nihidoo'ish ; éí kéyah yá'áhoot'éehgi abe' índa tsés'ná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįdgo haz'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord will give you this land with joy , and he will give you this land full of honey and honey .
GOLD:	And if the Lord is pleased with us , he will bring us safely into that land and give it to us . It is a rich land flowing with milk and honey .

ID:	3787
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Líívai t'áá bí bighangi ayóó át'éego Jesus yá áda'íísįįd , áádóó ákwii tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii índa binaadę́ę́' danilíinii t'óó ahayóí yił da'ayą́ągo nidaháaztą́ .
PRED:	And he made a great feast in his own house , and they sat with him , and they sat with him , and with them that were in the house of Levi .
GOLD:	Later , Levi held a banquet in his home with Jesus as the guest of honor . Many of Levi 's fellow tax collectors and other guests also ate with them .

ID:	3788
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Diyin God yá halne'ii t'áá aaníí Diyin God yá halne'ii nilínígíí bąą bich'į' k'éznídzingo , éí Diyin God yá halne'ii baa doolyéełii haa doolyééł , áádóó t'áá háiida diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii t'áá aaníí t'áá éí nilínígíí bąą bich'į' k'éznídzingo , éí diné ts'ídá t'áá ákwii át'éii baa doolyéełii haa doolyééł .
PRED:	“ If anyone causes a prophet a prophet , he will be given to a prophet , and whoever does what is right will be given to him .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	3789
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' hadziilgo ázhdiilyaago , tsé bee ahéé'ítł'in nideiniiskaadii t'áá át'é hasht'ééjiidlaa , áádóó éí bikáá'dóó yada'iitł'ingo bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí ájiilaa , áádóó tł'óó'dę́ę́' tsé ła' ahéénínáánástł'in , índa David bikin haal'áagi Míllo hoolyéii hasht'ééjiidlaa áádóó bee na'abaahii índa naagé t'óó ahayóigo ádajiilaa .
PRED:	And he built up his strong wall , and built all the walls of the wall , and built up the walls of the wall , and built up another wall , and built it in the wall of David , and in the city of David .
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah worked hard at repairing all the broken sections of the wall , erecting towers , and constructing a second wall outside the first . He also reinforced the supporting terraces in the City of David and manufactured large numbers of weapons and shields .

ID:	3790
INPUT:	Índa ashdla' yiłkaah bijį́ dóola yázhí náhást'éigo , deenásts'aa' naakigo índa dibé yázhí dį́į́'ts'áadahgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	On the fifth day you shall offer two bulls , two rams , fourteen male lambs a year old .
GOLD:	“ On the fifth day of the festival , sacrifice nine young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	3791
INPUT:	Nizháá'áád doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da ; éí niye' be'asdzą́ą́ nilį́ ; éí t'ááká t'áá łichí'ígo áwóólééh lágo .
PRED:	You shall not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law , your son 's wife ; you shall not have sexual relations with her .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law ; she is your son 's wife , so you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	3792
INPUT:	Áko kin biyi'dę́ę́' dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' tsé bik'ijį' nideiskaadgo ahééhool'á ; ni'dóó dego tsé bik'ijį' ádayiilaa , índa sáípres wolyéii tsin dantł'izii tsin neheeshjíí' ályaago ni'góó nideiskaad .
PRED:	And he cut it out of the house of his brother 's house , and covered it with wood ; and he covered it with wood , and cedar wood .
GOLD:	The entire inside , from floor to ceiling , was paneled with wood . He paneled the walls and ceilings with cedar , and he used planks of cypress for the floors .

ID:	3793
INPUT:	Ákohgo diyingo naal'a'í shich'į' yáłti'ii ábidishní , Shibóhólníihii , díishą' ha'át'íí ádaat'é ?
PRED:	Then I said to the angel who spoke to me , “ Lord , what are these ? ”
GOLD:	Then I asked the angel , “ What are these , my lord ? What do they mean ? ”

ID:	3794
INPUT:	Háálá shí Bóhólníihii doo haada yit'éii ayóó'óósh'ní ; ani'į́į́' doo yá'áshóonii bił jooshłxá ; t'áá aaníí , bich'į' nida'diyeeshłeeł índa hool'áágóó bił ahada'dideesht'ááł .
PRED:	For I love the Lord ; I hate evil , and I hate evil ; yea , I will make a covenant with them for ever .
GOLD:	“ For I , the Lord , love justice.I hate robbery and wrongdoing.I will faithfully reward my people for their sufferingand make an everlasting covenant with them .

ID:	3795
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá shí shíla' bee nitsaago nihich'į' ak'e'ashchíhígíí baa ákodanoohsįįh !
PRED:	For ye know that my hand is written to you , that ye may know that it is written to you .
GOLD:	Notice what large letters I use as I write these closing words in my own handwriting .

ID:	3796
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Doo haada yit'éii baa áhólyą́ áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii baa naniná , háálá shibee yisdá'iildéehii k'adę́ę baa hoolzhíísh , índa shit'áá ákogi át'éii yit'íní ádoolnííł .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Be careful to do what is right , for my salvation is near , and my righteousness will come to pass .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Be just and fair to all.Do what is right and good , for I am coming soon to rescue youand to display my righteousness among you .

ID:	3797
INPUT:	Siláo ła' dah yinééł t'áadoo hooyání béíní'eezhgo dabighandóó bíni'dii chaháá'áago diits'a' , háálá dashidiyoołhééł biniyé a'áán ádahoolaa , áádóó łoh biih dideeshtał biniyé shá nideiznil .
PRED:	When the soldiers had brought him out of the camp , let them hear the voice of their house , for they have laid a net for me , and set my feet in the pit .
GOLD:	Let screaming be heard from their homesas warriors come suddenly upon them.For they have dug a pit for meand have hidden traps along my path .

ID:	3798
INPUT:	Áádóó Ádam éí bízhi' ádajiilaii alį́į́' t'áá ałtso áádóó nidaat'a'ii índa nihokáá'góó naaldeehii t'áá ałtso bízhi' hólǫ́ǫgo ájiilaa , nidi Ádam t'áá ákónéehee háká análwo' dooleełii t'ah doo há álnéeh da .
PRED:	And Adam made the name of all his cattle , and all the beasts of the earth , and all the beasts of the earth , but there was no help to help them .
GOLD:	He gave names to all the livestock , all the birds of the sky , and all the wild animals . But still there was no helper just right for him .

ID:	3799
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí díí dine'é kéyah biih nihideesh'ish yiłníigo , yich'į' ádee hadoodzíi'ii doo yínéés'ąądgóó , éí bąą honoojíigi neistseed .
PRED:	The Lord swore to this people , saying , “ I will bring you into this land , ” So he killed them in the wilderness .
GOLD:	‘ The Lord was not able to bring them into the land he swore to give them , so he killed them in the wilderness . '

ID:	3800
INPUT:	K'é ha'níinii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Greetings from Paul

ID:	3801
INPUT:	Bitsi' átséhígíí Jiimáíma yee yiyíízhi' , naaki góne'ígíí éí Kezáíya yee yiyíízhi' áádóó táá' góne'ígíí éí <unk> yee yiyíízhi' .
PRED:	The name of Naomi 's daughter was Naomi , and the name of his name was called Edom , and he set a third .
GOLD:	He named his first daughter Jemimah , the second Keziah , and the third Keren-happuch .

ID:	3802
INPUT:	Mózes éí Éran bił dashdii'áazhgo Féro baazhní'áázh , áko Bóhólníihii t'áá hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bi'jiilaa , áko Éran bigish éí Féro áádóó bá nidaal'a'í biyaajį' ayííłt'e'go tł'iish silį́į́' .
PRED:	So Moses took Aaron and brought him to Pharaoh , and he did as the Lord had commanded him . Aaron and his servants were cut down before Pharaoh and his servants .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did what the Lord had commanded them . Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his officials , and it became a serpent !

ID:	3803
INPUT:	Shoo , díí éí Diyin God át'éii t'įįhdígo yee' daah'į́ ; t'įįhdígo yee' baa dahodoohts'a' . Nidi bibee adziilii bee ii'ni' diits'a'ígíísh háí yik'idi'dootį́į́ł ?
PRED:	Behold , this is a great God , and ye hear ; but who shall understand the voice of his power ?
GOLD:	These are just the beginning of all that he does , merely a whisper of his power.Who , then , can comprehend the thunder of his power ? ”

ID:	3804
INPUT:	Áko Dził Hor si'ánídóó dah náádii'náago Zalmónah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out from Mount Sinai , and camped at Gibeon .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Israelites left Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah .

ID:	3805
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áá shí gad yaa'áhígíí bílátahdóó ła' k'ídeeshtihgo k'idideeshłééł ; bílátahdi ániid náádeitsooígíí éí ła' k'ídeeshtihgo dził agháá'áhígíí bighą́ą'gi k'idideeshłééł ;
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord God : I will cut off a tree from the tree , and I will cut it in the midst of the forest , and I will give it to the mountains , and I will plant it on the mountain .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will take a branch from the top of a tall cedar , and I will plant it on the top of Israel 's highest mountain .

ID:	3806
INPUT:	Kédiimath kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił índa Méfeiyath kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił ; éí dį́į'go kin hadaas'áii Miirárai dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	and Hamath with its suburbs , and with its pasture lands ; four cities .
GOLD:	Kedemoth , and Mephaath — four towns .

ID:	3807
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii beidoołkáłígíí t'áá íídą́ą́' nádzá , daaníigo t'áá ádzaagóó nihił dahalne'ígíí t'áadoo bik'ee ch'į́į́góó nitsídanohkeesí , t'áadoo bik'ee ádił nídahodoołchiłí . Jó , diné ła' , Shich'į' yit'íní ályaa , doodaii' , Kót'éego shił hóóne' , doodaii' , Paul áádóó yił naakaígíí naaltsoos ádayiilaii kóní , nínígíí éí t'áadoo t'áá aaníí ání danohsiní .
PRED:	And when the day of the Lord came , ye shall not be afraid of the prophets , saying , Behold , there is no one that hath been revealed to me , or to any man , or to me , or to him that made with me , or to the princes of Paul .
GOLD:	Do n't be so easily shaken or alarmed by those who say that the day of the Lord has already begun . Do n't believe them , even if they claim to have had a spiritual vision , a revelation , or a letter supposedly from us .

ID:	3808
INPUT:	Ts'íigo , ts'íigo , daaníinii bíni'dii t'óó baa yáhásinii bee k'éédabi'dólne' !
PRED:	Let those who say , “ Let them be ashamed ! ”
GOLD:	Let them be horrified by their shame , for they said , “ Aha ! We 've got him now ! ”

ID:	3809
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę biBóhólníihii Diyin God baa ha'niih le' ; éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin t'áadoo bee nóoshónígóó ádoolnííł biniyé aláahgo naat'áanii kót'éego bijéí yee tsíideeskééz .
PRED:	Blessed be the Lord , our ancestors , the God of our ancestors , that the heart of the Lord might not make it known to the king in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of our ancestors , who made the king want to beautify the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem !

ID:	3810
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí nihiníbaal haal'áhígi nihitahgi hólǫ́ , áko yisdánihiinííł áádóó nihi'ana'í nihílák'ee yidii'aah ; éí bąą nihiníbaal haal'áagi hodiyin dooleeł , áko doo yá'áshóonii doo ła' nihitahgi yiidoołtséeł da , áádóó doo nihits'ą́ą́' dah hodidooleeł da .
PRED:	For the Lord our God is among you in the camp , and deliver us into your hand , and deliver us into the hand of our enemies ; therefore there shall be no evil among you .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	3811
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí hał yee nínáhodiiłhał bik'eh ásaa' yilghaałígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii nídiits'į́įh doo índa bigaan yiłmazgo anaa' ííł'į́į doo .
PRED:	And the Lord shall hear the sound of the rod , and the sound of the trumpet , and the sound of the harp , and the sound of the trumpet .
GOLD:	And as the Lord strikes them with his rod of punishment , his people will celebrate with tambourines and harps.Lifting his mighty arm , he will fight the Assyrians .

ID:	3812
INPUT:	Tseebíí yiską́ąjį' diné dabighangóó yéé'iisnii' , áko aláahgo naat'áanii yá'át'éehii yee yá hadaasdzíí' índa Bóhólníihii éí yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é bá naal'a'í David yę́ę áádóó bidine'é Ízrel yá yaa naayáhígíí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo índa bijéí bił nidahoozhǫǫhgo dabiníbaalgóó anídahaaskai .
PRED:	On the eighth day they remembered the king 's house , and the Lord had spoken good things to David his servant , and all the good things that the Lord had done to David his servant David his servant , and they went into their tents .
GOLD:	After the festival was over , Solomon sent the people home . They blessed the king and went to their homes joyful and glad because the Lord had been good to his servant David and to his people Israel .

ID:	3813
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3814
INPUT:	Áádóó nihíká adoojahii éí dine'é danilíinii dabizhé'é yę́ę bits'ą́ą́dóó náás ahoolchíiłii aląąjį' naazínígíí łá'í nítínígo
PRED:	And he will help you , the elders of their fathers , every man of his fathers ,
GOLD:	and you will be assisted by one family leader from each tribe .

ID:	3815
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá biniyé ał'ąą dine'é ádá nídahojilchįįh , índa dadine'é éí t'áadoo biniyéhígóó nidahoji'á ?
PRED:	Why do the nations think about them ? Why do the nations become angry ?
GOLD:	Why are the nations so angry ? Why do they waste their time with futile plans ?

ID:	3816
INPUT:	Níshgaígíí biniinaa doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Dinishniihígíí bik'ee atínídinishdleeh , áádóó ádííniid , T'áá aaníí , díí bik'ee yínííł nishłį́ , nidi ts'ídá bich'į' ha'ííníshníi doo .
PRED:	“ Woe to me because of the plague ! ” He said , “ I will weep , but I will cry to you . ”
GOLD:	My wound is severe , and my grief is great.My sickness is incurable , but I must bear it .

ID:	3817
INPUT:	Ayóó'ánósh'níinii nílíinii , bee shił honíshónígíí éí bee dooládó' nízhónígo ayóó áníínílnin da .
PRED:	My dear love , how beautiful is your ways , my love ?
GOLD:	Oh , how beautiful you are ! How pleasing , my love , how full of delights !

ID:	3818
INPUT:	Dził Lébanan hoolyéii bitsin yíl'áhígíí ałtso adidoolk'ą́łígíí , doodaii' binaaldlooshii didlidgo náádahidoonihígíí bi'oh daneel'ą́ .
PRED:	And the fire of Lebanon shall burn up the fire of Lebanon , or the beasts of the beasts of the beasts of the field .
GOLD:	All the wood in Lebanon 's forestsand all Lebanon 's animals would not be enoughto make a burnt offering worthy of our God .

ID:	3819
INPUT:	Áko jineezdáago naakits'áadahígíí hágo bizhdííniidgo ábijiní , Diné t'áá háiida ła' alą́ąjį' na'ázhdiiltéego éí akéédę́ę́' jílį́į doo , áádóó t'áá ałtso binaal'a'í jílį́į doo .
PRED:	And he called the twelve , and said unto them , If anyone is before him , he shall be one of them , and he shall be his servant .
GOLD:	He sat down , called the twelve disciples over to him , and said , “ Whoever wants to be first must take last place and be the servant of everyone else . ”

ID:	3820
INPUT:	<unk> . 2 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Leaders Buried in the Promised Land

ID:	3821
INPUT:	Nidi dah daask'idgóó kin hadaas'áii éí Ízrel dine'é t'áadoo adeideesk'ą́ą' da ; t'áá hazhó'ó Héízor kin haal'áii t'éiyá éí Jáshowa iidííłk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the cities of Israel struck down by the edge of the sword , but Joshua destroyed the city .
GOLD:	But the Israelites did not burn any of the towns built on mounds except Hazor , which Joshua burned .

ID:	3822
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ aleeh góne' aláahgo naat'áanii wáin bił honiiłdoigo bijéí bił nihoozhǫǫhgo díí yee haadzíí' : Miihóman , <unk> ha , <unk> na , Bígtha , A<unk> ha , <unk> har índa <unk> éí aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras áhánígo tsosts'id yilt'éego bá nidaal'a'ígíí
PRED:	On the seventh day of the seventh month , the king 's heart was filled with wine , saying , “ There is none of the seven servants of King Ahasuerus .
GOLD:	On the seventh day of the feast , when King Xerxes was in high spirits because of the wine , he told the seven eunuchs who attended him — Mehuman , Biztha , Harbona , Bigtha , Abagtha , Zethar , and Carcas —

ID:	3823
INPUT:	Ak'is hojooba' át'éii bohónéedzą́ ábi'diilyaago yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ le' ,
PRED:	Let the poor be glad , and rejoice in him .
GOLD:	Believers who are poor have something to boast about , for God has honored them .

ID:	3824
INPUT:	Díí jį́ , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilį́ , dadooniid . Éí bik'ehgo deíníikáah doo áádóó yee nihwiiz'áanii áádóó bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó yee nihodii'aahii bik'eh dahoniil'į́į doo índa áníinii deísíilts'ą́ą' doo , dadooniid .
PRED:	This day we say , ‘ The Lord our God is our God . We will walk in his ways , his statutes , his statutes , and his statutes , and his statutes , and his statutes . '
GOLD:	You have declared today that the Lord is your God . And you have promised to walk in his ways , and to obey his decrees , commands , and regulations , and to do everything he tells you .

ID:	3825
INPUT:	Kót'éego Sálaman éí kin áyiilaaígíí biyi'dę́ę́' óola t'áá bízhání bik'ésti'go áyiilaa , áádóó agháago hodiyingo haz'ánígíí bidáahgi óola da'ahólzha'í ha'naa naneelzhee'go ałts'ą́ą́hjí bidíníilzhee'ígi dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' ałts'ą́ą́hjí ha'naa naní'áhígíí óola bik'ésti'go áyiilaa .
PRED:	Solomon overlaid the house with pure gold , and covered it with pure gold in front of the Holy Place . He covered it with gold on each side of the Holy Place .
GOLD:	Then Solomon overlaid the rest of the Temple 's interior with solid gold , and he made gold chains to protect the entrance to the Most Holy Place .

ID:	3826
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áadoo tseebíí , doodaii' neeznáá daats'í hwiiłkaahí , Sesaríya góyaa jiníyáago , biiskání bikáá'dóó ánihwiit'aah bikáá' dasneezdáago , Paul nídoohłóós , jidííniid .
PRED:	And when he was eight or ten , he went down to Caesarea , and sat on the next day , he sat down on his throne , and said to Paul ,
GOLD:	About eight or ten days later Festus returned to Caesarea , and on the following day he took his seat in court and ordered that Paul be brought in .

ID:	3827
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hojíyáanii díí bik'izhdi'yiitįįh doo . T'áá háiida hóyą́ągo nitsíkeesii díí bił bééhózin doo . Háálá Bóhólníihii yee át'éii ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'é áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii yii' deíkáah dooleeł . Bee haz'áanii dayiitíihii chą́ą́h dahidínídééh .
PRED:	If you understand this , you will know what is right and right .
GOLD:	Let those who are wise understand these things.Let those with discernment listen carefully.The paths of the Lord are true and right , and righteous people live by walking in them.But in those paths sinners stumble and fall .

ID:	3828
INPUT:	Mózes biyiin
PRED:	Moses and the People of Moses
GOLD:	A Song of Deliverance

ID:	3829
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'jiiłhaazhgo łahgo nináádziizyeel : nít'éé' shoo , tł'oh naadą́ą́' t'ááłá'í sikaadígíí bineest'ą' yá'át'éehgo daneest'áanii tsosts'idgo bąąh dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And he again again again another dream : and behold , there came seven heads of grain , and seven good fruit .
GOLD:	But he fell asleep again and had a second dream . This time he saw seven heads of grain , plump and beautiful , growing on a single stalk .

ID:	3830
INPUT:	Áko diné danilíinii éí Jáshowa ádeidííniid , Dooda , nidi Bóhólníihii bá nideiil'a' dooleeł .
PRED:	The people answered Joshua , “ No , but we will serve the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But the people answered Joshua , “ No , we will serve the Lord ! ”

ID:	3831
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	3832
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel éí Jóseph áyidííniid , Doo hanii náániideestséeł da nisin nít'éé' , nidi Diyin God na'áłchíní ałdó' yideestséełgo yee shá hooł'a' .
PRED:	Then Israel said to Joseph , “ I would not see any more , but God sent me to see my children . ”
GOLD:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ I never thought I would see your face again , but now God has let me see your children , too ! ”

ID:	3833
INPUT:	Tó t'óó ahayóí dzoołhał nahalingo ał'ąą dine'é hahóół'á , nidi dziłghą́ą́'dóó azhool bił náhidiiyóół nahalingo áádóó nááts'ó'oołdísii łeezh dibahí naanáyooghas nahalingo Diyin God bididootehgo doo deeghánígóó yóó'ahidoojah .
PRED:	The nations roar like a flood , but the mountains goes up like the wind , and they will turn away like a storm , and they will turn away like dust .
GOLD:	But though they thunder like breakers on a beach , God will silence them , and they will run away.They will flee like chaff scattered by the wind , like a tumbleweed whirling before a storm .

ID:	3834
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hach'į' ni'ílyáago diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahíii dziisxíinii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Cursed be he who is guilty when he comes to you , and all the people shall say , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who accepts payment to kill an innocent person . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	3835
INPUT:	Áko kin hadaas'áhígíí t'áá át'é Líívai dine'é baa deet'aahgo dízdiindóó ba'aan tseebíí kin haal'á índa binaagóó dahootsooígíí ałdó' baa didoot'ááł .
PRED:	And all the cities of the cities shall be given unto the Levites , forty and forty and forty and eight .
GOLD:	In all , forty-eight towns with the surrounding pastureland will be given to the Levites .

ID:	3836
INPUT:	áko jį́honaa'éí hanádáhídóó e'e'aahjį' doo ła' diyin nááhódlǫ́ǫ́góó bee hoł béédahodoozįįł . Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ áádóó doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	And they shall know that there shall be no other god from the west to the west to the west , and there shall be no other .
GOLD:	so all the world from east to westwill know there is no other God.I am the Lord , and there is no other .

ID:	3837
INPUT:	Dibé yázhí hwee ádingo éí hasbídí naakigo , doodaii' hasbídí łigaii yázhí naakigo , ła' didlidgo nááhániihii át'éego áádóó ła'ígíí éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego yidoojih , áko náá'iiłniihii éí há k'ééhodoodǫǫłgo há néidiyoołnih , áko ho'didéeh doo .
PRED:	And he shall take two lambs , two or two young goats , and one for a burnt offering , and the other for a sin offering ; and the priest shall make atonement for him .
GOLD:	“ If a woman can not afford to bring a lamb , she must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons . One will be for the burnt offering and the other for the purification offering . The priest will sacrifice them to purify her , and she will be ceremonially clean . ”

ID:	3838
INPUT:	Hazhé'é éí , Ha'át'íísh biniyé kwíínít'įįd ? ts'ídá t'áadoo hodííniidgóó t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo yee hainíst'įįd da . Áko ałdó' t'áá íiyisí diné bíiyisii jílį́ ; Ábsalam bikéédę́ę́' ho'dizhchį́ .
PRED:	“ Why have you done so ? Why have you done so ? ” So he did not say , “ He is a great man . ” So Absalom was born from Absalom .
GOLD:	Now his father , King David , had never disciplined him at any time , even by asking , “ Why are you doing that ? ” Adonijah had been born next after Absalom , and he was very handsome .

ID:	3839
INPUT:	Biinéíyah , Biidíyah , <unk> ,
PRED:	Benaiah , Benaiah ,
GOLD:	Benaiah , Bedeiah , Keluhi ,

ID:	3840
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel naakits'áadah dine'é bitahgóó kéyah daabíí' dooleeł biniyé bá nidahodíízohígíí díí éí át'é : Jóseph dine'é éí naakigo bá náhodíízoh .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ The twelve tribes of Israel are the twelve tribes of Israel . These are the names of the tribe of Joseph . These are the twelve tribes of Joseph .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Divide the land in this way for the twelve tribes of Israel : The descendants of Joseph will be given two shares of land .

ID:	3841
INPUT:	Áko yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Manáseh dine'é éí kéyah ła' bá haadzo , háálá éí Jóseph alą́ąjį' bá yizhchį́ , Méíkir éí Manáseh alą́ąjį' bá yizhchį́ ; éí Gíliyad dine'é bizhé'é jílį́ ; jó , diné naabaahii jílį́įgo bąą Gíliyad áádóó Béíshan kéyahígíí há haadzo .
PRED:	And the border of Manasseh was one of the sons of Manasseh , because he was the firstborn of Manasseh , the firstborn of Manasseh , the father of Manasseh , the father of Gilead , and Bashan .
GOLD:	The next allotment of land was given to the half-tribe of Manasseh , the descendants of Joseph 's older son . Makir , the firstborn son of Manasseh , was the father of Gilead . Because his descendants were experienced soldiers , the regions of Gilead and Bashan on the east side of the Jordan had already been given to them .

ID:	3842
INPUT:	Éí bąą Ízrel biDiyin God Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , Jerúsalemgi dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é bik'ijį' doo yá'ádaashóonii ádaat'éhígíí kóshłééh , áko t'áá háiida yaa dahodiizts'ą́'ígíí bik'ee t'áá ałch'ijí bijeeh dahosiilts'įįh doo .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord , the God of Israel : Behold , I have sent evil against Jerusalem and Judah and Judah , and everyone who hears it shall come before him .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I will bring such disaster on Jerusalem and Judah that the ears of those who hear about it will tingle with horror .

ID:	3843
INPUT:	áádóó bik'isóó éí da'azhé'é aláahgo bídahólníhígíí éí naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki ánéelą́ą́' , índa Ímer biye' Miishíliimath , éí biye' Ahéísai , éí biye' Azéíriyel , éí biye' Amásheiyai wolyéii ,
PRED:	and the princes of his brethren , two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and two ; and the son of Zeruiah , the son of Zeruiah ,
GOLD:	along with 242 of his associates , who were heads of their families . Also Amashsai son of Azarel , son of Ahzai , son of Meshillemoth , son of Immer ,

ID:	3844
INPUT:	Danihich'é'éké ajił t'óó bił nidahodíł<unk> go áádóó danihizháá'áád da'diléego éí doo atídeeshłíił da , háálá diné danilínígíí t'áá bí ałjiłnii yich'į' ch'í'ídiyoo'nił áádóó ałjiłnii yił nidahałáago náá'iiniih yaa naakai ; éí bąą diné ts'ídá doo ak'ida'dootą́ą́' át'éégóó t'óó nida'ádiilchǫǫh .
PRED:	I will not punish your daughters with a prostitute , and I will not punish your daughters , because they will take away the prostitute , and they will worship the prostitute . Therefore they will worship the people .
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	3845
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego ałdó' Christ aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ábidi'doolnííł biniyé doo t'áá bí ayóó át'éego í'diilyaa da , nidi Diyin God kóbidííniidgo nibiníłtį́ , ShiYe' nílį́ , díí jį́ nishchíinii sélį́į́' .
PRED:	In the same way the high priest appeared to him , but God said to him , “ You are my Son today . ”
GOLD:	That is why Christ did not honor himself by assuming he could become High Priest . No , he was chosen by God , who said to him , “ You are my Son.Today I have become your Father . ”

ID:	3846
INPUT:	T'áá áko saad bihoolyaago Nébukadnézzar nilíinii bik'i hoole' . Diné danilíinii bits'á hodi'needzood áádóó béégashii nahalingo tł'oh jiłchozh nít'éé' índa yá'ąąshdę́ę́' dahtoo' bee nínájíltłohgo hatsii' t'éí atsá bits'os nahalingo dínéesą́ áádóó háláshgaan tsídii bíláshgaan nahalin silį́į́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Nebuchadnezzar came upon them , that Nebuchadnezzar the people fled , and they fled ; and they are like the grass of the sky , and as the dew of the sky , and the arm of the sky were as the wings of the sky .
GOLD:	“ That same hour the judgment was fulfilled , and Nebuchadnezzar was driven from human society . He ate grass like a cow , and he was drenched with the dew of heaven . He lived this way until his hair was as long as eagles ' feathers and his nails were like birds ' claws .

ID:	3847
INPUT:	Ákohgo áshidííniid , Daniel yinílyéii , t'áadoo nił yé'í , háálá <unk> dą́ą'di nijéí bee bik'idi'deeshtį́į́ł ninizį́į'go tsídíníkééz yę́ędą́ą́' áádóó niDiyin God bich'į' adahojiinilbá'í ádi'nilyaa yę́ędą́ą́' nidiizts'ą́ą́' áádóó t'áá ni ádíníinii biniyé naa níyá .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Do n't be afraid , Daniel , for I have come to you in your heart , and you have heard your heart , and you have heard the words of your God .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Do n't be afraid , Daniel . Since the first day you began to pray for understanding and to humble yourself before your God , your request has been heard in heaven . I have come in answer to your prayer .

ID:	3848
INPUT:	áádóó bahojoobá'íii t'áadoo éé' baa nínilgóó doo shich'į' ahééh niizį́į́'góogoínda shidibé bighaa' bee éé' ádaalyaaígíí t'áadoo yee ná'iidziilgóogo ,
PRED:	If I do not give thanks to the poor , and if I do not give thanks to the garment of my sheep ,
GOLD:	did they not praise mefor providing wool clothing to keep them warm ?

ID:	3849
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God nílíinii , díí baa niséyáago , shíla' bee doo ákwii át'éii áát'įįdgo ,
PRED:	I have done this , O Lord my God , and have sinned against me ;
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	3850
INPUT:	Engíí<unk> gi David éí Saul t'áadoo yiyiisxį́į da
PRED:	David and Saul
GOLD:	David Spares Saul 's Life

ID:	3851
INPUT:	Áko ch'ikę́ę́h t'áá íiyisí nizhóní áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii hazhó'ó yaa áhályą́ągo yá naal'a' ; nidi aláahgo naat'áanii t'áadoo hoł ałt'áá'áazh da .
PRED:	And the virgin was very beautiful , and he served the king , but they did not go with him .
GOLD:	The girl was very beautiful , and she looked after the king and took care of him . But the king had no sexual relations with her .

ID:	3852
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus éí diné yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áyidííniid , Nihokáá' dine'é bá adinídíín nishłį́ ; t'áá háiida shikéé' joogáłígíí éí doo chahałheełgóó nináájídáa da doo , nidi iiná bee adinídíinii hwee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	Jesus answered the people , “ I am the light of the world . Whoever comes after me will not sit in darkness , but the light will be in the light . ”
GOLD:	Jesus spoke to the people once more and said , “ I am the light of the world . If you follow me , you wo n't have to walk in darkness , because you will have the light that leads to life . ”

ID:	3853
INPUT:	T'áá éí bik'ehgo t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihik'is nihich'į' bąąhági ádaat'į́įgo nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' doo t'áá aaníí bá yóó'anídahidoh'aahgóó , shiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii ałdó' t'áá ákónihił'į́į doo .
PRED:	In the same way , every man who does evil against you , let him turn away from your own heart , even as my Father in heaven .
GOLD:	“ That 's what my heavenly Father will do to you if you refuse to forgive your brothers and sisters from your heart . ”

ID:	3854
INPUT:	Náájidi'yoołnihgo nááhidoonihii éí hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' nááhizhdoołnihígíí éí dibé nanilkaadii biką'ii , doodaii' bi'áadii hadaałt'éii ła' nízdidoolóosgo nááhizhdoołnih .
PRED:	He shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord of peace offerings , or a male sheep , or a male without blemish .
GOLD:	“ If you present an animal from the flock as a peace offering to the Lord , it may be a male or a female , but it must have no defects .

ID:	3855
INPUT:	Nidi tł'é'ííłníi'go ła' hazhdoolghaazh yists'ą́ą́' , Aadę́ę́' iiyehii yigááł ! Nihílááh bidááh nohkááh .
PRED:	But one of them cried out in the middle of the night , “ Come to meet ! ”
GOLD:	“ At midnight they were roused by the shout , ‘ Look , the bridegroom is coming ! Come out and meet him ! '

ID:	3856
INPUT:	Shidine'é bitahgóó ádił nida'iilzíihii éí doo yá'át'éehii doo nihidídóołniił da , doo nihaa nídóot'įįł da , daanínígíí éí t'áá át'é diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił .
PRED:	The wicked of my people will not answer you , but they will not judge you . They will fall by the sword .
GOLD:	But all the sinners will die by the sword — all those who say , ‘ Nothing bad will happen to us . '

ID:	3857
INPUT:	Atsį' biniyé dibé nidadootsiłii nidahoniidlingo ánihiinilaa . Índa ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó tanihiníníłkaad .
PRED:	You have made us like sheep for the sheep , and scattered us among the nations .
GOLD:	You have butchered us like sheepand scattered us among the nations .

ID:	3858
INPUT:	Azhą́ nihída , doodaléi' yá'ąąshdę́ę́' diyingo naal'a'ída átséédą́ą́' hane' yá'át'éehii bee nihił dahwiilne' yę́ę bits'ą́ą́jí hane' łahgo ánáánát'éii yee nihił náádahalne'go , háni'dii éí biniinaa ádahodi'dooldįįłgo há hada'doodzih !
PRED:	But if you tell us the Good News from heaven or from heaven , tell us the Good News that we have told you . Let them be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Let God 's curse fall on anyone , including us or even an angel from heaven , who preaches a different kind of Good News than the one we preached to you .

ID:	3859
INPUT:	Nik'i néijah doo , nidi nił honishłǫ́ǫgo nił yisdáhásh'aashígíí bee doo nik'eh dazhdidlį́į da doo , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But they will fight against me , but I will be with you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	They will fight you , but they will fail.For I am with you , and I will take care of you.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	3860
INPUT:	Áadi naazínígíí ła' bit'áahjį' niníyáago díí áhoodzaaígíí t'áá aaníí ááhyiłníinii t'áá át'é bínabídééłkidgo yee shił náhoolne' áádóó shił bééhózingo áshiilaa .
PRED:	And when he came near , he came near to me , and told me all the vision , and I know that it was true .
GOLD:	So I approached one of those standing beside the throne and asked him what it all meant . He explained it to me like this :

ID:	3861
INPUT:	Áko éidí Éran áádóó biye'ké daabí dooleeł , áko éí hodiyingo haz'ání góne' nídeidį́įh doo ; jó , éí aláahgo dílzinii át'éego nááyiiłniihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo náádahaniihii ádaat'éego éí ła' ahóyéel'áágóó bee nihoní'áanii át'é .
PRED:	And Aaron and his sons shall eat it in the sanctuary , and they shall eat it in the holy place ; for a burnt offering made by fire unto the Lord for ever and ever .
GOLD:	The loaves of bread will belong to Aaron and his descendants , who must eat them in a sacred place , for they are most holy . It is the permanent right of the priests to claim this portion of the special gifts presented to the Lord . ”

ID:	3862
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' shidinits'a'ígíí shił bééhózin , nidi díí diné kǫ́ǫ́ naazínígíí shííníł'a'ígíí deidoodląął biniyé binááł ádíshní .
PRED:	I know your ears always , but I say , ‘ This man who sent me to believe . '
GOLD:	You always hear me , but I said it out loud for the sake of all these people standing here , so that they will believe you sent me . ”

ID:	3863
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hazhó'ó biinéé' deísółts'ą́ą'go díí bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é bee nihich'į' haasdziihígíí ádaa dasoosįįdgo t'éiyá nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	If you listen to the voice of the Lord your God , you will be blessed with all these commandments which I command you .
GOLD:	You will receive this blessing if you are careful to obey all the commands of the Lord your God that I am giving you today .

ID:	3864
INPUT:	Áko ak'áán nááhidoonihígíí nízhdiiką́ągo hálák'ee hadeezbingo ła' hajííjaa'go bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' abínígo didlidgo nááhániihii bóóltą'go jidííłid .
PRED:	And he took the grain offering , and put it in his hand , and put it on the morning , and burned it on the altar .
GOLD:	He also presented the grain offering , burning a handful of the flour mixture on the altar , in addition to the regular burnt offering for the morning .

ID:	3865
INPUT:	Doo áhályáanii t'óó ałnádéesnii'go té'é'į́ bi'niiłhééh .
PRED:	A fool 's hand is a fool , and his mouth is given to him .
GOLD:	“ Fools fold their idle hands , leading them to ruin . ”

ID:	3866
INPUT:	T'áá ak'eh deesdlį́'ígíí algaigo hadadít'ée doo , áádóó iináájí naaltsoos biyi'dóó házhi' ts'ídá doo k'éé'deeshchǫǫł da . ShiTaa' índa bidiyingo nidaal'a'í dabinááł házhi' bee ádee hadideesdzih .
PRED:	They will be white , and I will not destroy them from the book of the book of the book of the book of the book of the Father and my angels .
GOLD:	All who are victorious will be clothed in white . I will never erase their names from the Book of Life , but I will announce before my Father and his angels that they are mine .

ID:	3867
INPUT:	náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí t'áá k'adę́ę oolghalígíí nidahalin , áádóó náshdóí yáázh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí t'áá nant'inee aa naa'na'ígíí nidahalin .
PRED:	The lions are like a lion , and as a young lion in battle .
GOLD:	They are like hungry lions , eager to tear me apart — like young lions hiding in ambush .

ID:	3868
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham tó hahaas'nilígíí biniinaa Abímelek yideezteh , háálá Abímelek bá nidaal' a'í t'áá na'níle'dii haghadeideest'ą́ ,
PRED:	And Abraham blessed Abimelech because of the waters , because Abimelech 's servants had taken away from them .
GOLD:	Then Abraham complained to Abimelech about a well that Abimelech 's servants had taken by force from Abraham 's servants .

ID:	3869
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é t'ahídą́ą́' bee bi'ílnii'ii
PRED:	The People of Ephraim
GOLD:	A Message about Samaria

ID:	3870
INPUT:	Dabi'disnáanii tsxį́įłgo béédadidoochił áádóó a'áán góyaa doo dadínóonéeł da índa bibááh doo ádadoodįįł da .
PRED:	They will go down quickly , and they will not die in the pit , neither will they die .
GOLD:	Soon all you captives will be released ! Imprisonment , starvation , and death will not be your fate !

ID:	3871
INPUT:	Áko Jew dine'é éí ákwii Jesus nijigháago dayíínii'go haa nánísą́ , nidi doo t'áá hó t'éí haniyé da , nidi Lázaras daaztsą́ą́ nít'ée'go náábizdiisáhígíí ałdó' deidoołtsééł biniyé haa nánísą́ .
PRED:	When the Jews heard that Jesus was there , he came to him , but Lazarus was not able to see Lazarus who had been dead .
GOLD:	When all the people heard of Jesus ' arrival , they flocked to see him and also to see Lazarus , the man Jesus had raised from the dead .

ID:	3872
INPUT:	Áko Féro názyizgo t'óó yah anáádzá ; díigi ádzaago t'áadoo nidi bijéí bidiisnáa' da .
PRED:	So Pharaoh turned to the king , and did so ; but the heart of Asia was troubled .
GOLD:	Pharaoh returned to his palace and put the whole thing out of his mind .

ID:	3873
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí diné ba'áłchíní éí kin haal'áii índa kin wót'ááh yí'áii yindaash'nishígíí jidínóoł'įįł biniyé hadahojííle' .
PRED:	Let them see that I had seen the Lord 's house , the city , the city , and the city .
GOLD:	But the Lord came down to look at the city and the tower the people were building .

ID:	3874
INPUT:	Nidi Férisii danilíinii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo ádahodííniid , Shoo , nídahooł'aahii háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' doo bee haz'ánígíí yaa naakai .
PRED:	But when the Pharisees saw it , they said to him , “ Look , your disciples have done the Sabbath on the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	But some Pharisees saw them do it and protested , “ Look , your disciples are breaking the law by harvesting grain on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	3875
INPUT:	Łoh łeeyi' haba' niit'ą́ ; łoh biishdoogáałii hadáahgi si'ą́ .
PRED:	They have set a net for a net ; they have set a net before them .
GOLD:	A noose lies hidden on the ground.A rope is stretched across their path .

ID:	3876
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii biye' yił ch'ídaaskaigo naat'á ch'ah bik'i dazdeez'ą́ áádóó bee ak'e'ashchíinii bee bééhániihii bílák'edadzistsooz , áádóó Jiihóíyada índa biye'ké éí ak'ah hak'i yadayiiziidgo aláahgo naat'áanii ádahoolaa índa ádaaní , Aláahgo naat'áanii as'ahgóó hináa le' !
PRED:	Then they brought him out of the king 's son , and put him on his head , and they anointed Jehoiada and his sons , and said , “ May the king live . ”
GOLD:	Then Jehoiada and his sons brought out Joash , the king 's son , placed the crown on his head , and presented him with a copy of God 's laws . They anointed him and proclaimed him king , and everyone shouted , “ Long live the king ! ”

ID:	3877
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii náohkąąh , áko ayóó át'éego ni'dilch'ilígíí índa nílótsoh naałtinígíí áhodidoolzih , áádóó nihéé'deesh'nihgo náásgóó doo t'áá kǫ́ǫ́ kénááhóht'į́į da doo .
PRED:	“ Please pray to the Lord , and there will be great hail and hail , and I will send it to you , and there will no more be a place . ”
GOLD:	Please beg the Lord to end this terrifying thunder and hail . We 've had enough . I will let you go ; you do n't need to stay any longer . ”

ID:	3878
INPUT:	Nidi shí ánihidishní , T'áá háiida ła' hak'is bich'į' háhóóchįįdígíí bee haa náhódóot'įįłii bą́ą́h jílį́į doo , áádóó t'áá háiida hak'is yáábí'jii'įįdígíí naat'áanii danilíinii yee aa nídaat'íinii bą́ą́h jílį́į doo , índa t'áá háiida hak'is nilíinii , Diigis nílį́ , bizhdííniidígíí biniinaa hool'áágóó kǫ' bii' ti'hoo'nííh bą́ą́h jílį́į doo .
PRED:	But I say to you , whoever is angry with his brother , shall be worthy of judgment , and he that hath given to his brother , shall be worthy of judgment , and he shall wash his brother , because of the fire .
GOLD:	But I say , if you are even angry with someone , you are subject to judgment ! If you call someone an idiot , you are in danger of being brought before the court . And if you curse someone , you are in danger of the fires of hell .

ID:	3879
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	King Hezekiah of Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	3880
INPUT:	Áko bá áhwiinít'į́įgo hach'į' yáłti' , áádóó Bábilangi bił aláahgo naat'áanii dajílínígíí biláahdi dah honeesdá .
PRED:	He spoke to him in judgment , and he was above the kings of Babylon .
GOLD:	He spoke kindly to Jehoiachin and gave him a higher place than all the other exiled kings in Babylon .

ID:	3881
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí ak'ah yíkánígíí ła' binishtł'ají bílák'eejį' yeidooziłgo
PRED:	And the priest shall pour some of the oil into the left hand of the oil ,
GOLD:	“ Then the priest will pour some of the olive oil into the palm of his own left hand .

ID:	3882
INPUT:	Jó , díidíígíí t'áá ałtso diné náádaała' bida'ílnííh biniyé ádabi'dool'įįd , áádóó nihí bee nidanihidi'nitin biniyé bee ak'eda'ashchį́ , háálá nihí díí hoolzhishígíí k'adę́ę bił niit'éehii daniidlį́ .
PRED:	For all these things are written to others , and to teach us , and to teach us , because we are the end of this time .
GOLD:	These things happened to them as examples for us . They were written down to warn us who live at the end of the age .

ID:	3883
INPUT:	t'áá náábíláahgo naalyéhé baa nidahaniihígíí áádóó naalyéhé yaa ádahalyáanii , áádóó Aréíbiyadę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá ałtso índa kédaayahdóó naat'áanii danilíinii ałdó' óola haa dayiiyeeh .
PRED:	And they have been brought to the wise , and all the kings , and all the princes of the land , and of the land .
GOLD:	This did not include the additional revenue he received from merchants and traders , all the kings of Arabia , and the governors of the land .

ID:	3884
INPUT:	Áko Nébukadnézzar ádííniid , Shéídrak , Mííshak áádóó Abédniigo biDiyin God baa ha'niih le' , háálá bidiyingo naal'a'í yiníł'a'go binaal'a'í baa dadzólíii yisdáyíínil , áko aláahgo naat'áanii yee haadzíi'ii łahgo ánáyiidlaa , áádóó diyin t'áá bóhólníhígíí bá na'al'a'go bich'į' nahadláhígíí biláahgo díí diné tált'éego bits'íís atídoolnííł biniyé t'áá bí biDiyin God yich'į' nidahałáhígíí yaa ádadeest'ą́ .
PRED:	Then Nebuchadnezzar said , “ Praise be the God of God ! He has saved his angels , and he has given them the words of the angel , and he has given them the words of the king , and he has given to all these three men . ”
GOLD:	Then Nebuchadnezzar said , “ Praise to the God of Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego ! He sent his angel to rescue his servants who trusted in him . They defied the king 's command and were willing to die rather than serve or worship any god except their own God .

ID:	3885
INPUT:	hódzą́ saad ayóó ánóolninii doo bee yáshti' da nít'éé' , nidi Níłch'i Diyinii binaanish áádóó bibee adziilii ííshjání áshłéehgo hashne' nít'éé' .
PRED:	I did not speak of wisdom , but I spoke to the Holy Spirit and power .
GOLD:	And my message and my preaching were very plain . Rather than using clever and persuasive speeches , I relied only on the power of the Holy Spirit .

ID:	3886
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Héi' ! Héi' ! Ayóó át'éego kin haal'áii jílį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii , naak'ą' tsídídééh nahalingo índa naak'ą' ałchxíí' bee hazhdít'éii yę́ę , óola , tsé da'ílíinii , índa diichiłí bee nijishch'ąą' yę́ę !
PRED:	They said , “ How great is the great city ! She was clothed with fine linen , purple , scarlet , scarlet , and scarlet , and precious stones .
GOLD:	“ How terrible , how terrible for that great city ! She was clothed in finest purple and scarlet linens , decked out with gold and precious stones and pearls !

ID:	3887
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii ábijiní , Baa nanináhígíí índa nibee hódzáanii shikéyahdi bee naa hane'go di<unk> ą́'ígíí t'áá aaníí lá .
PRED:	The king said to the king , “ It is true that I have told you what you have done and what you have done . ”
GOLD:	She exclaimed to the king , “ Everything I heard in my country about your achievements and wisdom is true !

ID:	3888
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá biniyé Bóhólníihii díí kéyahjį' ch'ínihiní'eezh ? Da' <unk> łishísh bee naa'adanihízdiyoolghałgo nihida'asdzą́ą́ índa nihada'áłchíní yisnááh dadooleeł ? T'óó Ííjip kéyahgóó nihéédahaakaigo nihá yá'át'éeh doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Why did the Lord bring us out of this land ? Have you cast your wives and children into captivity ?
GOLD:	“ Why is the Lord taking us to this country only to have us die in battle ? Our wives and our little ones will be carried off as plunder ! Would n't it be better for us to return to Egypt ? ”

ID:	3889
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ dooleełii nabídanohtaahgo bídahooł'aah .
PRED:	If you are glad in the Lord , you will be glad .
GOLD:	Carefully determine what pleases the Lord .

ID:	3890
INPUT:	Áko haa'íshą' Níłch'i Diyinii k'ehgo nidaniniilzánígíí t'áá áníiltso t'áá ákót'éego nitsídeiikees doo , nidi ha'át'íhígíida t'áá ał'ąą át'éego baa nitsídaahkeesgo , éí ałdó' Diyin God nihił ííshjání íidoolííł .
PRED:	So let us all the things we have seen by the Holy Spirit , but we will do all things , but also God will show us all things .
GOLD:	Let all who are spiritually mature agree on these things . If you disagree on some point , I believe God will make it plain to you .

ID:	3891
INPUT:	K'ad Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ná naal'a'í shizhé'é David yę́ę bich'į' saad bee háínídzíi'ii éí t'áá aaníi le' .
PRED:	Now , O Lord God of Israel , be faithful to your servant David , which you have spoken to my father David .
GOLD:	Now , O Lord , God of Israel , fulfill this promise to your servant David .

ID:	3892
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh nízinii índa yee ba'ahódlíii Ízrel dine'é yee yénáálnii' . Nahasdzáán nidanees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso nihiDiyin God bibee yisdá'iildéehii dayiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	He remembered your faithful love and faithful love ; I saw all the nations from the ends of the earth .
GOLD:	He has remembered his promise to love and be faithful to Israel.The ends of the earth have seen the victory of our God .

ID:	3893
INPUT:	<unk> niteelí yíchxǫ'ii binahjį' na'nitinii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Linen Loincloth

ID:	3894
INPUT:	Móses bisodizin
PRED:	The People of Moab
GOLD:	Making Bricks without Straw

ID:	3895
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę honoojíigi mána dayííyą́ą́' ; t'áá bee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego , Yá'ąąshdę́ę́' bááh baz'níłtsood .
PRED:	Your ancestors ate bread in the wilderness , just as it is written in heaven , “ Give them bread from heaven . ”
GOLD:	After all , our ancestors ate manna while they journeyed through the wilderness ! The Scriptures say , ‘ Moses gave them bread from heaven to eat . ' ”

ID:	3896
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii éí t'áá ákogi ááníiłii ayóó'áyó'ní , áádóó bidiyį́į́' danilíinii doo yóó'iidi'aah da . Hool'áágóó baa áháyą́ą doo , nidi doo yá'áshóonii ba'áłchíní éí ádooldįįł .
PRED:	For the Lord loves the righteous , and his saints shall not forgive his saints ; but the children of the wicked shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	For the Lord loves justice , and he will never abandon the godly.He will keep them safe forever , but the children of the wicked will die .

ID:	3897
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Sámuel ádeidííniid , T'áadoo áhodiilzéhí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihá néinikąąhgo Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánihidoonił .
PRED:	And the children of Israel said to Samuel , “ Do not pray to the Lord your God , and he will deliver us from the hand of the Philistines . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't stop pleading with the Lord our God to save us from the Philistines ! ” they begged Samuel .

ID:	3898
INPUT:	Ákohgo yáłti'go diséts'ą́ą́' , áko diséts'ą́ą'go t'óó báhádzidgo bił niizį́į'go ni'jį' nikidiníish'ą́ągo iiłhaazh lá .
PRED:	Then I heard the voice of them , and I heard that he was angry , and he sat down on the ground .
GOLD:	Then I heard the man speak , and when I heard the sound of his voice , I fainted and lay there with my face to the ground .

ID:	3899
INPUT:	Nílááh , bąąhági át'éii biniyé Béthel kin shijaa'jį' dadohkááh ; Gílgal kin shijaa'gi bąąhági át'éii bee tsi'haohkááh ; t'áá ákwíí abíní náádahidoołnihii nidahohjááh , t'áá táá' yoołkááł bik'eh nihee dahólóonii neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' nidahohjááh .
PRED:	“ Go to Bethel , and go to Gilgal . Take away the sin of Gilgal , and bring it every morning , and bring it to me three days . ”
GOLD:	“ Go ahead and offer sacrifices to the idols at Bethel.Keep on disobeying at Gilgal.Offer sacrifices each morning , and bring your tithes every three days .

ID:	3900
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	3901
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Parable of the Lamp

ID:	3902
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	The Need for Workers

ID:	3903
INPUT:	Díí jį́ Bóhólníihii shílák'ee nididoo'áałgo naa anízhdeeshtł'į́į́ł áádóó nitsiits'iin nidi'deesh'ááł , áko díí jį́ tsídii áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi naaldlooshii da'ałchinii bich'į' Filístiya dine'é bisiláo dabits'íís nidaaztseedii ahideeshtł'ił , áko éí bee nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́góó kéédahat'íinii díí bił béédahodoozįįł : Ízrel dine'é bitahgi Diyin God hólǫ́ .
PRED:	This day I will deliver you into my hand , and I will lay your head , and I will cut off the slain of the Philistines and the beasts of the earth , and they shall know that the God of Israel is among the earth .
GOLD:	Today the Lord will conquer you , and I will kill you and cut off your head . And then I will give the dead bodies of your men to the birds and wild animals , and the whole world will know that there is a God in Israel !

ID:	3904
INPUT:	Christ éí diyingo nidaal'a'í biláahdi ájít'é
PRED:	Jesus is the Son of Christ
GOLD:	The Son Is Greater Than the Angels

ID:	3905
INPUT:	T'áá nihí yá'át'éehgo ádaa hane'ésh baa nínáádiit'áázh ? Da' yá'át'éehgo nihaa hane'go nihich'į' naaltsoos ádoolníłígíísh ádá bídin niidlį́ ? Éí doodaii' naaltsoos ákót'éii aají nihits'ą́ą́dóó deezna'iísh ałdó' ádá bídin niidlį́ ?
PRED:	Do we take away the good news ? Are we not worthy of the good news ? Or are we not of the book of the truth ?
GOLD:	Are we beginning to praise ourselves again ? Are we like others , who need to bring you letters of recommendation , or who ask you to write such letters on their behalf ? Surely not !

ID:	3906
INPUT:	Amínadab éí Júdah dine'é nilį́įgo biye' Náshan ,
PRED:	Of the tribe of Judah : from the tribe of Judah :
GOLD:	JudahNahshon son of Amminadab

ID:	3907
INPUT:	Ákódzaago daal'aadii índa ałk'isóó danilíinii Judíyagi kéédahat'ínígíí , doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ałdó' Diyin God bizaad yaa dadzoozlíí' ha'níigo dayíínii' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the apostles and the brethren that dwelt in Judea , that they also believed in the word of God .
GOLD:	Soon the news reached the apostles and other believers in Judea that the Gentiles had received the word of God .

ID:	3908
INPUT:	Da' Píyor kin shijaa'diísh t'įįhdígo doo ákwii ádeiit'įįd da ? Jó , t'áá nihí nidi doo nihida'dódééh át'ée da . Azhą́ Bóhólníihii bidine'é dah yinéłígíí bee atí'él'íinii yee atíyiilaa nidi ákóniit'é .
PRED:	Have we not done wrong ? For we are not able to help us , but the wrath of the Lord is against the people of Israel ?
GOLD:	Was our sin at Peor not enough ? To this day we are not fully cleansed of it , even after the plague that struck the entire community of the Lord .

ID:	3909
INPUT:	Bąąhági át'éego saad yee yádaałti'go biniinaa yee ádaa dadzódlíhígíí háni'dii łoh nahalingo yiih hikááh . Háálá da'ódziih áádóó dabiyooch'íidgo yádaałti' .
PRED:	Let them go into a net , because they speak lies and speak lies .
GOLD:	Because of the sinful things they say , because of the evil that is on their lips , let them be captured by their pride , their curses , and their lies .

ID:	3910
INPUT:	Ats'á'ázhdeeltį́įgo ádee hadzoodzíi'go hóyoołkááł biyi' doo hatsii' doolzhih da ; Bóhólníihii bich'į' t'áá ats'á'ázhdeet'ánígíí bíighah azlį́į'jį' jidiyin doo , áádóó bíni'dii hatsii' nineez dooleeł .
PRED:	When he has made an oath to himself , he must not wash his head . He must be holy to the Lord all the days of his head , and let his hair be long .
GOLD:	“ They must never cut their hair throughout the time of their vow , for they are holy and set apart to the Lord . Until the time of their vow has been fulfilled , they must let their hair grow long .

ID:	3911
INPUT:	Nik'a' dadeeníigo aláahgo naat'áanii bi'ana'í dabijéí baa ahilyeed , áko ał'ąą dine'é niyaajį' naa'ahinidééh .
PRED:	The arrows of the king is in his heart , and the nations bow down before us .
GOLD:	Your arrows are sharp , piercing your enemies ' hearts.The nations fall beneath your feet .

ID:	3912
INPUT:	Tsxį́įłgo áłah wohłeeh ; hágo , nihokáá' dine'é danohłíinii , t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' áłah wohłeeh . Bóhólníihii áadi nisiláo dahayóii hadani'éésh .
PRED:	Get up ! Come up , you earth , all the earth ! The Lord 's soldiers are here . ”
GOLD:	Come quickly , all you nations everywhere.Gather together in the valley. ” And now , O Lord , call out your warriors !

ID:	3913
INPUT:	Agrípa shinanit'a'í nílíinii , da' Diyin God yá dahalne'iísh yinídlą́ ? Yinídlą́ągo lá shił bééhózin ni .
PRED:	King Agrippa , do you believe that the prophets have faith ?
GOLD:	King Agrippa , do you believe the prophets ? I know you do — ”

ID:	3914
INPUT:	Ła' éí ánahat'i' áádóó ná'<unk> xis , ła' béésh da'ahólzha'í bee dah dabi'diistł'ǫ́ǫgo awáalyaa góne' ti'dahooznii' .
PRED:	There are some of them who are bound in prison . They were bound in prison .
GOLD:	Some were jeered at , and their backs were cut open with whips . Others were chained in prisons .

ID:	3915
INPUT:	Díí béeso anídahohniłígíí naalkaahgo Christ baa hane' yá'át'éehii bee ádee hadahidohdziihgo bik'eh dahonoł'ínígíí binahjį' Diyin God yaa dahaniih doo , áádóó nihił dahadlee'go Diyin God bidiyį́į́' bá índa náádaała'ígíí t'áá ałtso bá béeso adahohníłígíí ałdó' binahjį' Diyin God yaa dahaniih doo ;
PRED:	If you obey the Good News of Christ , you will give thanks to God because you obey the Good News of the Good News . You will give thanks to all God 's people and to the other people .
GOLD:	As a result of your ministry , they will give glory to God . For your generosity to them and to all believers will prove that you are obedient to the Good News of Christ .

ID:	3916
INPUT:	Doodaii' yik'ee diniihgo t'áá na'níle'dii nihíideestsisgo , doodaii' yaa niheedzáago t'áadoo le'é yee yííníiłne'go yiyiisxį́į́ ládą́ą́' ,
PRED:	Or if I hate you , or if he is in the midst of you , or if he has killed you in the darkness ,
GOLD:	So if someone hates another person and waits in ambush , then pushes him or throws something at him and he dies , it is murder .

ID:	3917
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yee nihá has'ánígi át'éego na'áłchíní ła' t'áá aaníinii yik'ehgo dayíkáahgo shił bééhoozinígíí t'áá íiyisí baa shił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	I am glad because of the truth of God the Father , as one of your children walked in the truth .
GOLD:	How happy I was to meet some of your children and find them living according to the truth , just as the Father commanded .

ID:	3918
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Iiláíyashib biye' Jóíyada biye' ła' éí Hóran dine'é Sanbálat yaadaaní nilį́į́ lá ; éí bąą hó éí níwehjį' ahonííłchą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the high priest , Tobiah the son of Uriah the priest , the son of Tobiah , the son of Tobiah , the son of Tobiah ; therefore he fled .
GOLD:	One of the sons of Joiada son of Eliashib the high priest had married a daughter of Sanballat the Horonite , so I banished him from my presence .

ID:	3919
INPUT:	Jó , nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é t'áá bí naazínígi t'áá ła' bizhi'ee t'áá ałtso doo bąąh daachinígóó ída'diilyaa . Yisnááh danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę bá atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii biniyé dabik'isóó nááda'iiłniihii danilíinii bá áádóó t'áá daabí ałdó' ádá dibé yázhí nideistseed .
PRED:	For the priests and the Levites who were standing in their own place were brought to captivity . They also killed the Passover and the Levites .
GOLD:	The priests and Levites had purified themselves and were ceremonially clean . So they slaughtered the Passover lamb for all the returned exiles , for their fellow priests , and for themselves .

ID:	3920
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso yéego hahodííłdláád áádóó tł'éé' bíighah daachago yiską́ .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when all the congregation of Israel cried out , and all the congregation of Israel wept all night .
GOLD:	Then the whole community began weeping aloud , and they cried all night .

ID:	3921
INPUT:	Na'nitin doo t'áá aaníinii bits'ąą ádaa áháyą́
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Warnings against False Teachings

ID:	3922
INPUT:	Áko bíni'dii ha'ahóní nihinaalnishgo ałtso ła'yilééh , ákót'éego nihe'oodlą' bee ts'ídá t'áá ákóne' ádanoht'éego índa t'áadoo bee nihich'į' anáhóót'i'ígóó dahinohnáa doo .
PRED:	And let him make all your servants , that ye may live in the same way , and live in the way of your faith .
GOLD:	So let it grow , for when your endurance is fully developed , you will be perfect and complete , needing nothing .

ID:	3923
INPUT:	Aláahgo nihinanit'a'í áda'azįįd niiní'ą́ą́ góne' naat'áanii danilíinii yił wáin deidlą́ągo nídadí'néesdlą́ą́' ; nidahałt'i'ígíí yił ahił dandlį́ .
PRED:	And our kings drink wine , and they drink wine in the house of our kings ; and they were with us .
GOLD:	On royal holidays , the princes get drunk with wine , carousing with those who mock them .

ID:	3924
INPUT:	Áko naal'a'í éí Saul ánéidoo'niid , <unk> , kǫ́ǫ́ béésh łigaii shékel wolyéhígíí dį́į'go shijaa'ígíí t'ááłá'í si'ą́ bíighahgo shee hólǫ́ , áko diné éí Diyin God bił hólóonii baa deeshniłgo náádiit'ashgóó yee nihił hodoolnih .
PRED:	Then Saul said to Saul , “ I have four shekels of silver , and I have four shekels of silver , and I will give to the man of God . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , ” the servant said , “ I have one small silver piece . We can at least offer it to the man of God and see what happens ! ”

ID:	3925
INPUT:	Nidi diyingo naal'a'í áshidííniid , Ha'át'íísh bik'ee t'óó nił ahayóí ? Asdzání áádóó naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii bitsiits'iin tsosts'idgo índa bidee' neeznáá , asdzání bik'i dah sidáhígíí ááhyiłníinii doo bééhózin da yę́ę bee nił hodeeshnih .
PRED:	But the angel said to me , “ Why are you afraid ? I will tell you seven heads and seven horns , and ten horns , and ten horns , and ten horns . ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you so amazed ? ” the angel asked . “ I will tell you the mystery of this woman and of the beast with seven heads and ten horns on which she sits .

ID:	3926
INPUT:	áádóó t'áá biyi'ídi nitsíkeesgo íinízin , Haaléit'ée dooleeł lá ? Náníłt'ánígíí la' t'áadoo nooh náá<unk> chíiłgi da .
PRED:	and that he may look , and see , and what shall he do ? And there is no rest in his hand .
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

ID:	3927
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahí daígíí nahont'indę́ę́' dayółt'óóh . T'áadoo hooyání dahółt'óohgo doo bił daayée' da .
PRED:	And the man shall not be found in a secret place ; and they shall not fear .
GOLD:	They shoot from ambush at the innocent , attacking suddenly and fearlessly .

ID:	3928
INPUT:	Naat'á ch'ah nihik'eelts'id ; dooládó' hojooba' ániit'ée da ; ádił da'siilziih lą́ą !
PRED:	How terrible is it for us ! How terrible for us ! We have sinned !
GOLD:	The garlands have fallen from our heads.Weep for us because we have sinned .

ID:	3929
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , Jerúsalemgi kéédahoht'íinii áádóó Júdahgi diné danohłíinii , nánihooshkąąh : shí daats'í , doodaii' shich'il na'atł'o'ii k'idoolyáhígíí daats'í yá'át'ééh , éí nidadinoh'aah .
PRED:	Now therefore , O inhabitants of Jerusalem , I pray thee , O men of Judah , or of my vineyard , or of my vineyard , or of my vineyard .
GOLD:	Now , you people of Jerusalem and Judah , you judge between me and my vineyard .

ID:	3930
INPUT:	Hadáń'da'dítį́į́h yę́ę łeeh daaskai ; bich'ą́ą́h dáń'da'dilkał yę́ę niyiizti'go niyiishchxǫ' ; aláahgo hananit'a'í nilíinii áádóó binaat'áanii danilíinii ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó dabi'disná ; bee haz'áanii doo nááhódlǫ́ǫ da áádóó áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó doo bił ádahat'į́į da .
PRED:	The gates of the gate has destroyed the gates ; the king and his princes have been taken away among the nations , and there is no law in the Lord , and there is none of the prophets .
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's gates have sunk into the ground.He has smashed their locks and bars.Her kings and princes have been exiled to distant lands ; her law has ceased to exist.Her prophets receiveno more visions from the Lord .

ID:	3931
INPUT:	nidi nihinanit'a'í ánínígi át'éego ná nidaal'a'í éí dadoobah yiniyé hasht'e'ádadiilyaaígíí t'áá ałtso Bóhólníihii yinááł ha'naa nidoonééł .
PRED:	But all that we have prepared for battle before the Lord , as your master has prepared for battle .
GOLD:	But all who are able to bear arms will cross over to fight for the Lord , just as you have said . ”

ID:	3932
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro bibee adlání dah yish'áałgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii ni'diinilgo Féro bibee adlání biyi'jį' bitoo' bąąh sénihgo Féro bílák'ééką́ nisin .
PRED:	And I took the cup of Pharaoh 's cup , and put it in the cup of Pharaoh 's cup , and let Pharaoh give it to Pharaoh .
GOLD:	I was holding Pharaoh 's wine cup in my hand , so I took a cluster of grapes and squeezed the juice into the cup . Then I placed the cup in Pharaoh 's hand . ”

ID:	3933
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í honíle'go Áfra kin shijaa'gi Jó'ash joolyéii Éíbiyíízer dine'é jílį́įgo hachéch'il yiyaagi neezdá . Jó'ash biye' Gídiyan éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' nazhniłhaałgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizh góne' baa nijigháago Mídiyan dine'é bits'ąą nazhnił'in .
PRED:	And the angel of the Lord came to Bethel , and sat down under the tree of Joash , the son of Joash , in the vineyard of Midian , and hid them from the vineyards of Midian .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord came and sat beneath the great tree at Ophrah , which belonged to Joash of the clan of Abiezer . Gideon son of Joash was threshing wheat at the bottom of a winepress to hide the grain from the Midianites .

ID:	3934
INPUT:	Dooládó' nibee haz'áanii ayóó'óósh'níi da ! Shá bíighah nabik'ítséskeesgo shee e'e'ááh .
PRED:	How I love your law ! I think about all day long .
GOLD:	Oh , how I love your instructions ! I think about them all day long .

ID:	3935
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Éí lá bąą shizhé'é , nánooshkąąh , shizhé'é bighangóó hodíł'á ,
PRED:	He said , “ Please , my father , let my father go to the house of my father . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the rich man said , ‘ Please , Father Abraham , at least send him to my father 's home .

ID:	3936
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego , Lą'ígo nídajiizlá'ígíí doo ła' há ch'ínííłna' da , índa t'áá áłch'į́į́dígo nídajiizlá'ígíí doo hats'ą́ą́' bi'oh silį́į' da .
PRED:	As it is written in the Scriptures , “ There is no one left , and the few are left . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ Those who gathered a lot had nothing left over , and those who gathered only a little had enough . ”

ID:	3937
INPUT:	Sámuel éí ch'iyáán ííł'íní áyidííniid , Atsį' hasht'e'nidííkááł , nidííniid yę́ę nídiikaah ; tádiin daats'í yilt'éego nidahaaskai lá .
PRED:	Samuel said to the food , “ Give your meat to eat , and you said , ‘ Give up your meat , and thirty men have come . '
GOLD:	Samuel then instructed the cook to bring Saul the finest cut of meat , the piece that had been set aside for the guest of honor .

ID:	3938
INPUT:	áko Jerobówam áyidííniid , Neheesdǫ́zígíí neeznáago nídiinííł , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God ání , Shoo , Sálaman dadine'é bee hóhólníhígíí haghahideeshxą́ąłgo neeznáago dine'é naa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	And Jeroboam said unto Jeroboam , Behold , I have brought ten loaves , for the Lord , the God of Israel , saith , Behold , I will give thee into the kingdom of Ammon .
GOLD:	Then he said to Jeroboam , “ Take ten of these pieces , for this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : ‘ I am about to tear the kingdom from the hand of Solomon , and I will give ten of the tribes to you !

ID:	3939
INPUT:	Ałníí'góó ní'áa dooígíí éí t'áá níléijį' ha'naa hadii'áago áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle thereof .
GOLD:	He made the middle crossbar to attach halfway up the frames ; it ran all the way from one end of the Tabernacle to the other .

ID:	3940
INPUT:	Nidi Paul haadzíi'go ání , Ha'át'íísh biniyé daahchago shijéí ti'dabiyołnííh ? Háálá Jerúsalemdi doo t'óó dashidi'yootł'ółígíí t'éiyá biniyé hasht'e'í'diishyaa da , nidi Bóhólníihii Jesus bízhi' bá dadeestsaałígíí ałdó' biniyé hasht'e'í'diishyaa .
PRED:	But Paul answered , “ Why do you weep with my heart ? For I have prepared for Jerusalem , but I have prepared for the name of the Lord Jesus . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Why all this weeping ? You are breaking my heart ! I am ready not only to be jailed at Jerusalem but even to die for the sake of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	3941
INPUT:	Bee hahíínídzíi'ii baa shił nihoozhǫǫh ; éí kót'éego dashiłníinii ádaat'é .
PRED:	I rejoice in your statutes , and they say , “ This is my delight . ”
GOLD:	Your laws please me ; they give me wise advice .

ID:	3942
INPUT:	Doo hodíína' ákǫ́ǫ́ dohjeeh , áadi nihishoojée'go índa doo nantł'agóó ádeeshłííł . Éí bąą éí kin haal'áii Zó'er hoosye' .
PRED:	Arise , and go , and I will make you go up , and I will make you a desolation . Therefore , the son of Amoz .
GOLD:	But hurry ! Escape to it , for I can do nothing until you arrive there. ” ( This explains why that village was known as Zoar , which means “ little place . ” )

ID:	3943
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída shízhi' bee dayínóhkeedgo , éí ádeeshnííł , aYe' bee aTaa' baa ha'niih doo biniyé .
PRED:	If you ask anything in my name , I will do it , that the Son may praise the Father .
GOLD:	You can ask for anything in my name , and I will do it , so that the Son can bring glory to the Father .

ID:	3944
INPUT:	Áko kéyahgi kéédahojit'ínígíí éí Mólek diyin bidi'níinii yich'į' diné ba'áłchíní ła' nááyiisnii'ígíí t'áadoo baa nídajist'įįdgóó índa t'áadoo dajiisxį́į́góó
PRED:	And the inhabitants of the land did not eat any of the people of the land which he had offered , and had not slain him .
GOLD:	And if the people of the community ignore those who offer their children to Molech and refuse to execute them ,

ID:	3945
INPUT:	,
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested

ID:	3946
INPUT:	áko níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í áhodííniid , Díí bee ídahólníihgo bił nahaz'áanii índa yee ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá át'é naa dideesh'ááł , háálá éí shaa deet'ą́ , áádóó t'áá háiida baa dideesh'ááł niizį́'ígíí éí baa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	The devil said to him , “ I will give you all these kingdoms and wonders , because I will give them to you , and I will give them to you . ”
GOLD:	“ I will give you the glory of these kingdoms and authority over them , ” the devil said , “ because they are mine to give to anyone I please .

ID:	3947
INPUT:	Diné badahojoobá'íii áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii yá atéét'įįd , áko díí kódzaaígíí t'áá ákóne' í'iilaa ; éí ts'ídá shéého'dílzinii át'é , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	The poor and needy have done what the Lord says : “ This is what he has done . ”
GOLD:	He gave justice and help to the poor and needy , and everything went well for him.Is n't that what it means to know me ? ” says the Lord .

ID:	3948
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbram ádííniid , Shoo , áłchíní t'áadoo shéínínil da , áko shighangi yizhchínígíí t'éiyá shee hólóonii bíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	And Abram said , Behold , thou hast not brought me children ; and my father 's house shall possess it .
GOLD:	You have given me no descendants of my own , so one of my servants will be my heir . ”

ID:	3949
INPUT:	Łah Jéíkab éí atoo' jiłbéezhgo Íísa t'áá íiyisí dichin bi'niiłhį́įgo halgaidę́ę́' haa nádzá .
PRED:	And it came to pass on that day , that Jacob was filled with water , that he might kill Esau in the field , that he might kill him .
GOLD:	One day when Jacob was cooking some stew , Esau arrived home from the wilderness exhausted and hungry .

ID:	3950
INPUT:	Zedekáíyah éí naadiin ła' binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' áádóó Jerúsalemgi ła'ts'áadah nááhaijį' aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' . Bimá éí Hamútal wolyéego Líbnahdóó Jeremáíyah yitsi' nilį́ .
PRED:	Zedekiah was thirty years old when he became king , and he reigned twelve years in Jerusalem . His mother 's name was Jeremiah the daughter of Jeremiah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . His mother was Hamutal , the daughter of Jeremiah from Libnah .

ID:	3951
INPUT:	Ádíshní , ShiDiyin God nílíinii , she'iina' ałníi'jį' ashíyííłką́ągo t'ah shííyisgo shił dah doó'aash lágo . Oochííłgóó t'áá ałtso nibéédahaháahii bitah honílǫ́ .
PRED:	I said , “ My God , keep me in the midst of the night . Do n't let me go with me in the midst of all generations . ”
GOLD:	But I cried to him , “ O my God , who lives forever , do n't take my life while I am so young !

ID:	3952
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii t'ááłá'ígíí índa bik'ehgo hoogáałii t'ááłá'ígíí éí nihí áádóó dé'éyóní t'óó átsééd kéédahat'ínígíí bił nihá át'ée doo .
PRED:	The law and the ordinances shall be for you and for the stranger who are with you .
GOLD:	The same instructions and regulations will apply both to you and to the foreigners living among you . ”

ID:	3953
INPUT:	Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é doo ádahozdiilts'a'ii hach'į' sháhodoochįįłgo áádóó hashké dínéesdzįįłgo k'ééhodideeshdlííł .
PRED:	And I will be angry with the nations , and I will pour out my anger against them .
GOLD:	I will pour out my vengeanceon all the nations that refuse to obey me . ”

ID:	3954
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God doo dayoodlą́ą da , índa dziil yee yisdá'iiníiłii doo yaa dadzólíi da nít'éé' .
PRED:	For they did not believe God , nor trust in his salvation .
GOLD:	for they did not believe Godor trust him to care for them .

ID:	3955
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Pharisees Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	3956
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God nihíká ádííniidígíí diyin nilínígi át'éego nihí ałdó' t'áá ałtsojį' diyingo dahinohnáa doo .
PRED:	But as God called you , you also will live in every way .
GOLD:	But now you must be holy in everything you do , just as God who chose you is holy .

ID:	3957
INPUT:	índa biyáázhké nidilt'éego ałdó' yił dah diikai ; éí ła' Gérsham wolyé , háálá łah ájíní , Dé'éyóní nishłį́įgo kéyah doo ééhonisindi naashá ;
PRED:	And he took his two sons with him ; and they said , I am a stranger , and he said , I am a stranger .
GOLD:	( Moses ' first son was named Gershom , for Moses had said when the boy was born , “ I have been a foreigner in a foreign land . ”

ID:	3958
INPUT:	Bee aha'deet'áanii ániidíii yee nidaal'a'ii
PRED:	The new covenant
GOLD:	The Glory of the New Covenant

ID:	3959
INPUT:	Hazhé'é , doodaii' hamá , doodaii' hak'is , doodaii' halah ła' daaztsą́ągo bee t'áá hó doo bi'didéehii doo ázhdi'doolníił da , háálá haDiyin God bá bee hwééhózinii diyingo bits'ąą hasti'go hatsii'káa'gi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	If his father or his brother or his brother or his brother died , he shall not be made unclean ; for he is a sign of God upon his head .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	3960
INPUT:	Jó , Mózes nidi dówózhii biyi'dę́ę́' bich'į' ha'oodzí'ígíí baa hane' binahjį' da'neeznáádę́ę́' náádi'yiijeehígíí ííshją́ą́ áyiilaa , háálá ádííniid , Bóhólníihii éí Éíbraham biDiyin God áádóó Áízak biDiyin God índa Jéíkab biDiyin God nilį́ .
PRED:	But Moses showed them the dead words that he had spoken to them in the sky . He said , “ The Lord God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . ”
GOLD:	“ But now , as to whether the dead will be raised — even Moses proved this when he wrote about the burning bush . Long after Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had died , he referred to the Lord as ‘ the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . '

ID:	3961
INPUT:	Dį́į́' nídízííd binih índa náhást'éí yoołkááł góne' éí kin haal'áagi ayóó át'éego hodííchįįdígíí biniinaa diné éí ch'iyáán bits'ą́ą́' ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	On the fourth day of the fourth month and on the fourth day of the fourth month , the people destroyed them for food .
GOLD:	By July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , the famine in the city had become very severe , and the last of the food was entirely gone .

ID:	3962
INPUT:	T'áá bee shich'į' ha'oodzí'ígíí bik'ehgo haasdzíí' , áko dahiná daazlį́į'go deizį' áádóó ayóó ánéelą́ą́' yíl'á .
PRED:	And I commanded them according to the word of my mouth , and they rose up , and they stood , and great multitude .
GOLD:	So I spoke the message as he commanded me , and breath came into their bodies . They all came to life and stood up on their feet — a great army .

ID:	3963
INPUT:	Áko Niihemáíyah ání , Shoo , nihiDiyin God nílíinii , nihidiits'į́į́h , háálá nihi'doot'įįd , áádóó yee nihá nidahałt'i'ii bik'ijį' nináhádleehgo ánílééh índa kéyah yisnááh hólǫ́ǫdi dabidilnééh .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Listen , our God , for we have done this , and bring them into captivity , and bring them into captivity . ”
GOLD:	Then I prayed , “ Hear us , our God , for we are being mocked . May their scoffing fall back on their own heads , and may they themselves become captives in a foreign land !

ID:	3964
INPUT:	Áádóó Názarait nilíinii bá díí bee haz'áanii át'é : ats'á'ádeet'ą́ągo bíyoołkáłígíí bíighah azlį́į'go níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'jį' hoł dadookah ,
PRED:	And these are the law of the law : when the days of the month come , they shall bring him to the door of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law for Nazirites . At the conclusion of their time of separation as Nazirites , they must each go to the entrance of the Tabernacle

ID:	3965
INPUT:	<unk> , Ii<unk> , Níífeg , Jafáíya ,
PRED:	He said , “ Go up , saying ,
GOLD:	Ibhar , Elishua , Nepheg , Japhia ,

ID:	3966
INPUT:	Áádóó nízhdii'na'go kin bii' áłah ná'ádleehí biyi'dę́ę́' ch'ízhníyáago , Sáíman bighangi yah ajííyá . Nít'éé' Sáíman be'asdzą́ą́ bimá t'áá íiyisí bitah honeezgai lá , áko yá nídahookąąh .
PRED:	And he rose up and went out of the synagogue , and went into Simon 's house . And Simon 's mother 's wife was sick , and cried out to him .
GOLD:	After leaving the synagogue that day , Jesus went to Simon 's home , where he found Simon 's mother-in-law very sick with a high fever . “ Please heal her , ” everyone begged .

ID:	3967
INPUT:	Ashdla' nołt'éego neeznádiingo nihaa nídadidoojah ; neeznádiin nołt'éego neeznáadi míilgo nihik'ee nidanichée doo áádóó nihi'ana'í nihilą́ąjį' diltłish bee bił nidadziilghaał doo .
PRED:	And ten hundred men shall come to you , and ten thousand men shall fall before you , and ye shall fall before your enemies .
GOLD:	Five of you will chase a hundred , and a hundred of you will chase ten thousand ! All your enemies will fall beneath your sword .

ID:	3968
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné t'áá íiyisí nídaasdzíidgo ádahodííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ánít'į́ ? Háálá nida'ał'eełii Jónah éí Bóhólníihii hólǫ́ǫ́dóó yits'ąą yóó'eelwodígíí bił béédahoozin ; jó , t'áá ákót'éego bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	And the people were afraid , and said unto him , Why are you ? For they have known that he has fled from the Lord , because they have fled from the hand of the Lord .
GOLD:	The sailors were terrified when they heard this , for he had already told them he was running away from the Lord . “ Oh , why did you do it ? ” they groaned .

ID:	3969
INPUT:	Nidi ádił ni'jít'įįhgo ádee hanáázdoodzíí' , Diné baa nídaaht'ínígíí doo bééhasin da nihidishní .
PRED:	But I say to you , “ I do n't know what you do . ”
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know this man you 're talking about ! ”

ID:	3970
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	David 's Prayer of Thanks

ID:	3971
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sáíras wolyéii ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii éí ał'ąą dine'é bidáahgi nideeshniłgo áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii yee áká daaszaazii nítłóo'go ádeeshłííł índa béésh łitsoii dáń'dítį́hí naakigo ąą ádooníiłgo doo dáń'di'dootį́įł da biniyé bíla' nish'náájí yótą'go yich'į' yáłti'go ííłní ,
PRED:	He said to Cyrus , “ I will set my anointed before the nations , and I will open the gates of the nations , and I will open the gates of the nations , to open the gates , and to open its right hand ,
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Cyrus , his anointed one , whose right hand he will empower.Before him , mighty kings will be paralyzed with fear.Their fortress gates will be opened , never to shut again .

ID:	3972
INPUT:	Ákohgo éí ałdó' kódaaníigo hach'į' t'ą́ą́' háádadoodzih , Bóhólníihii , hádą́ą'shą' dichin nílį́įgo , doodaii' dibáá' nílį́įgo , doodaii' dé'éyóní nílį́įgo , doodaii' ni'éé' ádingo , doodaii' dantsaahgo , doodaii' awáalyaa góne' sínídáago daniiltsą́ągo , t'áadoo naa ádahosiilyąąd da ?
PRED:	They will answer him , “ Lord , why are you hungry or foreigners , or foreigners , or in prison , or in prison ? ”
GOLD:	“ Then they will reply , ‘ Lord , when did we ever see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison , and not help you ? '

ID:	3973
INPUT:	Nihí índa k'idadooláii dibáá' áádóó dláád índa níló bee atínihiishłaa , nidi t'áadoo shich'į' ninánoohkai da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And ye , and thirsty , and thirsty , and hail , but ye have not come to me , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	I sent blight and mildew and hail to destroy everything you worked so hard to produce . Even so , you refused to return to me , says the Lord .

ID:	3974
INPUT:	áko nihida'ana'í t'áá át'é t'áá nihí ádíts'ą́ąjį' nihaa ch'ídahidoojah ; jó , ákót'éego Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	And all your enemies will turn away from you , as the Lord has spoken .
GOLD:	You will drive out all the enemies living in the land , just as the Lord said you would .

ID:	3975
INPUT:	Naadiin tsosts'id yihah góne' , áłtsé nídízííd binih , ła'a jį́į́ góne' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	On the first day of the seventh month , in the first month , the word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	On April 26 , the first day of the new year , during the twenty-seventh year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3976
INPUT:	Ákondi éí diné ła' aTaa' nilíinii yiyiiłtsą́ , doo dishníigo ádíshníi da , t'áá hazhó'ó Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' hojílónígíí t'éiyá , éí aTaa' jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	But I say to the Father , “ I do n't say that the Father is from God except the Father . ”
GOLD:	( Not that anyone has ever seen the Father ; only I , who was sent from God , have seen him . )

ID:	3977
INPUT:	<unk> shan áádóó Áshįįh kin haal'áii índa Engíídai ; éí bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił hastą́ągo kin hadaas'áhígíí ałdó' Júdah dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	and Bashan , and Bashan ; six cities with their villages .
GOLD:	Nibshan , the City of Salt , and En-gedi — six towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3978
INPUT:	Shizhé'é kóníigo Diyin God binááł hashiyííłdzíí' , Shoo , dadeestsaał ; Kéínan kéyahdi t'áá shí ádá tséní'íígeedgi yóó'áshidíílííł . Éí bąą k'ad , t'áá shǫǫdí , sha'di'ní'aahgo ákǫ́ǫ́ deesháałgo áadi shizhé'é yóó'ádeeshłííł , áádóó índa áádę́ę́' nínáádeeshdááł .
PRED:	My father said to me , “ Behold , I will die in the land of Canaan , and bury me in the cave . Now let me go and bury my father , and I will bury him . ”
GOLD:	Tell him that my father made me swear an oath . He said to me , ‘ Listen , I am about to die . Take my body back to the land of Canaan , and bury me in the tomb I prepared for myself . ' So please allow me to go and bury my father . After his burial , I will return without delay . ”

ID:	3979
INPUT:	Áádóó yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá ałtso baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doogo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'idzisdli' ; éí nihí áádóó niha'áłchíní áádóó Líívai dine'é índa dé'éyóní nihitahgi kéédahat'ínígíí bił nihaa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	And ye shall rejoice in all good things , and the Lord thy God hath blessed thee , and thy children , and the Levites , and the stranger that dwell among thee .
GOLD:	Afterward you may go and celebrate because of all the good things the Lord your God has given to you and your household . Remember to include the Levites and the foreigners living among you in the celebration .

ID:	3980
INPUT:	Doo yá'át'ééhgóó hane'ii doo bik'ee bił yée' da ; Bóhólníihii yaa dzólíigo bijéí bohoníłdzil .
PRED:	The wicked shall not be afraid of him ; the heart of the Lord shall stand in his heart .
GOLD:	They do not fear bad news ; they confidently trust the Lord to care for them .

ID:	3981
INPUT:	éí nihí nihida'ana'í bits'ą́ąjį' , índa nihik'ee dadiniihii t'áá ałtso bílák'eedę́ę́' yisdáhidiikah biniyé ,
PRED:	to deliver us from our enemies , and from all those who hate us .
GOLD:	Now we will be saved from our enemiesand from all who hate us .

ID:	3982
INPUT:	háálá Mózes yik'ee bił niiłch'iihgo ádayiilaa , áko t'áá na'níle'dii saad yee hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	For Moses was filled with fear , and he spoke with his mouth .
GOLD:	They made Moses angry , and he spoke foolishly .

ID:	3983
INPUT:	Kintah da'nítiingi wáin yíká daacha ; ił hózhóonii t'áá ałtso ásdįįd ; kéyah bikáá'góó dloh hasinii bił ahóóyá .
PRED:	They cry out in the streets ; all the joy of the earth is destroyed .
GOLD:	Mobs gather in the streets , crying out for wine.Joy has turned to gloom.Gladness has been banished from the land .

ID:	3984
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Éran índa biye'ké Eliyéízar áádóó Íthamar ííłní , Nihitsii' t'ááká bik'i da'doołtsóós lágo , danihi'éé' t'ááká ák'indaołdlaad lágo , áko doo dadínóohnéeł da índa diné t'áá ałtso doo atíbidi'doolníił da biniyé ákódadoohnííł . Nidi bíni'dii danihik'isóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso éí Bóhólníihii ahodííłk'ą́'ígíí yaa atínídadindleeh .
PRED:	Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar , “ Do n't touch your head . Do n't put your clothes on your head , so that you will not die , and you will die , and all the people of Israel did as the Lord burnt . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons Eleazar and Ithamar , “ Do not show grief by leaving your hair uncombed or by tearing your clothes . If you do , you will die , and the Lord 's anger will strike the whole community of Israel . However , the rest of the Israelites , your relatives , may mourn because of the Lord 's fiery destruction of Nadab and Abihu .

ID:	3985
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní yóó'adíí'ą́ ; shíi'ii bits'áníyá ; shii' sizíinii hánígo ayóó'ádayó'nínígíí bida'ana'í baa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	My children have forsaken me ; I have given them to those who love me .
GOLD:	“ I have abandoned my people , my special possession.I have surrendered my dearest ones to their enemies .

ID:	3986
INPUT:	Ákohgo Sámson éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' sodoolzingo ání , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , shéénílnííh baa nánooshkąąh ; Diyin God nílíinii , shidziilgo ánáshídlééh , áko Filístiya dine'é shináá' hadeiznilii t'ááłáhídiígíí ałtso k'éédideeshdlííł .
PRED:	Samson prayed to the Lord and said , “ Please , Lord God , I pray you , and make me strong , and I will give all the Philistines to me . ”
GOLD:	Then Samson prayed to the Lord , “ Sovereign Lord , remember me again . O God , please strengthen me just one more time . With one blow let me pay back the Philistines for the loss of my two eyes . ”

ID:	3987
INPUT:	Níyol nááshidiiłtéehgo shił yiyołgo ánáshiinil'įįh ; ayóó át'éego níyolígíí yááshiiłgohgo nínáshidíł'oł .
PRED:	He makes me fall , and makes me fall , and I bow down to the wind , and I bow down to the wind .
GOLD:	You throw me into the whirlwindand destroy me in the storm .

ID:	3988
INPUT:	<unk> dziihgo áádóó bina'adlo'go áádóó bináhoo<unk> go t'éí yáłti' ; ádílááh saad índa saad nichǫ́'íii yee yáłti' .
PRED:	The words of the mouth of lies , and the words of truth , and the tongue of the wicked .
GOLD:	Their mouths are full of cursing , lies , and threats.Trouble and evil are on the tips of their tongues .

ID:	3989
INPUT:	Nihits'ą́ą́dóó nidahachíihii bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo áádóó nihidáda'ak'eh bits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' áádóó nihilį́į́' nidahachíihii áádóó nihibéégashii índa nihidibé k'ee'ąą deílzhíishgo bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo .
PRED:	May your descendants be blessed with you , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your flocks , and your flocks .
GOLD:	Your children and your cropswill be blessed.The offspring of your herds and flockswill be blessed .

ID:	3990
INPUT:	Díí ałtso ła' yinilaago ninish'náajigo náádíníítéełgo Júdah dine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii bá dah yíyéeł doo ; dízdiin yiską́ąjį' kót'éego sínítį́į doo ; t'ááłá'í niyiiłkaahígíí éí t'ááłá'í náháhígíí bik'ehgo wólta'go naa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	And thou shalt take one of these things , and thou shalt take it to the right hand of Judah for forty days ; and thou shalt take one half of them .
GOLD:	After that , turn over and lie on your right side for 40 days — one day for each year of Judah 's sin .

ID:	3991
INPUT:	Saul ání , Haa'íshą' diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii danohłíinii t'áá ánółtso , hágo , áko nihił béédahodoozįįł áádóó dadínóoł'įįł háishą' jį́į́dą́ą́' ádił ni'iidzííh yaa naayá .
PRED:	Saul said , “ Let all the elders of the elders of the elders come and see that he has sinned . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul said to the leaders , “ Something 's wrong ! I want all my army commanders to come here . We must find out what sin was committed today .

ID:	3992
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Páílat áhodííniid , T'áá aaníiniishą' éí ha'át'íí óolyé ? Áádóó kódííniidgo , Jew dine'é yich'į' ch'ínáánádzáago áyidííniid , Yee ádąąh dah hast'áanii doo ła' bá shił bééhoozin da .
PRED:	Pilate said to them , “ What is the truth ? ” And when he came out to the Jews , he said to the Jews , “ I do n't know anything . ”
GOLD:	“ What is truth ? ” Pilate asked . Then he went out again to the people and told them , “ He is not guilty of any crime .

ID:	3993
INPUT:	Áádóó éí diné béhé aghajíltínígíí bitsásk'ehgi dibé yázhí dį́į́' ninázhdoodlééł , háálá díí kójíít'įįdgo doo aa a'áhí jiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	And he shall take the lamb of the man 's sheep in his place , for he did not receive the gift .
GOLD:	He must repay four lambs to the poor man for the one he stole and for having no pity . ”

ID:	3994
INPUT:	Áadi índa ábidííniid , Yínííł nitsaii bii' dahoniidlǫ́ǫgo nihił béédahózin ; Jerúsalem kin haal'á t'áá ádzaaí silį́į́' índa bidáń'daditį́įhii adahideezk'ą́ą́' ; sołtį' , doo t'óó nihá ninááhát'i' da doo biniyé Jerúsalem ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'in dooígíí háádadiitł'į́į́ł .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ We know that we have many troubles . Let 's burn the gates of Jerusalem and the gates of Jerusalem , and let us burn the gates of Jerusalem . Let 's not be built . ”
GOLD:	But now I said to them , “ You know very well what trouble we are in . Jerusalem lies in ruins , and its gates have been destroyed by fire . Let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem and end this disgrace ! ”

ID:	3995
INPUT:	T'áadoo hasht'edaalyaa da yę́ę hasht'edadííliił biniyé Kríitdi nininíłtį́ , áádóó t'áá kin hadaas'áhígi da'oodlání áłah nádleehgi oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii nidahidíínił . Bee ándííniidii béénílniih :
PRED:	Remember what they had prepared for them , but I have given them to them , and give you the elders of the church in every city .
GOLD:	I left you on the island of Crete so you could complete our work there and appoint elders in each town as I instructed you .

ID:	3996
INPUT:	Háálá ajéí bii'dę́ę́' nichxǫ́'ógo nitsáhákees hahwiileeh , diné naatseed , adilyé , na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá , ani'į́į́' , wooch'íidgo hane' , t'áá ádzaagóó aa hane' .
PRED:	For there is a false heart , a false witness , a false witness , a false witness , a false witness .
GOLD:	For from the heart come evil thoughts , murder , adultery , all sexual immorality , theft , lying , and slander .

ID:	3997
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa hak'ijisdli'go hwéé'níłnii' áádóó dahaghangóó anídadziiskai .
PRED:	So Joshua blessed them , and they returned to their home .
GOLD:	So Joshua blessed them and sent them away , and they went home .

ID:	3998
INPUT:	éí ła' diné , ałdzéhí nilį́įgo , Sáíman ałdó' yolyéego tábąąhgi bighan , ákwii ba'ałk'ee dzizdá . [ Éí baa nidíínaałii bee nił hozhdoolnih . ]
PRED:	If a man named Simon , son of Simon , who is at the sea , tell him what you have done . ”
GOLD:	He is staying with Simon , a tanner who lives near the seashore . ”

ID:	3999
INPUT:	Díí éí Líívai dine'é bídadéét'i' : naadiin ashdla'dóó yówehgo béédááhaígíí éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' nidaal'a' doo ,
PRED:	These are the Levites : five years old and twenty years old and twenty years old , and they shall serve in the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	“ This is the rule the Levites must follow : They must begin serving in the Tabernacle at the age of twenty-five ,

ID:	4000
INPUT:	háálá díí na'al'a'go cho'oot'ínígíí Diyin God bidiyį́į́' yídin danilíinii doo t'óó bee bíká aná'álwo'ii t'éiyá át'ée da , nidi t'áá bilááh ánéelą́ą'go Diyin God bich'į' baa ahééh hwiindzin k'ee'ąą yilzhishgo áyoolííł .
PRED:	For it is not only for the saints , but to the saints , but to give thanks to God more than many .
GOLD:	So two good things will result from this ministry of giving — the needs of the believers in Jerusalem will be met , and they will joyfully express their thanks to God .

ID:	4001
INPUT:	Éísa éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo tádiindóó ba'aan tseebíí náhááh binih Ámrii biye' Éíhab éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í náánásdlį́į́' , áko Ámrii biye' Éíhab Samériyagi Ízrel dine'é yinant'áago naadiin naaki nááhai .
PRED:	In the eighth year of Asa king of Judah , Ahab son of Ahab became king of Israel in Samaria for two years .
GOLD:	Ahab son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-eighth year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty-two years .

ID:	4002
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí tónteel yikáa'jigo dah didiilnii'go Bóhólníihii éí ha'a'aahdę́ę'go tł'éé' bíighah ayóó át'éego níyolgo áyiilaa ; éí bee tónteel t'ą́ą́' anáálzhiizh ; tónteelígíí ałts'á yííłk'olgo ni' yíłtseigo áyiilaa .
PRED:	And Moses stretched out his hand upon the sea , and the Lord made a great wind by night by night , and he divided them up by the sea , and divided them up by the sea .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand over the sea , and the Lord opened up a path through the water with a strong east wind . The wind blew all that night , turning the seabed into dry land .

ID:	4003
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bízhi' ayóó át'éii yą́ą́h nilíinii bee baa dahohniih ! Náádahidoołnihii deínóhjáahgo bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah ahohkááh !
PRED:	Praise the name of the Lord , who is worthy of his name ; come into the house of his sanctuary .
GOLD:	Give to the Lord the glory he deserves ! Bring your offering and come into his courts .

ID:	4004
INPUT:	Áko ts'ídá ayóó át'éii haidiní'ą́ągo bąą diné danilíinii áádóó ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii índa bizaad ał'ąą át'éego yee yádaałti'ii t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí bitah nidahwiiłnáago hak'ee bił daayéé' nít'éé' . Diyeeshhééł yó'níinii <unk> xeed nít'éé' , áádóó bił yá'át'éehii éí dahináago áyósin nít'éé' . A'ohgo át'éii atisgo át'éego ádeile' nít'éé' , áádóó atisgo át'éii a'ohgo át'éego ádeile' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And he gave them great power , and all peoples , and language , and language , and all their tongue , and smote them ; and they hated them , and made them great .
GOLD:	He made him so great that people of all races and nations and languages trembled before him in fear . He killed those he wanted to kill and spared those he wanted to spare . He honored those he wanted to honor and disgraced those he wanted to disgrace .

ID:	4005
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Hananáíyah bich'į' dínáahgo kóbidiní , Tsin bee azéédéetání ádaalyaii dahíníti' , nidi bitsásk'ehgi béésh nitł'izii bee azéédéetání ádeinilaa .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Go to Hananiah , and say to them , ‘ You have made a yoke of iron . '
GOLD:	“ Go and tell Hananiah , ‘ This is what the Lord says : You have broken a wooden yoke , but you have replaced it with a yoke of iron .

ID:	4006
INPUT:	Doo hwiih nileehígíí biniinaa Asíriya dine'é ałdó' bich'į' íłjił nít'éé' ; t'áá aaníí bich'į' íłjił nidi , t'áadoo hwiih sínílį́į' da .
PRED:	Because you were filled with the hand of Assyria , you did not have sex with her , but you did not have filled with her .
GOLD:	You have prostituted yourself with the Assyrians , too . It seems you can never find enough new lovers ! And after your prostitution there , you still were not satisfied .

ID:	4007
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá awołí bee da'iinohdląąh , áádóó doo éí t'éiyá da nidi ts'ídá yá'át'éehgo ádaahníił doo , áádóó nihił éédahodoozįįł ,
PRED:	Therefore believe in the faith , and not only in the faith , but do good , and ye shall know that it is good .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	4008
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii éí yínííł nilį́į doo ; naat'áanii éí t'áá íiyisí bąąh nahóókaad doo ; éí kéyah bii' diné kéédahat'íinii yéé' bitah dahóó<unk> doo ; ádajíít'įįdígíí bik'ehgo k'éédahodideeshdlííł ; t'áá hó aa nídajit'íinii bik'ehgo haa nídadéesht'įįł ; áadi índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	The king will mourn , and the king will be very angry . I will punish the inhabitants of the land , and they will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The king and the prince will stand helpless , weeping in despair , and the people 's handswill tremble with fear.I will bring on themthe evil they have done to others , and they will receive the punishmentthey so richly deserve.Then they will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	4009
INPUT:	Gad nahalingo bitsee' yiwod , bitsosk'id gónaa bits'id a<unk> ghahgo neelzhee' .
PRED:	He ran away like a bird , and he was able to stand at the end of the lake .
GOLD:	Its tail is as strong as a cedar.The sinews of its thighs are knit tightly together .

ID:	4010
INPUT:	Áłtséhé góne' dahooghanígíí éí tsosts'idóó ałníi'go ké naazlá ádahoníłtso , ná'á<unk> góne' dahooghanígíí náhást'éí ké naazlá ádahoníłtso , áádóó índa táá' ná'á<unk> góne' dahooghanígíí éí neeznáádóó ałníi'go ké naazlá ádahoníłtso , háálá á daní'áhígíí éí doo kin bá nídaastł'inígíí bighá daaz'áa da doo biniyé kin bá nídaastł'inígíí bąąh dah náhást'ą́ągo ahééhool'áago áyiilaa , áko á daní'áhígíí bikáa'gi dah naaztą́ .
PRED:	And the pillars were seven cubits and twenty cubits , and the breadth of the court , and the breadth of the court , and the breadth of the house , for the cities of the city was not built for ever .
GOLD:	The complex was three stories high , the bottom floor being 71/2 feet wide , the second floor 9 feet wide , and the top floor 101/2 feet wide . The rooms were connected to the walls of the Temple by beams resting on ledges built out from the wall . So the beams were not inserted into the walls themselves .

ID:	4011
INPUT:	Háí diné shį́įshą' Job nahojílin ? Éí tó jidlánígi át'éego nahat'i' jidlą́ ,
PRED:	Who is this man like Job ? It is like water , and believe in him .
GOLD:	“ Tell me , has there ever been a man like Job , with his thirst for irreverent talk ?

ID:	4012
INPUT:	Áádóó tsídii t'ááłá'ígo tó nílínídę́ę́' tóhígíí hashtł'ish łeets'aa' bee siką́ągo bik'ijį' yidiyoołhééł .
PRED:	And he shall kill one bird from the water , and he shall kill the water of the water .
GOLD:	He will slaughter one of the birds over a clay pot filled with fresh water .

ID:	4013
INPUT:	Áko Sámson ázhdííniid , Télii biyaats'iin bee míilgo diné nisíłts<unk> go ałk'i dadeesk'idgo áshłaa .
PRED:	Samson said , “ I have sent a thousand donkeys , and I have cast them on a hill . ”
GOLD:	Then Samson said , “ With the jawbone of a donkey , I 've piled them in heaps ! With the jawbone of a donkey , I 've killed a thousand men ! ”

ID:	4014
INPUT:	K'ad díí kót'éego éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin ázhdoolíłígíí Sálaman bee nahodi'neestą́ą́' . Áłtséédą́ą́' bí'néél'ąądígíí t'áá éí bik'ehgo náásee'go náhást'édiin ké silá áádóó tádiin ké silá áníłtéél .
PRED:	Now this is the number of the house of the Lord : the length of Solomon was twenty cubits long and twenty cubits .
GOLD:	These are the dimensions Solomon used for the foundation of the Temple of God ( using the old standard of measurement ) . It was 90 feet long and 30 feet wide .

ID:	4015
INPUT:	Dadine'é áádóó nihokáá' bee bídahólníihgo bił nahaz'áanii Bóhólníihii yá nidaal'a' doo biniyé áłah silį́į'go yaa dahodoolnih .
PRED:	And the people and the kingdoms shall come together to serve the Lord in all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	when multitudes gather togetherand kingdoms come to worship the Lord .

ID:	4016
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii bik'ee ił yée'ii áádóó yee ayóó át'éii bits'ádi'nílíidii bits'ąą tséníí' góne' adoohkahgo łeeyi' nídadidooht'į́į́ł .
PRED:	Therefore you shall take away the glory of the Lord , and hide them in the rock of the glory of the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	Crawl into caves in the rocks.Hide in the dustfrom the terror of the Lordand the glory of his majesty .

ID:	4017
INPUT:	Nidi yaa nitsídaakeesígíí hoł bééhózingo ábizhdííniid , Ła' hooghandóó danilíinii t'áá bí ałk'i néijahgo éí t'áá ádzaaí neheleeh , áádóó łahgo dah oonééł t'áá bí ałk'i néijahgo t'óó ałts'á'áldah doo .
PRED:	But when he saw their thoughts , he said to them , “ Some of the house will be cut off , and the camp will be divided . ”
GOLD:	He knew their thoughts , so he said , “ Any kingdom divided by civil war is doomed . A family splintered by feuding will fall apart .

ID:	4018
INPUT:	Binaagóó éí yah ada'iildéhígíí dahólǫ́ , áko nááseego dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódahonízah , áádóó naaniigo éí tseebíí ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódahoníłtéelgo yah ada'iiztiin .
PRED:	The border of the court was forty cubits , and the breadth of the court was twenty cubits , and the breadth of the gate was five cubits .
GOLD:	( The entry rooms of the gateways leading into the inner courtyard were 14 feet across and 433/4 feet wide . )

ID:	4019
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii hach'į' haadzíi'go ání , Bath-shííba shá hágo bidiní . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' nizhníyáago bidááhdę́ę́' dziizį' .
PRED:	Then the king answered her , “ Call my sister . ” So she went and stood before the king .
GOLD:	King David responded , “ Call Bathsheba ! ” So she came back in and stood before the king .

ID:	4020
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar éí Jeremáíyah kódadoohłííł , níigo siláo binanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan yich'į' haadzíí' ,
PRED:	This is the word that Jeremiah , king of Babylon , saying ,
GOLD:	King Nebuchadnezzar had told Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , to find Jeremiah .

ID:	4021
INPUT:	Nidi na'nitiní t'áadoo bee danihi'dójíhí , háálá t'ááłá'í nihiNa'nitiní nilį́ , áádóó nihí t'áá ánółtso ałk'isóó danohłį́ .
PRED:	But do not be afraid of the teaching , because he is our Teacher , and all your brothers .
GOLD:	“ Do n't let anyone call you ‘ Rabbi , ' for you have only one teacher , and all of you are equal as brothers and sisters .

ID:	4022
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí yá bich'į'go bigish yił yadidiilnii' , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí nida'dilch'ilgo ni'dóó hahidinaadgo nílótsoh naałtingo áyiilaa , áko Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip kéyah bik'ijį' nílótsoh nayííłtą́ .
PRED:	And Moses stretched out his hand toward them , and fire came down upon the earth , and the Lord brought rain upon the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses lifted his staff toward the sky , and the Lord sent thunder and hail , and lightning flashed toward the earth . The Lord sent a tremendous hailstorm against all the land of Egypt .

ID:	4023
INPUT:	Doo ádahalyánígíí bee hool'iní dah deidiijaa'go ak'ah iih nídoodziłígíí t'áágééd dah diikai ,
PRED:	They took the light from the lamp , and went away without oil .
GOLD:	The five who were foolish did n't take enough olive oil for their lamps ,

ID:	4024
INPUT:	Áko éí Ófer hoolyéedi bił da'ní'éél , áádóó óola dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin tálent bíighahgo shóda<unk> t'e' , índa éí aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman baa dadziizyį́ .
PRED:	And they came to Cyprus , and they took four hundred and four hundred talents of gold , and brought them to king Solomon .
GOLD:	They sailed to Ophir and brought back to Solomon some sixteen tons of gold .

ID:	4025
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' binaa ahééda'astł'inii naa'ííníłkaad ? Áko yą́ą́h nídadikahii aneest'ą' dayóbé .
PRED:	Why do you cast down the walls ? And the sheep eat fruit .
GOLD:	But now , why have you broken down our wallsso that all who pass by may steal our fruit ?

ID:	4026
INPUT:	T'áá ádzaagóó hodílzingo doo adą́ ádeił'íinii bił ííshją́ą́ ádahóle'
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	A Call to Justice and Mercy

ID:	4027
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaadóó biiskání hoos'įįdgo Néíbal hasht'e'ninádzáago , hwe'asdzą́ą́ díí t'áá ałtso yee hoł hoolne'go bik'ee hajéí niiltłah áádóó tségi ájít'é dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that when she came to Nabal , that he went and told him all these things , and his heart was filled with oil .
GOLD:	In the morning when Nabal was sober , his wife told him what had happened . As a result he had a stroke , and he lay paralyzed on his bed like a stone .

ID:	4028
INPUT:	K'ad Josáíyah łahjį' yaa naayáhígíí áádóó Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii bii' nídaháasdzooígíí bik'ehgo yá'át'éehgo ádzaii
PRED:	Josiah did what was right in the book of the Lord 's Law .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Josiah 's reign and his acts of devotion ( carried out according to what was written in the Law of the Lord ) ,

ID:	4029
INPUT:	Azhą́ Bóhólníihii aláahgo bóhólnííh nidi , a'ohgo ádaat'éii yaa ntsíkees , nidi ádaa dahoji'niihii éí nízaadi hats'ą́ądi hólǫ́ǫgo haa nitsékees .
PRED:	But the Lord is the King , but the humble are far away from him , and he is far away from us .
GOLD:	Though the Lord is great , he cares for the humble , but he keeps his distance from the proud .

ID:	4030
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ągo náá'iiłniihii nááhodínóoł'įįł , áko hakáá'góó k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizh lágo éí náá'iiłniihii , Doo ni'didéeh da lá , hodidooniił ; éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii naałniih át'é .
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest shall look at him , and the priest shall pronounce him unclean , and the priest shall pronounce him unclean , and he shall pronounce him unclean .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the person again . If the affected area has spread on the skin , the priest must pronounce that person ceremonially unclean , for it is clearly a serious skin disease .

ID:	4031
INPUT:	Áko ne'ajooba'ii sha'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii hool'áágóó doo bits'ą́ąjį' ádíílíił da . Bóhólníihii éí David bi'ana'í t'ááłá'í nítínígo nahasdzáán bikáa'gi áyoołdįįłgo doo nihits'ą́ąjį' kódíílíił da .
PRED:	You shall not turn away from the house of my servant forever ; you shall not turn away from the hand of David to destroy all the earth .
GOLD:	treat my family with this faithful love , even when the Lord destroys all your enemies from the face of the earth . ”

ID:	4032
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Peter hanáánáádzíi'go áhodííniid , Jó , nihí nihee dahólǫ́ǫ́ nít'é'ígíí ałtso bits'ą́ą́' dah dahidiikaigo , nikéé' dayíníikááh . Ákoshą' ha'át'íí nihíí' dadooleeł ?
PRED:	Peter answered and said to them , “ We have left all that you have , and follow us . What will we do ? ”
GOLD:	Then Peter said to him , “ We 've given up everything to follow you . What will we get ? ”

ID:	4033
INPUT:	Áko Féro bits'ą́ą́dóó ch'ízhníyáago Bóhólníihii níjooskan .
PRED:	So he went out of Pharaoh and prayed to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Moses left Pharaoh 's court and pleaded with the Lord .

ID:	4034
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' Míriyam éí níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ą́góó kóho'diilyaa , áko diné t'áadoo niheenéhí Míriyam bił yah anídadziskaijį' índa .
PRED:	On the seventh day she went out of the camp , and the people went in to Moses and went to meet her .
GOLD:	So Miriam was kept outside the camp for seven days , and the people waited until she was brought back before they traveled again .

ID:	4035
INPUT:	Samériyagi Jííhu éí Ízrel dine'é yinant'áago naadiin tseebíí nááhai .
PRED:	Jehu reigned forty years in Samaria .
GOLD:	In all , Jehu reigned over Israel from Samaria for twenty-eight years .

ID:	4036
INPUT:	Asdzání doo ałchíhígíí ba'áłchíní haleehgo bił hózhǫ́ǫgo bighan yaa áhályą́ągo ádeiile' . Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Let the children of women be glad , and let them rejoice in the house of the fatherless . Praise the Lord .
GOLD:	He gives the childless woman a family , making her a happy mother.Praise the Lord !

ID:	4037
INPUT:	Ts'ídá dílzingo nideet'áanii , éí diné ts'ídá dílzingo niidiní'ánígíí éí doo nááhidoonih da , nidi t'áádóo nídí ádooldįįł .
PRED:	But if a man is holy , he shall not offer an offering , but he shall surely be cut off .
GOLD:	No person specially set apart for destruction may be bought back . Such a person must be put to death .

ID:	4038
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó hodílzingo doo adą́ tágí jį́ azlį́į'go Esther éí naat'á éé' nizhóníii biih jííyáago aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bich'éédą́ą'gi haz'ání góne' yah ajííyá , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bibik'i dah asdáhí bikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah sidáago binaashiidę́ę́' dziizį' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , on the third day , that Esther went into the house of the king , and entered into the house of the king , and sat on the throne of the king , and sat on his throne .
GOLD:	On the third day of the fast , Esther put on her royal robes and entered the inner court of the palace , just across from the king 's hall . The king was sitting on his royal throne , facing the entrance .

ID:	4039
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí łichíi'go índa t'áá át'é ditł'ogo akágí éé' nahalin , áko éí Íísa bee dahojíízhi' .
PRED:	And the firstborn was white , and all his firstborn , and they named him Esau .
GOLD:	The first one was very red at birth and covered with thick hair like a fur coat . So they named him Esau .

ID:	4040
INPUT:	<unk> bee atí'ályaaígíí
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	A Plague of Festering Boils

ID:	4041
INPUT:	Éí diné dabiyooch'íidgo t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo nida'nitinii éí t'áá aaníinii áádóó doo t'áá aaníí danilíinii yee ádaa ákodadínóodzįįł yę́ę , doo yee ádaa ákodanoozį́į́' át'ée da daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	They have become ashamed of the false witness , and they have been ashamed of the truth and truth .
GOLD:	These people are hypocrites and liars , and their consciences are dead .

ID:	4042
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave me this message :

ID:	4043
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ákwíí jį́ hach'į' yaa yádaałti' , ákondi doo jíists'ą́ą' da , Mórdiikai yiniinaa át'ínígíí daats'í bá dínóodzįįł biniyé Héíman bee bił hóóne' , háálá Jew dine'é nishłį́ jiníigo bee bił dahojoolne' .
PRED:	And they speak to him every day , but he would not listen to them , but Haman told them what Mordecai had done to the Jews , because I am the Jews .
GOLD:	They spoke to him day after day , but still he refused to comply with the order . So they spoke to Haman about this to see if he would tolerate Mordecai 's conduct , since Mordecai had told them he was a Jew .

ID:	4044
INPUT:	Áádóó díí t'ah biláhígo doo bą́ą́h anishłíinii baa naasháa doo , áádóó t'áá shí hózhǫ́ a'ohgo ádíí'níszin ádi'deeshnííł , índa ch'ikéí nidaal'a'í baa yáníłti' yę́ę ánísht'éii bił danilį́į doo .
PRED:	And I will do more than these things , and I will be humble , and I will be humble , and I will be ashamed with my servants .
GOLD:	Yes , and I am willing to look even more foolish than this , even to be humiliated in my own eyes ! But those servant girls you mentioned will indeed think I am distinguished ! ”

ID:	4045
INPUT:	Áko Korníílyas ání , Dį́į́' yiskánídą́ą́' , [ hodínísingo doo ashą́ą́góó] kojį' daats'í o'oolkidgo , wózhǫ́ yaa adeez'ą́ągo sodizin biniyé hoo'a'go shighan góne' sodiszin nít'éé' ; jó'akon , diné léi' shidááhdóó bi'éé' bits'ádi'nílíidgo sizį́ .
PRED:	Then Abimelech said , “ It was for four days , because it was about to pray , and I went into my house to pray , and behold , there was a man sitting before me . ”
GOLD:	Cornelius replied , “ Four days ago I was praying in my house about this same time , three o'clock in the afternoon . Suddenly , a man in dazzling clothes was standing in front of me .

ID:	4046
INPUT:	Áko nihí t'áá áníiltso t'áadoo nihinii'jį' bik'ída'asti'í bii' adéest'į́į́' biyi'jį' adéest'į́'ígi át'éego Bóhólníihii bee bits'ádi'nílíidii daníil'į́ , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Níłch'i Diyinii nilį́įgo nihiyi' naalnishgo Bóhólníihii bits'ádi'nílídígi át'éego t'áá ałkéé' honí'ą́ągo nihí ałdó' nihits'ádi'nílííd dadiidleeł .
PRED:	And we shall see the glory of the Lord , as we are full of the spirit of the Lord , and as the spirit of the Lord is in us .
GOLD:	So all of us who have had that veil removed can see and reflect the glory of the Lord . And the Lord — who is the Spirit — makes us more and more like him as we are changed into his glorious image .

ID:	4047
INPUT:	béégashii éí tádiindóó ba'aan hastą́ądi miil ánéelą́ą́' ,
PRED:	and twenty oxen , and six thousand ,
GOLD:	36,000 cattle ,

ID:	4048
INPUT:	áko índa Diné Silį́į'ii bee bééhózinii yádiłhił biyi'di yidooltsééł , áadi índa nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso dadoocha , índa yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' Diné Silį́į'ii k'os bił yildohgo áádóó bee adziil índa ayóó át'é ats'ádi'nílííd yił yigáałgo deizdoołtsééł .
PRED:	And the Son of Man shall see the Son of Man in heaven , and all the nations shall weep in heaven , and shall see the Son of Man coming out of heaven , and glory , and glory .
GOLD:	And then at last , the sign that the Son of Man is coming will appear in the heavens , and there will be deep mourning among all the peoples of the earth . And they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory .

ID:	4049
INPUT:	Áko dah nízhdiikaigo , jó'akon , Jóseph nayiiyeełgo Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago ábidííniid , Nídiidááh , áádóó ashkii áłts'íísígíí bimá bił ts'ídá tsxį́įłgo Ííjipgóó dohkááh . Nił ná<unk> ne'jį' áadi nihighan doo , háálá Hérad éí ashkii yidiyoołhééł biniyé háidínéeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	So they went out and saw a vision of the Lord appeared to him . He said to him , “ Get up and go to Egypt , and let the boy go to Egypt , for Herod will kill the boy . ”
GOLD:	After the wise men were gone , an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream . “ Get up ! Flee to Egypt with the child and his mother , ” the angel said . “ Stay there until I tell you to return , because Herod is going to search for the child to kill him . ”

ID:	4050
INPUT:	Náhookǫs índa shádi'ááh íinilaa , Dził Téíbor áádóó Dził Hérman bił hózhǫ́ǫgo nízhi' yaa haniih .
PRED:	You made the south and the south , and Mount Carmel praise his name .
GOLD:	You created north and south.Mount Tabor and Mount Hermon praise your name .

ID:	4051
INPUT:	Áko Jó'ab éí deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádííniid , áádóó Ízrel dine'é yikéé' deíjeehígíí t'ą́ą́' hahaazhjéé' ; jó , Jó'ab éí diné yéé'níłnii' .
PRED:	Joab said to the trumpet , “ The people of Israel followed Israel , because Joab sent the people away . ”
GOLD:	Then Joab blew the ram 's horn , and his men returned from chasing the army of Israel .

ID:	4052
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Éíbraham áyidííniid , Jó , Sérai ne'asdzą́ą́ éí Sérai doo nááhodidíí'niił da ; k'ad éí Sárah bee hwíínízhíi doo .
PRED:	And God said to Abraham , Behold , she is not able to say to her : for she hath not called Sarah .
GOLD:	Then God said to Abraham , “ Regarding Sarai , your wife — her name will no longer be Sarai . From now on her name will be Sarah .

ID:	4053
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Danizhé'é yę́ę bikéyahgóó índa nik'éítahgóó nídídááh , áko nił honishłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	The Lord said to Jacob , “ Your ancestors have come into the land of your ancestors , and you will be with you . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Jacob , “ Return to the land of your father and grandfather and to your relatives there , and I will be with you . ”

ID:	4054
INPUT:	Naat'áanii t'áá bí íinízingo Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádi'yoołnihgo éí didlidgo nááhániihii , doodaii' hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego éí ha'a'aahjigo dáń'dítį́hígíí há ąą ánál'įįh doo ; t'áá háá'áyį́į́h jį́ náá'iiłnihígi át'éego didlidgo nááhániihii , doodaii' hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii nááyiiłnih doo áádóó índa ch'ééjiidáahgo hakéédę́ę́' dáń'dílkał doo .
PRED:	And the prince shall offer an offering to the Lord , and the burnt offering , and the peace offering , and the gate of peace offerings , and the priest shall open the gates of peace offerings , and the gates of peace offerings , and the gates of peace offerings .
GOLD:	When the prince offers a voluntary burnt offering or peace offering to the Lord , the east gateway to the inner courtyard will be opened for him , and he will offer his sacrifices as he does on Sabbath days . Then he will leave , and the gateway will be shut behind him .

ID:	4055
INPUT:	Doo nihich'į' báhodoochįįłígíí biniyé índa deínókááhgóó doo ádadoohdįįł da biniyé biYe' nilíinii t'óó baa ádadiyoht'aah . Diné éí Diyin God yaa deidzólíhígíí t'áá ałtso bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	Be careful to destroy the Son of man , to destroy you , so that you may not destroy his Son , and to destroy all who trust in God .
GOLD:	Submit to God 's royal son , or he will become angry , and you will be destroyed in the midst of all your activities — for his anger flares up in an instant.But what joy for all who take refuge in him !

ID:	4056
INPUT:	Biníí' gónaa bidziilgo áyiił'įįh , áádóó bigaan ałdó' bidziilgo áyiił'įįh .
PRED:	He makes his hands strong , and makes his arm strong .
GOLD:	She is energetic and strong , a hard worker .

ID:	4057
INPUT:	Jó , doo tsį́įłgo ch'ídoohkah da , doo nidi ch'ídadínóohchéeł da , háálá Bóhólníihii t'áá bí nihilą́ąjį' yigáał doo , índa Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God éí t'áá nihikéédę́ę́' nihaa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	You will not go out quickly , but you will not escape ; for the Lord will come before you , and the God of Israel will keep you from you .
GOLD:	You will not leave in a hurry , running for your lives.For the Lord will go ahead of you ; yes , the God of Israel will protect you from behind .

ID:	4058
INPUT:	Díliyan , Mízpeh , <unk> hiyel ,
PRED:	Mizpah , Mizpah , Mizpah ,
GOLD:	Dilean , Mizpeh , Joktheel ,

ID:	4059
INPUT:	Éí t'ah nahą́ądę́ę́' doo ná choo'į́į da nít'éé' , nidi k'ad éí ná choo'į́ , shí ałdó' shá choo'į́ .
PRED:	In this way you were not able to live , but now they are for me .
GOLD:	Onesimus has n't been of much use to you in the past , but now he is very useful to both of us .

ID:	4060
INPUT:	Tsin tł'óół naakits'áadah bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii bee Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih , tsin tł'óół neeznáá bąąh daneelzhee'go bee bá nidaahnéego dahohtaał !
PRED:	Sing to the Lord with the harp ! Sing to the Lord with the harp .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord with melodies on the lyre ; make music for him on the ten-stringed harp .

ID:	4061
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaa haz'ánígi biná'ázbaalgo ádíílííł , índa bich'é'étiingi aníbaalgo ádíílííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt make a tent of the tabernacle , and thou shalt make his tent in the door of the door .
GOLD:	Then set up the courtyard around the outside of the tent , and hang the curtain for the courtyard entrance .

ID:	4062
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' bikáá' náá'iiniihí ájiilaaígi bikáá'dóó didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii táadi náájiilnih t'ááłá'í nínáhahjį' áádóó Bóhólníihii binááł bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáá' didlidgo łikání halchin nízhdíłi' . Kót'éego kin ałtso ájiilaa .
PRED:	And Solomon built an altar unto the Lord , and a burnt offering , and a burnt offering , and a burnt offering , and a burnt offering in the sight of the Lord ; and he burned it in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	Three times each year Solomon presented burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built for the Lord . He also burned incense to the Lord . And so he finished the work of building the Temple .

ID:	4063
INPUT:	Áko nihí da'iisiidląądii t'éiyá háá'áyį́į́h Diyin God yee hooł'a'ígíí biih hiikááh . Jó , t'áá bí ádííniid , T'óó báhádzidgo atí'ésh'íinii binahjį' ádee hadeesdzíi'go ádííniid , Háá'áyį́į́h bee hooł'a'ígíí ts'ídá doo biih dazhdookah da ! Azhą́ nahasdzáán ałtso niiní'ą́ąjį' binaanish ła'yiyiilaa nidi ádííniid .
PRED:	But we have believed in the Sabbath , but to the rest of God . He said to himself , “ They will not enter into my wrath ! ” But he said to them , “ They will not enter the rest of the world . ”
GOLD:	For only we who believe can enter his rest . As for the others , God said , “ In my anger I took an oath : ‘ They will never enter my place of rest , ' ” even though this rest has been ready since he made the world .

ID:	4064
INPUT:	Áko hastą́ą́h yiską́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Jesus , éí Peter áádóó James índa bitsilí John ałdó' dziłghą́ą́'góó t'áá sáhí hajizh'eezh .
PRED:	And it came to pass after six days , that Jesus took Peter , James , and John , and John , and John , and John , and John , and John , and John , and his brother .
GOLD:	Six days later Jesus took Peter and the two brothers , James and John , and led them up a high mountain to be alone .

ID:	4065
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego : Bił hadlee'go na'aznii' , diné badahojoobá'íii yitaa'aznii' . Bit'áá ákogi é'ét'éii éí hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	As it is written , “ The poor will give thanks to the poor , and the righteous will be forever . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ They share freely and give generously to the poor.Their good deeds will be remembered forever . ”

ID:	4066
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehgo iiná doo jinízinii hasht'e'nináho'deedlóozgo bik'ee ti'hwiizhdoonih áádóó hach'aho'dishkéii jijoołxáii éí dazdootsaał .
PRED:	If you do what is good , you will be put to death . You who hate you will die .
GOLD:	Whoever abandons the right path will be severely disciplined ; whoever hates correction will die .

ID:	4067
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é haa dahodiizts'ą́ą'go a'áán ádayiilaago yee hoł dadeezdéél ; béésh da'ahólzha'í yee Ííjip kéyahdi dahazlóóz .
PRED:	When the nations heard it , they took him into the pit , and put him in chains .
GOLD:	Then the nations heard about him , and he was trapped in their pit.They led him away with hooksto the land of Egypt .

ID:	4068
INPUT:	Áko Féro ádííniid , Nílááh , ákǫ́ǫ́ dínáahgo nizhé'é yóó'ánílééh ; Diyin God binááł haniyííłdzí'ígíí bik'ehgo ánílééh .
PRED:	Pharaoh said , “ Go and bury your father , just as God has commanded you . ”
GOLD:	Pharaoh agreed to Joseph 's request . “ Go and bury your father , as he made you promise , ” he said .

ID:	4069
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'óó báhádzidgo báhóóchįįd bijį́įdi béésh łigaii áádóó óola bee dahólóonii ts'ídá doo yisdábónííł át'ée da doo , nidi łe'niizį́'ígíí diiltłahgo nahasdzáán t'áá át' <unk> nít'éé' ałtso iididoołk'ą́ą́ł , áko nahasdzáán bikáá' kéédahojit'íinii t'áá ádzíłtso t'áadoo kót'é'ílíní áhodoołdįįł .
PRED:	In the day of the anger of the Lord was angry with silver and gold , but he would not save the face of the earth ; and he will destroy all the inhabitants of the earth , and all the inhabitants of the earth shall destroy .
GOLD:	Your silver and gold will not save youon that day of the Lord 's anger.For the whole land will be devouredby the fire of his jealousy.He will make a terrifying endof all the people on earth .

ID:	4070
INPUT:	Táyi'dę́ę́' kéyah hadaaz'á danohłíinii , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' , áádóó ał'ąą dine'é danohłíinii nízaadi kéédahoht'íinii , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' ; Bóhólníihii éí iishch'id biyi'dę́ę́' shíká ádííniid ; shimá bitsą́ądi sétį́įgo shízhi' shá ályaa .
PRED:	Listen to me , you nations of the sea , and listen to me , you nations far away from a far country . The Lord called me in my mother 's name .
GOLD:	Listen to me , all you in distant lands ! Pay attention , you who are far away ! The Lord called me before my birth ; from within the womb he called me by name .

ID:	4071
INPUT:	Bee nóhólníihii náásgóó k'ee'ąą yilzhish le' . Áádóó bee íinínízinii t'áá yá'ąąshdi ááníłígi át'éegonahasdzáán bikáa'gi ááníił le' .
PRED:	Let your kingdom be fruitful , and let the earth be as you do in heaven .
GOLD:	May your Kingdom come soon.May your will be done on earth , as it is in heaven .

ID:	4072
INPUT:	Jerúsalem nílíinii , Bóhólníihii baa hóniih ! Záíyan nílíinii , niDiyin God baa hóniih !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , Jerusalem ! Praise your God , O Zion !
GOLD:	Glorify the Lord , O Jerusalem ! Praise your God , O Zion !

ID:	4073
INPUT:	diné doo yá'áshóonii t'óó kónígháníjį' ak'idiyaa danilį́ , áádóó t'óó áhodil'íinii yee bił hózhónígíí t'óó deiltse' .
PRED:	The wicked are against them , and the eyes of the wicked are full of eyes .
GOLD:	the triumph of the wicked has been short livedand the joy of the godless has been only temporary ?

ID:	4074
INPUT:	Éí Diyin God hadeintáago t'ah nít'ée'da haa ákodaniizįįhgo hak'ídaakah łeh nízingo ákót'éego áyiilaa . Azhą́ t'ááłá'í niitínígo nihits'ą́ądi doo nízaadi hojílǫ́ǫ da nidi ,
PRED:	If they know that God has not been found , they have found him ; yet each man is far away from us .
GOLD:	“ His purpose was for the nations to seek after God and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him — though he is not far from any one of us .

ID:	4075
INPUT:	Índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii éí kwáart bee í'neel'ąąhí bee wáin t'ááłáhídi haaką́ągo dibé yázhí t'ááłá'ígo bił náádahołniih doo ; hodiyingo haz'ą́ągi wáin bidziilii yanáadzi'go nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You shall offer a drink offering of wine mixed with each lamb in the holy place . You shall offer a drink offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Along with it you must present the proper liquid offering of one quart of alcoholic drink with each lamb , poured out in the Holy Place as an offering to the Lord .

ID:	4076
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bibee ajooba' t'áá jíík'e ainíláhígíí binahjį' t'áá ákogi ádajít'éego há háádoodzihgo Christ Jesus nááhwiisnii'ígíí bee hwéédahideeshchid .
PRED:	But the gift of God was given by the grace of God , by the grace of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Yet God , in his grace , freely makes us right in his sight . He did this through Christ Jesus when he freed us from the penalty for our sins .

ID:	4077
INPUT:	Diné k'asdą́ą́' t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo dajooba'ígíí yaa dahalne' , nidi diné ba'ahódlíii bídin hóyéé' .
PRED:	All people declare to the poor , but there is no fear in them .
GOLD:	Many will say they are loyal friends , but who can find one who is truly reliable ?

ID:	4078
INPUT:	Háálá Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Bábilan bich'é'é éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' habí'dool<unk> jį' ahoolzhiizhgo bikáa'gi habé'él'éesii nahojílin ; t'óó nááhodoo'náá'ígo dabidi'doogishjį' bee haa hodoolzhish .
PRED:	For thus saith the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , Behold , the time shall come to pass , and the house of Babylon shall come to pass , and the end of the sons of Babylon shall come to pass .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Babylon is like wheat on a threshing floor , about to be trampled.In just a little whileher harvest will begin . ”

ID:	4079
INPUT:	Dził Lébanan góde hasínáahgo dílwosh , áádóó Dził Béíshandi chánahgo handziihgo dílwosh . Bił ałch'į' dah danilwo'ii t'áá ałtso atélyaago daneeznánígíí biniinaa Dził Ábarim atiindóó ninínáahgo dílwosh .
PRED:	Come up to Lebanon and cry out to the mountains of Bashan ; cry out to the mountains of Bashan , and cry out to the mountains because of the dead .
GOLD:	Weep for your allies in Lebanon.Shout for them in Bashan.Search for them in the regions east of the river.See , they are all destroyed.Not one is left to help you .

ID:	4080
INPUT:	Nidi áádóó naaki nááhaigo <unk> Féstas éí Fííliks naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi naat'áanii nilį́į doo biniyé níyá , áádóó Fííliks éí Jew dine'é bił dahodeeshǫǫł niizį́į'go , Paul t'áá awáalyaa sidáa doogo yee nihoní'ą́ągo dah diiyá .
PRED:	But Festus was two years old when Festus went to the governor of Festus , to make him ruler over the Jews , to sit in prison .
GOLD:	After two years went by in this way , Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus . And because Felix wanted to gain favor with the Jewish people , he left Paul in prison .

ID:	4081
INPUT:	Ído , Gíniitho , Abáíjah ,
PRED:	Abijah , Abijah , Abijah ,
GOLD:	Iddo , Ginnethon , Abijah ,

ID:	4082
INPUT:	Nidi díí éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' át'éhígíí hazhé'é índa hamá doo bił bééhózin da , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Filístiya dine'é bíká doot'áałgi yíká déez'į́į́' nít'éé' . Ákwii hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' Filístiya dine'é ts'ídá ayóó át'éego Ízrel dine'é yee ádídahólnííh nít'éé' .
PRED:	But he did not know what the Lord had done , his father , and his mother , because the Lord was looking for the Philistines at that time , and there the Philistines were great power .
GOLD:	His father and mother did n't realize the Lord was at work in this , creating an opportunity to work against the Philistines , who ruled over Israel at that time .

ID:	4083
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é ła'ígíí kin haal'áhídóó éí yich'į' ch'íníjéé' , ákohgo Éí'ai dine'é éí Ízrel dine'é bita'gi tsístł'aaskai , áko Ízrel dine'é ałts'ą́ą́hjí niníjée'go ałtso nidahastseed ; łá'í nidi doo ła' joodzíi' da , índa doo ła' yisdájííyáhí da .
PRED:	So the rest of the men of Israel went out to Ai , and the men of Ai were in the midst of the children of Israel , and all the men of Israel were scattered on each side , and no one could save them .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Israelites who were inside the town came out and attacked the enemy from the rear . So the men of Ai were caught in the middle , with Israelite fighters on both sides . Israel attacked them , and not a single person survived or escaped .

ID:	4084
INPUT:	danihizhé'é yee nihił dahoolne' áádóó dasidiits'ą́ą'go nihił béédahózin yę́ę bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	I will speak to our fathers , and I will speak to them what we have heard .
GOLD:	stories we have heard and known , stories our ancestors handed down to us .

ID:	4085
INPUT:	K'ad ániishłaaígi át'éego Bihíímath wolyéii íishłaaígíí níníł'į́ ; éí béégashii nahalingo ch'il yiłchozh .
PRED:	Now I have made you as I have made you , and you have seen it like a wild ox .
GOLD:	“ Take a look at Behemoth , which I made , just as I made you.It eats grass like an ox .

ID:	4086
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii yá nidaal'a'í danilíinii bíni' chaha'oh áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí bita'gi daachago kódaaníi le' , Bóhólníihii , nidine'é yisdánínííł ; níí' nilíinii t'ááká baa yáhásinii baa dóó'áałgo ana'í danilíinii bee ádidahólnííh lágo ! Áko ha'át'íísh biniyé , Háájíshą' biDiyin God ? dabidi'níi doo .
PRED:	The priests said to the servants of the Lord , “ Lord , save your people ! Do n't let them say , ‘ Lord , save your people ! ' So why do you give them victory over their enemies ? ”
GOLD:	Let the priests , who minister in the Lord 's presence , stand and weep between the entry room to the Temple and the altar.Let them pray , “ Spare your people , Lord ! Do n't let your special possession become an object of mockery.Do n't let them become a joke for unbelieving foreigners who say , ‘ Has the God of Israel left them ? ' ”

ID:	4087
INPUT:	áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ábidííniid , Bíni' aláahgo naat'áanii hool'áágóó hiná ; jó , biniyéii baa yínííł nishłį́ , háálá kin haal'á nít'é'ídi dashizhé'é yę́ę bii' yóó'ádaalyaa yę́ędi t'áá ádzaagóó nihidadíl'á áádóó dáń'daditį́hí adahideesk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the king said to the king , Let the king live forever ; for I am thy father 's house , and the gates of the city is burned with fire .
GOLD:	but I replied , “ Long live the king ! How can I not be sad ? For the city where my ancestors are buried is in ruins , and the gates have been destroyed by fire . ”

ID:	4088
INPUT:	Háálá shá nidahałt'i'go saad shich'į' adayiiníiłgo dashódziih áádóó ana'í índa k'éédidoo'níiłii biniinaa t'óó ádaa yániisdzį́į́' .
PRED:	For they are ashamed to speak against me , and they are ashamed of shame , and against their enemies .
GOLD:	All we hear are the taunts of our mockers.All we see are our vengeful enemies .

ID:	4089
INPUT:	Bee naa yáhodoosįįłígíí biniyé ni'éé' ninii' bilááhgóó de ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will make your clothes above you , so that you may be ashamed .
GOLD:	I myself will strip youand expose you to shame .

ID:	4090
INPUT:	Áko shich'į' nahosínísáago , díí t'áá át'é ni dooleeł .
PRED:	And thou shalt answer me , and thou shalt be all these things .
GOLD:	I will give it all to you if you will worship me . ”

ID:	4091
INPUT:	Nidi Jew dine'é doo da'oodlánígíí éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii yił hadahoneeshchaadgo , hódeidéé'į́į'go ádayiilaa .
PRED:	But the Gentiles who did not believe with the Gentiles went out and looked up and looked up .
GOLD:	Some of the Jews , however , spurned God 's message and poisoned the minds of the Gentiles against Paul and Barnabas .

ID:	4092
INPUT:	Éí níl'į́įgo t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego bik'ee hóyée'go Mózes ání , T'áá íiyisí bik'ee shił yée'go shitah hoditłid .
PRED:	And he was afraid , and he said , “ I am afraid , and I am afraid . ”
GOLD:	Moses himself was so frightened at the sight that he said , “ I am terrified and trembling . ”

ID:	4093
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , Júdah dine'é índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii , diné áádóó asdzánída nihinaalte' danilį́į dooleeł danohsingo daołtsood . Áko nihí nidi nihiDiyin God Bóhólníihii bich'į' ádił nida'ayoosíi'go át'é .
PRED:	Now therefore , behold , the people of Judah , and Jerusalem , and the inhabitants of Jerusalem , and the slaves of men ; and ye have sinned against the Lord your God .
GOLD:	And now you are planning to make slaves of these people from Judah and Jerusalem . What about your own sins against the Lord your God ?

ID:	4094
INPUT:	Ákódzaago yikáít'áahjį' ayííłką́ągo kǫ' éí k'os bił níyizgo yildohígíí biníkáádę́ę́' Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é siláo yinééł'į́į'go yich'į' hodiisnáá' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when it came to pass , that it came to pass in the cloud , that the Lord looked upon the Egyptians , and saw that the Lord saw the army of Egypt .
GOLD:	But just before dawn the Lord looked down on the Egyptian army from the pillar of fire and cloud , and he threw their forces into total confusion .

ID:	4095
INPUT:	Éíhaz naadiin binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' , áádóó hastą́'áadah nááhaijį' Jerúsalemgi nant'áá nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo t'áá ákogi ájít'į́įgo Bóhólníihii haDiyin God binááł jideeyáa da ; hazhé'é David áátįįdígi t'áadoo ádziidzaa da .
PRED:	Ahaz was thirty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned in Jerusalem , but he did not do what was right in the sight of the Lord his God , and did not do what his father David had done .
GOLD:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He did not do what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord his God , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	4096
INPUT:	Jó , Éíhaz éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizindę́ę́' áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bighandę́ę́' índa naat'áanii danilíinii dabighandę́ę́' da'ílíinii ch'íyiizhjaa'go Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í aa yílyáii át'éego baazhnínil , nidi éí t'áadoo háká eelwod da .
PRED:	For Ahaz brought out of the house of the Lord , and from the king 's house , and from the house of the king of Assyria , and brought gifts to the king of Assyria , but he did not help him .
GOLD:	Ahaz took valuable items from the Lord 's Temple , the royal palace , and from the homes of his officials and gave them to the king of Assyria as tribute . But this did not help him .

ID:	4097
INPUT:	Díí éí Ísakar dine'é bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ ; éí hastą́diindóó ba'aan dį́įdi mííldóó ba'aan táadi neeznádiingo ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	These are the families of Issachar according to their families : and the number of them were three hundred and three hundred .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Issachar . Their registered troops numbered 64,300 .

ID:	4098
INPUT:	Jó , tooh nílínígíí wó'ądaanah nidi , doo bik'ee bił yée' da ; azhą́ bizée'jį' Jórdan tooh bínízdeełhałgo nílį́į nidi , doo ya'ólíi da .
PRED:	For it is like the river , but he does not fear ; yet he does not believe in his mouth , but he does not believe .
GOLD:	It is not disturbed by the raging river , not concerned when the swelling Jordan rushes around it .

ID:	4099
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é bi'deesteh bijį́įdi t'áadoo nídoodleełí da . T'áádóo nídí ádooníłígíí Ízrel dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó baa hashne' .
PRED:	The people of Ephraim will not be punished in that day . I will tell you what will happen to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	One thing is certain , Israel : On your day of punishment , you will become a heap of rubble .

ID:	4100
INPUT:	Hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehjį' diné bida'asnii'ígi át'éego t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' báádahadzidii shik'ijį' bi'iyíníłnii' , áko Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįd bijíní góne' doo ła' yóó'anííchą́ą' da , doo nidi ła' yidzíi' da ; bił nída'iisdis yę́ę índa danísą́ yę́ę shi'ana'í ałtso ádabisdįįd .
PRED:	You sent me out of all the terrible things that are in the feast of the feast , so that there was no one left them in the anger of the Lord , but none of those who had taken away from me , and destroyed my enemies .
GOLD:	“ You have invited terrors from all around , as though you were calling them to a day of feasting.In the day of the Lord 's anger , no one has escaped or survived.The enemy has killed all the childrenwhom I carried and raised . ”

ID:	4101
INPUT:	Jó , éí bitł'éé' doo bí'ootsą́ą da le' ; éí bitł'éédą́ą́' t'áadoo diné bił dahózhóní le' .
PRED:	For night I will not see the night , neither let the people rejoice in the night .
GOLD:	Let that night be childless.Let it have no joy .

ID:	4102
INPUT:	Áko bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Jó , kin haal'áhígíí bine'dę́ę'go baa nihidoohkah . Kin haal'áhídóó t'áadoo nízaadgóó anáhjahí , nidi t'áá ánółtso hasht'e'ádadíínółzin dooleeł .
PRED:	And he answered them , Behold , ye shall come out of the city , and ye shall go forth from the city ; but ye shall be ready for a long time .
GOLD:	with these orders : “ Hide in ambush close behind the town and be ready for action .

ID:	4103
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God , k'éédidíí'níiłii nílíinii , Diyin God k'éédidíí'níiłii nílíinii , ííshjání í'dílnééh !
PRED:	O Lord God , show thyself , and show thyself , O God .
GOLD:	O Lord , the God of vengeance , O God of vengeance , let your glorious justice shine forth !

ID:	4104
INPUT:	Hwe'oodlą' át'éii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Great Examples of Faith

ID:	4105
INPUT:	Éí bi'é'él'į' nilíinii Rome dine'é daniidlį́įgo t'áadoo bee nihá haz'áanii deidiiltsołgo bik'eh dayíníikáah dooleełígíí yínanihiniłtin .
PRED:	and teach us the law of our law , that we may not follow the law .
GOLD:	“ They are teaching customs that are illegal for us Romans to practice . ”

ID:	4106
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hinishná ; ákót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' bee ádee hadzoodzíi'ii jíí'įįdii , áádóó hoł aha'deet'áanii doo bik'eh hojííł'įįdii éí aláahgo naat'áanii jílį́įgo áhoolaii kééhat'į́įgi ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bábilandi dazhdootsaał .
PRED:	“ As I live , ” says the Lord God , “ I swear by the king 's covenant and does not obey the king 's covenant . He will surely die in Babylon .
GOLD:	No ! For as surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , the king of Israel will die in Babylon , the land of the king who put him in power and whose treaty he disregarded and broke .

ID:	4107
INPUT:	Jériko kin haal'áádóó diné táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' .
PRED:	The men of Jericho , three hundred and five .
GOLD:	The citizens of Jericho345

ID:	4108
INPUT:	Áko diné éí ha'ázdidoolziłgo índa díí bááh jidooyį́į́ł áádóó díí doodlį́įłii jidoodlį́į́ł .
PRED:	And the man shall anoint him , and eat this bread , and drink it .
GOLD:	That is why you should examine yourself before eating the bread and drinking the cup .

ID:	4109
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí da'atsidii dį́į'go shił yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then the Lord showed me four four four corners .
GOLD:	Then the Lord showed me four blacksmiths .

ID:	4110
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh biniinaa ná k'éé'deeshchxǫǫł ? Áko na'áłchíní yóó'adashideez'ą́ , áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii yee ádee hadadeesdzíí' . <unk> daazlį́į'jį' ba'iistsóód nít'ée'go da'díílá , áádóó dah naazhjaa'go ałjiłnii bighan naaznilgóó tádadookai .
PRED:	Why do I cut off from you ? And your children have forsaken me , and have taken away their gods , and have taken them in their villages .
GOLD:	“ How can I pardon you ? For even your children have turned from me.They have sworn by gods that are not gods at all ! I fed my people until they were full.But they thanked me by committing adulteryand lining up at the brothels .

ID:	4111
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóram éí Jííhu yiyiiłtsą́ągo ání , K'éésh biniyé ánít'į́ , Jííhu ? Haadzíi'go ání , Nimá Jézebel be'ajił áádóó álílee k'ehgo yee hoołáałii t'ah náás deít'éehgo haash yit'éego k'é hólǫ́ǫ doo ?
PRED:	When Jehu saw him , he said , “ What are you doing ? ” Jehu answered , “ Your mother 's mother Ahab and her mother will be well with her ? ”
GOLD:	King Joram demanded , “ Do you come in peace , Jehu ? ” Jehu replied , “ How can there be peace as long as the idolatry and witchcraft of your mother , Jezebel , are all around us ? ”

ID:	4112
INPUT:	Ákoshą' háí ba'ahódlíigo índa hóyą́ągo naal'a'í nilį́ , éí binanit'a'í bighan haz'ą́ągi nidaakaígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá áajį' anáhwiilzhíishgo yaná'áltso' doo biniyé nibiníłtį́ ?
PRED:	Who is wise and faithful servant , who gave him all who are in the house of the master 's house , to give them all the days ?
GOLD:	“ A faithful , sensible servant is one to whom the master can give the responsibility of managing his other household servants and feeding them .

ID:	4113
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é hodeeyá t'áá bítséedi néidiinilii doo yóó'iidíí'ą́ą da . Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii Iiláíjah yaa halne'iísh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Éí Ízrel dine'é baa yájíłti'go Diyin God níjookąąh yę́ędą́ą́' kózhdííniid ,
PRED:	Do n't you know that Elijah had taken from the beginning of God 's people ? It is written in the Scriptures , “ If he spoke to the people of Israel , ”
GOLD:	No , God has not rejected his own people , whom he chose from the very beginning . Do you realize what the Scriptures say about this ? Elijah the prophet complained to God about the people of Israel and said ,

ID:	4114
INPUT:	Nidi t'óó ák'eh dahal'į́įgo doo t'áá k'ad da'diizts'ą́ą́'góó deíkááh áádóó doo da'didoots'į́įł da biniyé jé'ádahodilkał nít'éé' .
PRED:	But when they did not listen , they would not listen to them , and would not hear them .
GOLD:	“ Your ancestors refused to listen to this message . They stubbornly turned away and put their fingers in their ears to keep from hearing .

ID:	4115
INPUT:	David éí tsits'aa' dílzinii néidoo'ááł yiniyé dah diiyá
PRED:	David went up to the ark
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	4116
INPUT:	Háálá Jew dine'é danilíinii éí Diyin God bibee adziilii bee bééhózinii nihá ádoolnííł daaníigo dayókeed , áádóó Gríik dine'é danilíinii éí bee hódzáanii t'éí bił ayóó ádaat'é .
PRED:	For the Jews asked for us a sign for the sign of God , and the Greeks are great .
GOLD:	It is foolish to the Jews , who ask for signs from heaven . And it is foolish to the Greeks , who seek human wisdom .

ID:	4117
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hatélii , doodaii' habéégashii , doodaii' hadibé , doodaii' halį́į́' bił kééhojit'íinii ba'ałk'ee nizhníłtį́įgo nít'éé' daaztsą́ągo , doodaii' haada yidzaago , doodaii' yóó'anoolchą́ą'go , nidi t'áadoo haideel'į́'í dago
PRED:	If any man had a donkey or sheep , or sheep , or his neighbor 's neighbor died , or if he sees it , or if he had fled , they did not find him .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose someone leaves a donkey , ox , sheep , or any other animal with a neighbor for safekeeping , but it dies or is injured or is taken away , and no one sees what happened .

ID:	4118
INPUT:	( Áko Béíshan kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Ag wolyéii yé'iitsoh ła' nilį́įgo éí t'éí yidziih . Jó , tsásk'eh yikáá' nitéhígíí béésh nitł'izii bá nidaaz'áago ályaa . Éí Ámon dine'é bikin haal'áhígi Rábah hoolyéegi si'ą́ . <unk> ts'áadahdóó ná'áłníi'go ké silá áníłnééz áádóó naaniigo éí hastą́ądi ké silá áníłtéél . <unk> wolyéhígíí ach'oozlaa'dóó ála' aníí'dę́'ígíí bílátahjį' bee í'neel'ąąhígíí át'é . )
PRED:	The king of Bashan was only one of the iron . He made the iron altar for the children of Ammon . He had twelve cubits and twenty cubits , and the breadth of the children of Ammon were five cubits .
GOLD:	( King Og of Bashan was the last survivor of the giant Rephaites . His bed was made of iron and was more than thirteen feet long and six feet wide . It can still be seen in the Ammonite city of Rabbah . )

ID:	4119
INPUT:	Ła' tsé deez'áhígíí éí náhookǫsjí Míkmash báhátis bich'į'go deez'á , ła'ígíí éí shádi'ááhjí Gíbiyah kin haal'áii bich'į'go deez'á .
PRED:	And one stone was toward the north side of the north , and the other on the south side of Gibeah .
GOLD:	The cliff on the north was in front of Micmash , and the one on the south was in front of Geba .

ID:	4120
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí Gíbiyan kin haal'áadi wók'ą́ądi haz'ánídę́ę́' áádóó níbaal bii' dahozdísinii si'ą́ą́dę́ę́' dah nízdiidzáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áajį' nídzídzáago Ízrel dine'é binazhnit'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Solomon went up from the hill of Gibeon , and from the top of the tabernacle of meeting , and he reigned over Israel .
GOLD:	Then Solomon returned to Jerusalem from the Tabernacle at the place of worship in Gibeon , and he reigned over Israel .

ID:	4121
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then another message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4122
INPUT:	Áádóó azhą́ shee hólóonii t'áá át'é badahojoobá'íígíí bi<unk> niih nidi , áádóó ashidi'doolk'ą́ąłjį' niná'ádinisht'ą́ą nidi , bee ayóó'ó'ó'níinii shii' ádingo t'áadoo shá nídoodleełí da .
PRED:	But if all my wealth is poor , I have been given to the fire , and my love is not in me .
GOLD:	If I gave everything I have to the poor and even sacrificed my body , I could boast about it ; but if I did n't love others , I would have gained nothing .

ID:	4123
INPUT:	Áko ádił ni'jít'įįhgo ádee hanáázdoodzíí' , Éí dinéhígíí doo bééhasin da . T'áá áko naa'ahóóhai biką'í ádííniid .
PRED:	And he swore a vow , saying , I do not know the man . And the servant answered him .
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know the man ! ” And immediately the rooster crowed .

ID:	4124
INPUT:	áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' tooh nílį́į́ léi' bibąąhjį' kin haal'áádóó ch'íniikai , ákwe'é sodizin biniyé náhoot'aah łeh ; ákwii dineebingo asdzání ahíikaígíí bich'į' yádeiilti' .
PRED:	And we went out of the city on the Sabbath , and came out of the city , to pray , and there the women gathered together .
GOLD:	On the Sabbath we went a little way outside the city to a riverbank , where we thought people would be meeting for prayer , and we sat down to speak with some women who had gathered there .

ID:	4125
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Nóah áyidííniid ,
PRED:	God said to Noah ,
GOLD:	Then God said to Noah ,

ID:	4126
INPUT:	Áko k'ad t'áá íídą́ą́' nihik'ijį' k'ídíshnii'go ni áádóó nidine'é t'áá bił naałniih bee atínihiishłaago nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ánihisíłdįįd doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	And now I have stretched out my hand against you , and I have destroyed you with all your people , and have destroyed you on the earth .
GOLD:	By now I could have lifted my hand and struck you and your people with a plague to wipe you off the face of the earth .

ID:	4127
INPUT:	Áádóó kintahjį' Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii Éíhab bich'į' hane' nidei'áhígíí ayííł'a'go ííłní , Ben-héídad kóní ,
PRED:	And the king of Israel sent messengers to Ahab , saying ,
GOLD:	Ben-hadad sent messengers into the city to relay this message to King Ahab of Israel : “ This is what Ben-hadad says :

ID:	4128
INPUT:	Ni lą́ą adziil bee áká sínílzaazii , nidziil bee dził nidasínínil .
PRED:	You have set your strength in your strength , and you have set up your mountains .
GOLD:	You formed the mountains by your powerand armed yourself with mighty strength .

ID:	4129
INPUT:	Háálá diné t'áá ákogi át'éego na'nitin doo yich'į' hada'ólníi da dooleełígíí baa dahodoolzhish , nidi t'áá bí deinízinígíí t'éiyá dayíists'ą́ą'go bił yá'ádaat'éeh doo , t'áá bí yidádanoolníinii bik'ehgo nida'nitinii t'éiyá yíchą́deídéelni' doo .
PRED:	For the way of the righteous shall not be able to teach them , but they that hear their own ways , but they that hear their own ways .
GOLD:	For a time is coming when people will no longer listen to sound and wholesome teaching . They will follow their own desires and will look for teachers who will tell them whatever their itching ears want to hear .

ID:	4130
INPUT:	Níníí'dę́ę́' bee náhidíyoołii bee tó ahąh íinilaa ; tó ałt'ah nehegeehgo nídiidzá ; tó ditáanii bitł'áahjį'go tónteel yíníłtł'is .
PRED:	You made the water of water in your midst , and your right hand is in your hand , and let the waters run out of the sea .
GOLD:	At the blast of your breath , the waters piled up ! The surging waters stood straight like a wall ; in the heart of the sea the deep waters became hard .

ID:	4131
INPUT:	Nidi Férisii danilíinii ła' ádadííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' doo bee haz'ánígíí baa naahkai ?
PRED:	But some Pharisees said to him , “ Why do you do evil on the Sabbath day ? ”
GOLD:	But some Pharisees said , “ Why are you breaking the law by harvesting grain on the Sabbath ? ”

ID:	4132
INPUT:	Áko ábididííniił , Bóhólníihii , Hííbrew dine'é biDiyin God nilíinii , nich'į' shiníł'a' kóníigo , Shidine'é béé'níłnííh , áko éí honoojíidi shich'į' nidahałáa doo , jó'akon , nidi t'ahdii doo shíísíníłts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	And thou shalt say unto them , Lord , the God of the Hebrew , sent me , saying , Let my people go , so that they may worship me in the wilderness , but thou hast not listened to me .
GOLD:	Then announce to him , ‘ The Lord , the God of the Hebrews , has sent me to tell you , “ Let my people go , so they can worship me in the wilderness. ” Until now , you have refused to listen to him .

ID:	4133
INPUT:	Doo nádiinághánídę́ę́' shił bééhoozinígíí éí k'ad baa hodeeshnih<unk> shiilaii t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo ííshjání ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will show my righteousness to me , and I will declare my righteousness from above .
GOLD:	I will present profound argumentsfor the righteousness of my Creator .

ID:	4134
INPUT:	Áko ni'góó łeezhgi át'ée doogo bik'ída'iiséłhaal ; kintah atiingóó hashtł'ishígi át'éego bik'i niséyáago nídíí'eez .
PRED:	I struck down the earth like the earth , and I went down like the dust in the streets .
GOLD:	I ground them as fine as the dust of the earth ; I trampled them in the gutter like dirt .

ID:	4135
INPUT:	áko nihokáa'gi t'áá háiida t'áá bí ák'iníjídlíii éí Diyin God t'áá aaníinii bik'ijidlíi doo , áádóó nihokáa'gi t'áá háiida ádee hadoodzíi'ii éí Diyin God t'áá aaníinii yee ádee hadidoodzih , háálá ach'į' nahwii'ná yę́ę baa hoyoosnahgo shits'ąą nídees'į́į́' .
PRED:	so that whoever lives on earth will be blessed by God , and whoever lives on the earth will swear by God , because he has hid my affliction .
GOLD:	All who invoke a blessing or take an oathwill do so by the God of truth.For I will put aside my angerand forget the evil of earlier days .

ID:	4136
INPUT:	Áádóó doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí yee ádaa dahalne'go dabizhé'é yę́ę doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áhát'íinii yee doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádashííł'įįdgóó yee ádaa dahoolne'go áádóó ałdó' shits'ą́ą́jí t'óó shik'ijį' danilínígíí áádóó ałdó' shik'ijį' danilį́įgo deíkááh nít'é'ígíí yee ádaa dahalne' .
PRED:	And they spake against my fathers the iniquity of their fathers , and spake against me , and also against me .
GOLD:	“ But at last my people will confess their sins and the sins of their ancestors for betraying me and being hostile toward me .

ID:	4137
INPUT:	Bee ída'diiljeehí naaltsoos bee bidáda'deeshjée'ii ashdla' góne'ígíí ąą yidinízǫ́ǫzgo , bikáá' náá'iiniihí biyaagi Diyin God bizaad yaa dahalne'go áádóó t'áá éí yee ádaa ch'ídahwiist'ą́ągo biniinaa nidabi'diztseedii bii' naazíinii yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	When he had opened the fifth seal , I saw the words of God on the altar , and the soul of the dead .
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the fifth seal , I saw under the altar the souls of all who had been martyred for the word of God and for being faithful in their testimony .

ID:	4138
INPUT:	Háálá shi'ana'í hahóół'á , áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii shich'į' nidahwiiłná . Háálá doo ákwii át'éii shik'ijį' deidiyiił<unk> , áádóó bádahachį'go dashijoołxá .
PRED:	For my enemies have turned against me , and the wicked are against me : for they have turned against me , and hate me .
GOLD:	My enemies shout at me , making loud and wicked threats.They bring trouble on meand angrily hunt me down .

ID:	4139
INPUT:	Áádóó Iiláíyakim éí aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bee bóhólníhígíí áádóó Shébna éí naaltsoos ííł'íní índa hastóí nááda'iiłniihii éí tł'oh yishbizh bik'ídaasti'go Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah Diyin God yá halne'ii nilíinii bich'į' ajiis'a' .
PRED:	He sent messengers to the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz , who was in charge of the king 's house . He sent messengers to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz .
GOLD:	And he sent Eliakim the palace administrator , Shebna the court secretary , and the leading priests , all dressed in burlap , to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz .

ID:	4140
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ła'da , Shoo , kǫ́ǫ́ Christ naaghá , éí doodaléi' , Shoo , níláhjí naaghá , danihiłníigo t'áadoo deinohdlání .
PRED:	And if any man say to you , Behold , he is the Christ , or he is here ; do not believe him .
GOLD:	“ Then if anyone tells you , ‘ Look , here is the Messiah , ' or ‘ There he is , ' do n't believe it .

ID:	4141
INPUT:	Mózes áádóó Éran náás ahoolchíiłii
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Moses and Aaron

ID:	4142
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph bik'isóó yíkai ; ha'níigo Féro bighandi baa hóóne'go Féro índa bá nidaal'a'í yaa bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	So Joseph 's brothers came to Pharaoh 's house , and his servants were glad .
GOLD:	The news soon reached Pharaoh 's palace : “ Joseph 's brothers have arrived ! ” Pharaoh and his officials were all delighted to hear this .

ID:	4143
INPUT:	Ákohgo íídą́ą́' Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é dabinááł Kéínan kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Jéíbin wolyéii yik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that God smote Israel before the king of Canaan .
GOLD:	So on that day Israel saw God defeat Jabin , the Canaanite king .

ID:	4144
INPUT:	Nidi asdzání Jézebel , Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo ádójíii , éí shá nidaal'a'í na'ageh yee tsi'nidaakai doogo , índa eda'alyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii deiyą́ą doogo neinitingo t'áá áhoodzaagóó ayii'éeshgo bee bá nahosooł'ánígíí , éí t'éí nihik'ijį' séł'ą́ .
PRED:	But she said to her , “ The prophets of my servants have committed adultery , and have given them the gifts of my servants , and have given them to their idols , and I have sent them to you . ”
GOLD:	“ But I have this complaint against you . You are permitting that woman — that Jezebel who calls herself a prophet — to lead my servants astray . She teaches them to commit sexual sin and to eat food offered to idols .

ID:	4145
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God bá haleego ásdzaa . Jó , Ízrel dine'é nibee aha'deet'ą́ yóó'adeideez'ą́ ; nibikáá' nááda'iiniihí dayiistł'ííd , áádóó ná dahalne'ii diltłish yee nideistseed , áko shí , t'áá shí t'éiyá , ch'ééyá , áko k'ad dashidiyoołhééł biniyé hadashintá .
PRED:	He said , “ I have done this for the Lord , the God of hosts . The Israelites have forsaken your covenant . They have killed your altars and killed your prophets , and I am the only one who goes out to kill me . ”
GOLD:	Elijah replied , “ I have zealously served the Lord God Almighty . But the people of Israel have broken their covenant with you , torn down your altars , and killed every one of your prophets . I am the only one left , and now they are trying to kill me , too . ”

ID:	4146
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii kóní , Tooh nílį́ nahalingo ach'į' hózhóonii éí há bighą́ą́h nídideestsih áádóó ał'ąą dine'é yee ayóó ádaat'éii tó wó'ą́ą́lį́ nahalingo bá bighą́ą́h nídadi'deestsih , <unk> akon , áko índa da'ołt'o' doo , booshk'iizh yee nanihijaah doo áádóó bitsosk'idgi dah nanihijaah doo .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ I will make you like a river , and I will make you like a flood of many nations , and you will bear their blood in your side .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will give Jerusalem a river of peace and prosperity.The wealth of the nations will flow to her.Her children will be nursed at her breasts , carried in her arms , and held on her lap .

ID:	4147
INPUT:	Áko Arimathíya hoolyéédę́ę́' diné at'íinii léi' Jóseph wolyéego , éí ałdó' Jesus yíhooł'aahii nilį́įgo , hííłch'į'go níyá .
PRED:	There was a certain man named Joseph , who was also Joseph , who was a disciple of Jesus , came to him .
GOLD:	As evening approached , Joseph , a rich man from Arimathea who had become a follower of Jesus ,

ID:	4148
INPUT:	Líyah éí ha'át'e' ádin joolnáá' , nidi Réíchel éí t'áá íiyisí ayóó ánóolnin áádóó baadzólní .
PRED:	Leah had no eyes , but Rachel was very beautiful and beautiful .
GOLD:	There was no sparkle in Leah 's eyes , but Rachel had a beautiful figure and a lovely face .

ID:	4149
INPUT:	áádóó ła'ts'áadah náhááh góne' , tseebíí nídízííd góne' <unk> yiziłígíí binih kin ts'ídá ałtso hadidzaa ; ádoolnííł hodoo'niid yę́ęgi át'éego t'áá ákót'éego ályaa . Áko t'áá ájíléehgo tsosts'id nááhai .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the eighth year , in the eighth month , in the eighth month , as he had said to him , and he did for seven years .
GOLD:	The entire building was completed in every detail by midautumn , in the month of Bul , during the eleventh year of his reign . So it took seven years to build the Temple .

ID:	4150
INPUT:	Ha'a'ááhdóó e'e'áahjį' Bóhólníihii bízhi' éí baa ha'niih biniyé át'é !
PRED:	The name of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] is His name .
GOLD:	Everywhere — from east to west — praise the name of the Lord .

ID:	4151
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é índa ał'ąą dine'é ts'ídá t'áá ałtso chaha'ohgi hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh bida'jił'į́į doo biniyé doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ałnáádajikahígíí díí bee atídaho'dil'į́į doo .
PRED:	The Egyptians and all the nations who go to worship at the feast of the feast .
GOLD:	Egypt and the other nations will all be punished if they do n't go to celebrate the Festival of Shelters .

ID:	4152
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é yínííł danilį́ , áádóó bidáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó naháaztą́ągo áda daho<unk> xáá' . Bidine'é tsé'yaa naazhjée'go daacha áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí éí nída'ookąąhgo hahosiilts'įįh .
PRED:	The people of Judah were crying and hated the gates . The people fell down to the ground , and the inhabitants of Jerusalem cry before him .
GOLD:	“ Judah wilts ; commerce at the city gates grinds to a halt.All the people sit on the ground in mourning , and a great cry rises from Jerusalem .

ID:	4153
INPUT:	Áádóó jó'akon , Bóhólníihii bizaad náázdiizts'ą́ą'go ánááhodoo'niid , Díí doo hóó' dooleeł da ; t'áá ni niye' bíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	And behold , the word of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) heard the word of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] said unto him , This [ is ] not his son .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to him , “ No , your servant will not be your heir , for you will have a son of your own who will be your heir . ”

ID:	4154
INPUT:	T'áá háiida díí daaztsą́ągo bits'íís nidzistínígíí éí ha'éé' jidoogis , áko i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didoodah da .
PRED:	Whoever touches this body shall wash his clothes , and he shall not be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If you pick up their carcasses , you must wash your clothes , and you will remain defiled until evening .

ID:	4155
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákwii é'ét'é ak'eh didlį́įgo áyiilaajį'lók'aatsoh yisk'isii nidi doo k'íidootih da , índa bee hool'iní biih yít'i'ígíí t'óó bilid nidi doo yidínóołtsis da ,
PRED:	He shall cut off all his iniquity , but he shall not break his yoke , nor shall he burn the lamp in his light , nor shall he burn the lamp .
GOLD:	He will not crush the weakest reedor put out a flickering candle.Finally he will cause justice to be victorious .

ID:	4156
INPUT:	Díí ts'ídá nihił béédahózin le' : Diyin God bizaad biyi'dóó nee'ni'jį' ádahodooníiłii bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí doo diné ła' t'áá bí bíniik'ehgo yik'i'diitáanii át'ée da .
PRED:	You know that no one can understand what is written in the Scriptures .
GOLD:	Above all , you must realize that no prophecy in Scripture ever came from the prophet 's own understanding ,

ID:	4157
INPUT:	Beríyadóó <unk> ter , <unk> biye' , áádóó Thesalonáíkadóó Aristárkas áádóó <unk> <unk> das , áádóó Dérbiidóó Géíyas , Timothy ałdó' , índa Éízhadóó Tíkakas áádóó Trófimas Éízhajį' hoł niikai .
PRED:	And they came to Asia , and Silas , and Silas , and Silas , and Silas , and Silas , and Asia , and Asia .
GOLD:	Several men were traveling with him . They were Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea ; Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica ; Gaius from Derbe ; Timothy ; and Tychicus and Trophimus from the province of Asia .

ID:	4158
INPUT:	Éí bąą shiyázhí danohłíinii , dashíínółts'ą́ą́' ; saad bee yáshti'ígíí deísínółts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Therefore hear , my little ones , and hear the words of my mouth .
GOLD:	So listen to me , my sons , and pay attention to my words .

ID:	4159
INPUT:	áádóó binaa haz'ánígíí índa ch'é'étiin bitł'ááh naaznilígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí áádóó níbaal bii' hodílzinii índa binaa haz'ánígi bá anídaalkałígíí ałdó' éí béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	and their pillars , and their pillars , and their pillars , and their pillars , and their pillars , and their pillars .
GOLD:	Bronze was also used to make the bases for the posts that supported the curtains around the courtyard , the bases for the curtain at the entrance of the courtyard , and all the tent pegs for the Tabernacle and the courtyard .

ID:	4160
INPUT:	Áádóó díí éí t'óó baa'ih danohsin doo ; nidaat'a'ígíí doo daadáanii éí baa'ihii ádaat'é : atsá áádóó jeeshóó' índa dzílí
PRED:	And these things shall be unclean , which shall be unclean , which are unclean , which are unclean , and the wings , and the flowers ,
GOLD:	“ These are the birds that are detestable to you . You must never eat them : the griffon vulture , the bearded vulture , the black vulture ,

ID:	4161
INPUT:	Jesus t'éiyá Dził Álivz bighą́ą́'góó dashdiiyá .
PRED:	Jesus left the Mount of Olives and went up to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Jesus returned to the Mount of Olives ,

ID:	4162
INPUT:	háálá díí shidił bee aha'deet'áanii ániidíii , t'óó ahayóí bąąhági át'éii bá yóó'ahididoot'ááł biniyé bá deezna'ígíí át'é .
PRED:	For this is the new covenant of my covenant , which is poured out for many sins .
GOLD:	for this is my blood , which confirms the covenant between God and his people . It is poured out as a sacrifice to forgive the sins of many .

ID:	4163
INPUT:	Diné biyódí yee hináanii ách'ą́ą́h <unk> yé , nidi diné baa hojoobá'ígíí t'áadoo bizéé' yidó'áłí da .
PRED:	The eye of the poor is for his life , but the hand of the poor is not in his mouth .
GOLD:	The rich can pay a ransom for their lives , but the poor wo n't even get threatened .

ID:	4164
INPUT:	Diyin God éí nízaadgóó hólǫ́ áádóó diné éí t'óó
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	Book Four

ID:	4165
INPUT:	Áko Mózes ádííniid , Ákódeiidzaago doo beełt'ée da , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' nááda'iyeelnii'go éí Ííjip dine'é t'óó baa'ihígi yaa nitsídaakees doo . Jó , nihí Ííjip dine'é binááł náádahiilnii'ígíí t'óó baa'ihgo yaa nitsídaakeesígíí biniinaa nihił nidazdiyoołniił .
PRED:	Moses said to them , “ It is not good for us to offer sacrifices to the Lord our God , because we have sinned against the Egyptians because we have sinned before the Egyptians . ”
GOLD:	But Moses replied , “ That would n't be right . The Egyptians detest the sacrifices that we offer to the Lord our God . Look , if we offer our sacrifices here where the Egyptians can see us , they will stone us .

ID:	4166
INPUT:	Shoo , Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bighangi asdzání daadziihígíí éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í naat'áanii biyaa sinilígíí baa dahidoot'ish , áko ádadidooniił , K'ad nahodits'ǫ' íínítłizhgo nik'isóó baa dzíínílíí nít'ée'ii ninda'azlo'go nik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' áádóó t'ą́ą́' dah nídahidiijéé' .
PRED:	Behold , the women that are left in the house of the king of Judah shall be brought into the hand of the king of Babylon ; and they shall say , We have cast us into the pit , and have fled .
GOLD:	All the women left in your palace will be brought out and given to the officers of the Babylonian army . Then the women will taunt you , saying , ‘ What fine friends you have ! They have betrayed and misled you.When your feet sank in the mud , they left you to your fate ! '

ID:	4167
INPUT:	t'ááłá'ígo ats'áz'áhígíí álman wolyéii bílátah yiigahígíí nahalingo táa'go ałkéé' honíką́ągo bee naashch'ąą' doo ; bílátah haleehii áádóó yiigahígíí t'áá bił , bee hool'iní bá yaa'áhígíí hastą́ągo bits'ádaaz'áhígíí ákót'éego ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	There shall be three rows like a piece of an ephah , and three rows on each side , and on each side , and on each side of the lampstand , and on each side of the lampstand , and upon the lampstand .
GOLD:	Each of the six branches will have three lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	4168
INPUT:	Ákódzaago t'óó niyázhníłti'ígo aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké yikai . Áádóó chaał adahoyiiníihgo daacha ; aláahgo naat'áanii índa bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso yił ayóó át'éego daacha .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he had finished speaking , that the king 's sons cried out , and all his servants wept .
GOLD:	They soon arrived , weeping and sobbing , and the king and all his servants wept bitterly with them .

ID:	4169
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá háiida doo danihinízingóó índa nihizaad doo deidiits'a'góó , éí hooghandóó , doodaii' kin haal'áádóó dah náádahidoohkáahgo nihikee' łeezh bąąh nidahołdéeh dooleeł .
PRED:	If anyone does not listen to your words and hear your word , then you shall return from his house , and you shall wash your feet with dust .
GOLD:	If any household or town refuses to welcome you or listen to your message , shake its dust from your feet as you leave .

ID:	4170
INPUT:	Jerúsalemdi niikaigo , ałk'isóó danilíinii t'áá íiyisí nihaa bił dahóózhǫǫdgo k'é danihidííniid .
PRED:	And when they came to Jerusalem , the brethren were very angry with us .
GOLD:	When we arrived , the brothers and sisters in Jerusalem welcomed us warmly .

ID:	4171
INPUT:	Líbna dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í , Adálam dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	The king of Assyria , one ; the king of Assyria , one ;
GOLD:	The king of LibnahThe king of Adullam

ID:	4172
INPUT:	Nidi kóhóót'įįd : aláahgo naat'áanii Jiihó'ash naadiin táá' nááhaijį' aláahgo naat'áanii jílį́įgo hoolzhiizhígíí biyi' éí nááda'iiłniihii kin bii' sohodizin dááchxǫ' yę́ęgóó t'ah doo hasht'éédeidléeh da lá .
PRED:	But it came to pass , when King Joash was twenty years old when he began to reign in the temple , that the priests would not give it to the priests .
GOLD:	But by the twenty-third year of Joash 's reign , the priests still had not repaired the Temple .

ID:	4173
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí diné bisodizin yidiizts'ą́'ígíí t'ah bítséedi áádóó bik'ijį' t'ah doo ákóhánéeh da nít'éé' , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yá anaa' áhoolaa .
PRED:	The Lord had not heard the voice of the people before the voice of the people ; for the Lord had made war against Israel .
GOLD:	There has never been a day like this one before or since , when the Lord answered such a prayer . Surely the Lord fought for Israel that day !

ID:	4174
INPUT:	Dabitsee' séígo' bitsee' nidahalin , áádóó bizǫ́ǫ́z dahólǫ́ , ashdla' nídeezidjį' diné atídeił'į́į doogo dabitsee' yee dabidziil .
PRED:	Their heads were like the sand , and it was in pieces . It was five months old when they were killed , and they were able to kill the people .
GOLD:	They had tails that stung like scorpions , and for five months they had the power to torment people .

ID:	4175
INPUT:	Ayóó'ó'ó'níinii éí t'áá ałtsoní yéé'oo'níihgo t'óó yił át'é , t'áá ałtsojį' oodlą́ , t'áá ałtsojį' bił chohoo'į́ , t'áá ałtsoní yich'į' ha'ólní .
PRED:	love is in all things , in all things , in all things , in all things .
GOLD:	Love never gives up , never loses faith , is always hopeful , and endures through every circumstance .

ID:	4176
INPUT:	Háálá hódzą́ bee nandi'neestą́ą'go bíninil'ą́ągo dííbah , áádóó t'óó ahayóí kót'éego daaníinii hólǫ́ǫgi hasih haz'ą́ .
PRED:	For you have taught wisdom , and you have taught many things .
GOLD:	So do n't go to war without wise guidance ; victory depends on having many advisers .

ID:	4177
INPUT:	Asdzání adiléii éí ayį́į́h áádóó bizábąąh yé<unk> jołgo ániih , Doo ádił asésiih da .
PRED:	The woman who is a widow and a woman who has no sin .
GOLD:	An adulterous woman consumes a man , then wipes her mouth and says , “ What 's wrong with that ? ”

ID:	4178
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Tsinaa'eeł binish'náájígo łóó' bee hahaltsósí taah daałtsóosgo ła' bee hadadoołtsos . Áko taah dadzistsooz , nít'éé' łóó' t'óó ahayóigo biniinaa ch'ééh hadadziłtsóós .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Put a net on the right side of the boat , and they put it on the sea because they were many fish . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Throw out your net on the right-hand side of the boat , and you 'll get some ! ” So they did , and they could n't haul in the net because there were so many fish in it .

ID:	4179
INPUT:	Háálá nahdę́ę́' t'áá ahą́ą́h t'áá ákót'éego diné baa nánít'į́į́ nít'ée'go nił bééhózin .
PRED:	For you know that you have been found in this way .
GOLD:	For you know how often you yourself have cursed others .

ID:	4180
INPUT:	Kót'éego Líívai dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yaa nídeidiyii'aahii danihíí' dooleełgo nihaa diní'ánígíí éí bits'ą́ą́dóó neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' Bóhólníihii bich'į' bił dah nídi'diilnihgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii baa dahidoh'aah doo .
PRED:	“ Speak to the Levites , saying , ‘ The children of Israel are to give an offering to the Lord , which I have given to you , to give to the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Give these instructions to the Levites : When you receive from the people of Israel the tithes I have assigned as your allotment , give a tenth of the tithes you receive — a tithe of the tithe — to the Lord as a sacred offering .

ID:	4181
INPUT:	Ákohgo táá' yiską́ągo éí tó yee ádidooldah áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' doo chin bąąh hólǫ́ǫ doo , nidi táá' yiską́ągo t'áadoo ádooldee'góó tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' chin bąąh hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	On the third day the water will be clean , and on the seventh day they will be unclean , but on the third day they will be unclean .
GOLD:	They must purify themselves on the third and seventh days with the water of purification ; then they will be purified . But if they do not do this on the third and seventh days , they will continue to be unclean even after the seventh day .

ID:	4182
INPUT:	Nihits'íís bee Diyin God ayóó át'éego bee baa ha'niih doo
PRED:	The glory of our God
GOLD:	Avoiding Sexual Sin

ID:	4183
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hazhé'é éí Íífreiyim bitsii't'áagi dah deesnii'go dziiłtsą́ągo doo hoł aaníígóó Íífreiyim bitsii't'áádóó Manáseh bitsii't'áajį' hazhé'é dah bizhdidoołnih biniyé dah bizdees'nii' .
PRED:	When Joseph saw that Joseph had laid his hands on the head of Ephraim , he put his hands on the head of Ephraim , and Manasseh put his hands on his head .
GOLD:	But Joseph was upset when he saw that his father placed his right hand on Ephraim 's head . So Joseph lifted it to move it from Ephraim 's head to Manasseh 's head .

ID:	4184
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'óó bił adahayóigo ádaaní , Haa lá yit'éego fig sikaadii tsxį́įłgo niiłna' ?
PRED:	When the disciples saw it , they were amazed and said , “ Why do the fig tree come down quickly ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were amazed when they saw this and asked , “ How did the fig tree wither so quickly ? ”

ID:	4185
INPUT:	áko Ízrel dine'é bitahgi honishłǫ́ǫgo shidine'é Ízrel doo yóó'adideesh'áał da .
PRED:	And I am in the midst of the children of Israel , and I will not forsake Israel .
GOLD:	I will live among the Israelites and will never abandon my people Israel . ”

ID:	4186
INPUT:	Ákohgo Íísa díí hoł bééhoozin : Áízak éí Jéíkab yik'ijisdli' lá , áádóó Péídan-éíram hoolyéédóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ dooleełii nízhdidoołtééł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ ahóół'a' , áádóó bik'ijiijisdli'go hazhó'ó bizhníłnii'go ábijiní , Kéínan dine'é bitsi'ké ts'ídá doo ła' ne'asdzą́ą́ ádíílíił da ,
PRED:	And Esau knew that Isaac had blessed Jacob , and he sent him to take his wife from Egypt , and blessed him , and blessed him , and blessed him , saying , “ You shall not take any of the daughters of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	Esau knew that his father , Isaac , had blessed Jacob and sent him to Paddan-aram to find a wife , and that he had warned Jacob , “ You must not marry a Canaanite woman . ”

ID:	4187
INPUT:	Nít'éé' shoo , i'íí'ą́ągo diné haastih léi' niilnishgo dá'ák'ehdę́ę́' náádááł ; éí ałdó' Dził Íífreiyimdę́ę́' naagháago Gíbiyah kin haal'áagi t'óó átsééd níyáá lá , nidi Bénjamin dine'é éí íiyisí ákwii kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	And behold , there was a certain man coming out of the field , and a certain man came from the hill country of Ephraim , which was in the hill country of Ephraim , but Benjamin dwelt there .
GOLD:	That evening an old man came home from his work in the fields . He was from the hill country of Ephraim , but he was living in Gibeah , where the people were from the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	4188
INPUT:	ShiDiyin God nílíinii , shidiits'į́į́h ; nihiníníł'į́ áádóó nikin haal'áii nízhi' bee wójíhígi doo naagháhí daígíí níníł'į́ , háálá t'áá ákogi ádaniit'éego bąą doo nídaniikąąh da , nidi nee a'ááh hasin ayóó át'éii bąą nídaniikąąh .
PRED:	Listen to me , my God , and look at us , and look at your name , for we do not call on your name , but we cry out to you .
GOLD:	“ O my God , lean down and listen to me . Open your eyes and see our despair . See how your city — the city that bears your name — lies in ruins . We make this plea , not because we deserve help , but because of your mercy .

ID:	4189
INPUT:	Áko naal'a'í éí binanit'a'í bik'édí silį́į'go bąąh hayííł'áhígíí t'óó yik'i adeezogo <unk> dííchid .
PRED:	And the servant 's servant had stretched out his hand , and beat it , and touched it .
GOLD:	Then his master was filled with pity for him , and he released him and forgave his debt .

ID:	4190
INPUT:	Áko t'ááłá'í nootínígo t'áá nihonít'i'jį' t'áá ákót'éego bídanoohdlį́į doo danihííníi'ní , áko bíká nihił chodahoo'íinii nihá bi'doolnííł .
PRED:	And we will be every one according to the end of you , that we may have hope for you .
GOLD:	Our great desire is that you will keep on loving others as long as life lasts , in order to make certain that what you hope for will come true .

ID:	4191
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá nihizhé'é yił hólǫ́ yę́ęgi át'éego nihił hólǫ́ǫ doo , áko doo t'óó nihi'doołnihgo yóó'anihididoo'áał da .
PRED:	As the Lord your God is with you , so he will be with you , and he will not forsake you .
GOLD:	May the Lord our God be with us as he was with our ancestors ; may he never leave us or abandon us .

ID:	4192
INPUT:	Háálá nik'a' shaa adaazhjil , áádóó yéego shik'i dinilchid .
PRED:	For he hath stretched out his arrows , and hath stretched out my hand upon me .
GOLD:	Your arrows have struck deep , and your blows are crushing me .

ID:	4193
INPUT:	Éíman naadiin naaki binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' ; Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naaki nááhai . Bimá éí Miishóliimeth wolyé ; éí Játbahdóó diné <unk> yitsi' nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Amon was twenty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned two years in Jerusalem . His mother 's mother 's name was Abijah 's daughter .
GOLD:	Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem two years . His mother was Meshullemeth , the daughter of Haruz from Jotbah .

ID:	4194
INPUT:	Áko Mózes índa há naal'a'í Jáshowa bił dashdii'áázh áádóó Mózes éí Diyin God bidził góde dashdiigháahgo
PRED:	So Moses and his servant Joshua went up to the mountain of God .
GOLD:	So Moses and his assistant Joshua set out , and Moses climbed up the mountain of God .

ID:	4195
INPUT:	David éí Hííbran kin haal'áádę́ę́' níjí'náádóó bik'ijį' <unk> lem kin haal'áajį' jiníyáago hwe'asdzą́ą́ jíł'íní índa hwe'asdzą́ą́ ła' nínáájiisdláá' ; ákwe'é haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há nidayiishchį́ .
PRED:	After David went to Hebron , he took his wife , his wife , and his sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After moving from Hebron to Jerusalem , David married more concubines and wives , and they had more sons and daughters .

ID:	4196
INPUT:	Jó , éí kót'éego bee ak'e'ashchínígíí át'į́ : Jó'akon , shá halne'ii nilą́ąjį' deesh'aał , éí ná honít'i'ii nilą́ąjį' ná hasht'eidoolííł .
PRED:	Behold , it is written : Behold , I will send my prophet before you , that you may have eternal life .
GOLD:	John is the man to whom the Scriptures refer when they say , ‘ Look , I am sending my messenger ahead of you , and he will prepare your way before you . '

ID:	4197
INPUT:	Náftalai biye' ké éí <unk> ziyel áádóó <unk> áádóó Jíízer índa Shíllem daolyé ;
PRED:	And the sons of Naphtali : from the tribe of Naphtali , and Tema ;
GOLD:	The sons of Naphtali were Jahzeel , Guni , Jezer , and Shillem .

ID:	4198
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bá nidaal'a'í ádabiłní , Díísh ha'át'íí baa nisíníyá ? T'áadoo íyání awéé' baa nicha nít'éé' , azhą́ t'ah hináa nidi , áko awéé' daaztsą́ągo índa nídini'na'go ííníyą́ą́' .
PRED:	The servants said to him , “ What have you done to you ? Why have you done to the child ? Even though the child died , the child died and ate and ate it . ”
GOLD:	His advisers were amazed . “ We do n't understand you , ” they told him . “ While the child was still living , you wept and refused to eat . But now that the child is dead , you have stopped your mourning and are eating again . ”

ID:	4199
INPUT:	Shijéí t'áá íiyisí yidíłniih . Anoonééł bik'ee hóyée'ii shik'i dahoole' .
PRED:	My heart is troubled ; let those who hate me come upon me .
GOLD:	My heart pounds in my chest.The terror of death assaults me .

ID:	4200
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hajaa' hólǫ́ǫgo azdiits'a'ígíí éí háni' ajíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	If anyone has ears , let him hear .
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	4201
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá aaníí , Diyin God yá halne'ii dajílį́įgo áádóó Bóhólníihii bizaad hoł dahólǫ́ǫ́ ládą́ą́' Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' łeets'aa' sinilígíí áádóó Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bikin góne' łeets'aa' sinilígíí índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi łeets'aa' sinilígíí doo Bábilangóó doojih da , dajiníigo t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nídeizhdookąął .
PRED:	But if they have been a prophet , and the words of the Lord , if they have been with him , they shall not go into the house of the Lord , and the vessels of the Lord of hosts , and the vessels of the king of Judah , and the vessels of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	If they really are prophets and speak the Lord 's messages , let them pray to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Let them pray that the articles remaining in the Lord 's Temple and in the king 's palace and in the palaces of Jerusalem will not be carried away to Babylon ! '

ID:	4202
INPUT:	Judíyadóó Gáliliijį' Jesus jiníyáago , díidí naaki góne' habee adziilii bee bééhózinii baa nijiyáhígíí át'é .
PRED:	When Jesus came from Galilee to Galilee , he did all these things in the second sign .
GOLD:	This was the second miraculous sign Jesus did in Galilee after coming from Judea .

ID:	4203
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii yee has'áanii bąą hoł nihoozhǫǫh ; t'áá ákwíí jį́ índa t'áá ákwíí tł'éé' yee has'áanii nabik'ítsídzíkees .
PRED:	But they rejoice in the law of the Lord , and day and night .
GOLD:	But they delight in the law of the Lord , meditating on it day and night .

ID:	4204
INPUT:	Dine'é danohłíinii , t'áá nihí wołí bee ádaaht'į́įgo áádóó kódaníshéhégo ałtso nidahidoołtǫǫł ; kéyah nidahonees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' nidaahkaígíí da'íísínółts'ą́ą́' : t'áá nihí áká dasoołzaazgo kódaníshéhégo ałtso nidahidoołtǫǫł ; t'áá nihí áká dasoołzaazgo kódaníshéhégo ałtso nidahidoołtǫǫł .
PRED:	You people , will be broken , and you will be broken , and you will be broken ; all you who come from the ends of the land will be broken , and you will be broken .
GOLD:	“ Huddle together , you nations , and be terrified.Listen , all you distant lands.Prepare for battle , but you will be crushed ! Yes , prepare for battle , but you will be crushed !

ID:	4205
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Hágith biyáázh Adonáíjah ayóó át'é í'diilyaago ání , Shí aláahgo naat'áanii deeshłeeł . Áádóó tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó siláo éí łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii índa diné ashdladiingo éí bilą́ąjį' naajeeh doo biniyé ádá hasht'eyiilaa .
PRED:	And Adonijah the son of Adonijah became great , and said , I am the king . And he made his chariots , and fifty men before him .
GOLD:	About that time David 's son Adonijah , whose mother was Haggith , began boasting , “ I will make myself king. ” So he provided himself with chariots and charioteers and recruited fifty men to run in front of him .

ID:	4206
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díldzííł ! Diné t'áadoo ak'eh dadidlíní doo ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ni baa nánít'į́ !
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , and judge the nations .
GOLD:	Arise , O Lord ! Do not let mere mortals defy you ! Judge the nations !

ID:	4207
INPUT:	Áko Lííhai haz'ánígi hooldzis léi'gi Diyin God ąą áhoolaago áádę́ę́' tó háána'go éí joodlą́ą́' ; nít'éé' hwiih náhwiisdogo hasht'e'ninádzídzá . Éí bąą Enhá<unk> hoolyée doo , jidííniid . Díí jį́į́góó t'ahdii Lííhai haz'ánídi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And God opened the mouth of God , which is in the valley of Olives , and he ate water ; and it came to pass , and he said , It is a place of water , that is , and it shall be a place to this day .
GOLD:	So God caused water to gush out of a hollow in the ground at Lehi , and Samson was revived as he drank . Then he named that place “ The Spring of the One Who Cried Out , ” and it is still in Lehi to this day .

ID:	4208
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí áhoot'ééjí nidiní'ą́ . Bik'eh hoogáałii shilą́ąjį' hólǫ́ǫgo íínísin !
PRED:	Surely I have made thy judgments ; thou hast kept my ordinances before me .
GOLD:	I have chosen to be faithful ; I have determined to live by your regulations .

ID:	4209
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é hasht'éédadoolnííł
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	Hope for Restoration

ID:	4210
INPUT:	Háálá náhookǫsdę́ę'go ła' dine'é hak'ijį' nídidoonéełgo hakéyah doo naagháhígóó ádahodoolíiłgo ákwii doo ła' kééhat'íní da doo ; diné éí naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso yił ch'íheezná .
PRED:	For there shall be a nation against the north , and they shall come up against the north , and shall make no man dwell in it , and all the beasts of the earth shall come out .
GOLD:	For a nation will attack her from the northand bring such destruction that no one will live there again.Everything will be gone ; both people and animals will flee .

ID:	4211
INPUT:	Tax nahalyéii ła' nihá nísh'į́ . Áko béeso denériyas wolyéhígíí ła' haa deiz'ą́ .
PRED:	I do n't want to see you . So they gave the money to them .
GOLD:	Here , show me the coin used for the tax. ” When they handed him a Roman coin ,

ID:	4212
INPUT:	índa iiná doo ninít'i'ii baa hidish'aah , áko ts'ídá doo ádadoodįįł da , doo nidi ła'da shílák'eedóó haidiyoołhą́łí da .
PRED:	I give you eternal life , and no one will die , but no one will deliver them out of his hand .
GOLD:	I give them eternal life , and they will never perish . No one can snatch them away from me ,

ID:	4213
INPUT:	Jó , Júdah kéyahdi diné lą'í hach'ijí danilį́į doogo ádee hadadeesdzíí' , háálá Tobáíyah éí Éírah biye' Shekanáíyah baadaaní jílį́ , áádóó haye' Johéínan éí Berakáíyah biye' Miishálam bitsi' yił ahaa yít'áázh .
PRED:	For many of the people of Judah have made a vow in Judah , because they are not the son of Tobiah , the son of Uriah , the son of Zeruiah , the son of Zeruiah , the son of Nun .
GOLD:	For many in Judah had sworn allegiance to him because his father-in-law was Shecaniah son of Arah , and his son Jehohanan was married to the daughter of Meshullam son of Berekiah .

ID:	4214
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago bíyoołkááłdą́ą́' Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah in the days of Josiah the son of Josiah , king of Judah , saying ,
GOLD:	This is the message the Lord gave Jeremiah when Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah :

ID:	4215
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' Kapérniyam góyaa , hamá áádóó hatsilíké índa hódahooł'aahii bił jíkai , áko áadi t'áá díkwíí dahwiiską́ .
PRED:	After this , his mother , his brothers , his brothers , and his disciples went with him , and there were few days .
GOLD:	After the wedding he went to Capernaum for a few days with his mother , his brothers , and his disciples .

ID:	4216
INPUT:	Bitahdóó éí ła' naat'áanii nilį́į doo . Bitahdóó éí bá nant'áago binanit'a'í nilį́į dooleełii nídidoodááł . <unk> níhánígóó ninájídáahgo áhásh'į́į doo áádóó shaa jiigháah doo . Háishą' éí niná'ídidoot'áałgo shaa doogááł ? ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	He will be one of them . He will rule over them . He will stand before me . He will come to me , ” says the Lord . “ Who will come to me ? ”
GOLD:	They will have their own ruler again , and he will come from their own people.I will invite him to approach me , ” says the Lord , “ for who would dare to come unless invited ?

ID:	4217
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihik'isóó , kodi nihí lą'ígóó nihich'į' nidahwii'ná índa atídanihi'dil'į́į nidi , nihe'oodlą' bee chánah ánídanihoohdlaa ,
PRED:	Therefore , brothers and sisters , you have many troubles and trouble , but you have faith .
GOLD:	So we have been greatly encouraged in the midst of our troubles and suffering , dear brothers and sisters , because you have remained strong in your faith .

ID:	4218
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Walks on Water

ID:	4219
INPUT:	Táítas ákǫ́ǫ́ dínááh bidishníigo néisiskan , áko nihik'is nilíinii ła' bił ákǫ́ǫ́ ííł'a' . Ákoósh Táítas t'áá ha'át'éhígoda łínihizhcháázh ? Da' doósh t'ááłá'í nitsáhákees bee íi'níił da ? Da' doósh t'ááłá'ígi át'éego nihidiiltaał da ?
PRED:	I cried to Titus , and he sent us to our brother , and I sent him to you . Did n't we not seek one of us like we ?
GOLD:	When I urged Titus to visit you and sent our other brother with him , did Titus take advantage of you ? No ! For we have the same spirit and walk in each other 's steps , doing things the same way .

ID:	4220
INPUT:	Áko diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii yił áłah silį́į'go yaa nídaast'įįd , áko siláo éí béeso lą'í yaa deiznilgo ,
PRED:	And the elders of the people gathered together , and they brought many money into the hands of the army ,
GOLD:	A meeting with the elders was called , and they decided to give the soldiers a large bribe .

ID:	4221
INPUT:	Áko díí éí Jó'ash yik'ijį' nahaz'áanii éí Áman asdzání nilíinii Shímiyath biyáázh Zéíbad índa Mó'ab asdzání nilíinii <unk> biyáázh Jiihózabad wolyé .
PRED:	And it came to pass , after the law of Joash , the son of Joash , the son of Joash , and of the woman , that was , the son of Joash , and of the woman .
GOLD:	The assassins were Jozacar , the son of an Ammonite woman named Shimeath , and Jehozabad , the son of a Moabite woman named Shomer .

ID:	4222
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , ááhdishníinii éí díí , koshídę́ę́' hadziih , áko k'ad kodóó be'asdzą́ą́ dahazlį́'ígíi nidi , t'óó doo be'asdzą́ą́ dahólǫ́ǫ da nidahalingo dahináa doo ,
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , I am going to speak this , and now we will not have wives , but we will not have wives .
GOLD:	But let me say this , dear brothers and sisters : The time that remains is very short . So from now on , those with wives should not focus only on their marriage .

ID:	4223
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Kóbididííniił , T'ááká ákóde dadohkááh lágo áádóó t'ááká anaa' ádahohłééh lágo , háálá doo nihitah honishłǫ́ǫ da ; t'áá nihí ákǫ́ǫ́ dasidoohkaigo nihi'ana'í nidanihidoołtsił .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Do n't go up to battle . Do n't go up with them , because I am with you , and you will kill your enemies . ”
GOLD:	“ But the Lord told me to tell you , ‘ Do not attack , for I am not with you . If you go ahead on your own , you will be crushed by your enemies . '

ID:	4224
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ yiizį'go ání , Hágo bidohní . Áko diné doo oo'ínígíí hágo deidííniidgo ádeiłní , Nił hózhǫ́ǫgo nídiidááh ; níláhdę́ę́' hágo niłní .
PRED:	Jesus stood up and said , “ Come and say to the blind man . ” So they called for him , “ Get up ! Come here ! ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard him , he stopped and said , “ Tell him to come here. ” So they called the blind man . “ Cheer up , ” they said . “ Come on , he 's calling you ! ”

ID:	4225
INPUT:	Nít'éé' nááda'iiłniihii hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'ékaigo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' k'os ni' nihisheegizh ,
PRED:	And the priests went out of the sanctuary , and stood by the cloud of the Lord in the cloud of the Lord .
GOLD:	When the priests came out of the Holy Place , a thick cloud filled the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	4226
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii yaa nayiizyeelígíí bee bił náhodoonih biniyé álílee k'ehgo ída'ooł'įįłii áádóó déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii áádóó álíleego yee nidahałáii índa Kaldíya dine'é dahóyáanii t'áá ałtso hágo yididooniiłgo yee haadzíí' . Ákohgo nidahaaskaigo aláahgo naat'áanii yidááhdóó áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	Then the king called all the wise men , and all the wise men , and all the wise men of the Chaldeans , and all the wise men of the Chaldeans , and they came before the king .
GOLD:	He called in his magicians , enchanters , sorcerers , and astrologers , and he demanded that they tell him what he had dreamed . As they stood before the king ,

ID:	4227
INPUT:	Áko Mííshah hoolyéédóó ha'a'aahjígo Dził <unk> bich'į'go kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	They have gone out to the east side of the hill country .
GOLD:	The territory they occupied extended from Mesha all the way to Sephar in the eastern mountains .

ID:	4228
INPUT:	Jó , bik'ijį' nídideeshdááł , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii , áádóó Bábilan kin haal'áhígíí áádóó diné daadzí'ígíí áádóó aye'ké índa atséłké ałtso áhodeeshdįįł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	For I will turn against them , saith the Lord of hosts , and I will destroy Babylon , and her sons , and her daughters , and her daughters , saith the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I , myself , have risen against Babylon ! I will destroy its children and its children 's children , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4229
INPUT:	Díí nigaan bee baa nisíníyáhígíí bił béédahodoozįįł ; ni Bóhólníihii éí ákónít'į́ !
PRED:	You will know what you have done . You are the Lord .
GOLD:	Let them see that this is your doing , that you yourself have done it , Lord .

ID:	4230
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Jerúsalem kin haal' áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Adónai-zíídek wolyéii díí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą́' : Jáshowa éí Éí'ai kin haal'áii yik'eh deesdlį́į'go ts'ídá ałtso íísdįįdígíí áádóó Jériko kin haal'áii aláahgo binanit'a'í t'áá bił áyííł'įįdígi át'éego Éí'ai kin haal'áii áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í ákónááyiidlaaígíí índa Gíbiyan dine'é éí Ízrel dine'é yił k'é da'ahó'níigo áyiilaa áádóó bił kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the king of Jerusalem and the king of Ai heard this , that Joshua smote Ai , and destroyed it , and destroyed it , as he had done to the king of Jericho , and to the king of Ai , and to the king of Ai , and to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Adoni-zedek , king of Jerusalem , heard that Joshua had captured and completely destroyed Ai and killed its king , just as he had destroyed the town of Jericho and killed its king . He also learned that the Gibeonites had made peace with Israel and were now their allies .

ID:	4231
INPUT:	Nídadidohłóosgo yá'át'éehgo baa ádahołyą́ą doo áádóó doo haada dadoohłíił da . Kót'éego shá ádaohłééh , nihiłníigo t'áá ákót'éego bá ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	And ye shall bring it to pass , that ye may eat it , and do not do it , and do it unto me , that ye may do unto me .
GOLD:	“ See that he is n't hurt , ” he said . “ Look after him well , and give him anything he wants . ”

ID:	4232
INPUT:	Nidi diné doo t'áá ałtso éí bił béédahózin da . Ła' díí jį́įdi eda'alyaii yídaneesdinígíí biniinaa e'elyaii bich'į' ch'iyáán nááhaaznii'ii át'é t'ahdii danízingo deiyą́ , áko t'áá íídą́ą́' doo ál'į́į da danízin nidi ádayoolíiłgo bąą t'ą́ą́' anídabii'nííł .
PRED:	But all the people do not know what they have sacrificed to this day , because they have offered sacrifices to the idols of idols , but they have not been able to turn back .
GOLD:	However , not all believers know this . Some are accustomed to thinking of idols as being real , so when they eat food that has been offered to idols , they think of it as the worship of real gods , and their weak consciences are violated .

ID:	4233
INPUT:	Díí ts'ídá baa ákodanohsin , diné na'ageh yee tsi'naagháii , doodaii' baa'ihgo hináanii , doodaii' diné adánoolníinii , éí e'elyaii yich'į' nahałáii danilíinii éí Christ índa Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii łá'í nidi łahdóó doo hó da .
PRED:	You know that the kingdom of God is not from the kingdom of God .
GOLD:	You can be sure that no immoral , impure , or greedy person will inherit the Kingdom of Christ and of God . For a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	4234
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí Ííjip dine'é binaalte' dajílį́įgo nidazhdi'ni'go diséts'ą́ą́' , nidi bił ahadadi'nisht'áanii bénáshniih .
PRED:	And when the children of Israel heard that they were slaves of the Egyptians , I remembered my covenant with them .
GOLD:	You can be sure that I have heard the groans of the people of Israel , who are now slaves to the Egyptians . And I am well aware of my covenant with them .

ID:	4235
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso Ííjipgóó dadii'néełgo áadi kéédahwiit'į́į dooleeł , danízingo yee hasht'e'nitsídaazkézígíí éí diltłish áádóó dichin índa naałniih yik'ee dínóonééł , áko doo yá'át'éehii hak'ijį' bidííchidígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó doo ła' jidoodzih da , índa doo ła' yisdázhdooltéeł da .
PRED:	And all the people shall come to Egypt , and they shall dwell in the land of Egypt , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , and by the evil hand of none shall deliver them .
GOLD:	That is the fate awaiting every one of you who insists on going to live in Egypt . Yes , you will die from war , famine , and disease . None of you will escape the disaster I will bring upon you there . '

ID:	4236
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá aaníí áníigo índa doo yits'ą́ąjį' áńdoo'nííłgóó David yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' , Nits'ą́ą́dóó da'ahílchíihii ła' , bikáá'dóó nahó'áii yikáá' dah náhidinoobįįłgo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	As the Lord lives , he swore to David , saying , “ Your descendants will sit on the throne and sit on the ground . ”
GOLD:	The Lord swore an oath to Davidwith a promise he will never take back : “ I will place one of your descendantson your throne .

ID:	4237
INPUT:	háálá t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bá honít'i'jí Bóhólníihii bił bééhózingo yaa áhályą́ , nidi doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii bá honít'i'jí bił yóó'ahodoogááł .
PRED:	For the way of the Lord knows the way of the righteous , but the way of the wicked shall be forgiven .
GOLD:	For the Lord watches over the path of the godly , but the path of the wicked leads to destruction .

ID:	4238
INPUT:	Nidi k'éhézdon honít'i' bits'áhóhjeehgo bąą áádóó t'áá ádzaagóó bee haz'áanii bee na'nitin biniinaa t'óó ahayóí ádił da'asiihgo Líívai bibee aha'deet'áanii daołchxǫ' lá , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But if you turn away from the way , and if you have sinned against the law , you have made a covenant with many sins , ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	But you priests have left God 's paths . Your instructions have caused many to stumble into sin . You have corrupted the covenant I made with the Levites , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4239
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo bídahólníihii , aląąjį' naazíinii , naat'áanii danilíinii , ándahwii'aahii , yódí yaa ádahalyáanii , kót'éego daaníinii , yah ada'iiníiłii índa bídahólníihii nináneel'ą́ąjį' ts'ídá t'áá ałtso nidahaaskaigo aláahgo naat'áanii Nébukadnézzar e'elyaii áyiilaago yiyiisį'ígíí doolzįh biniyé hoo'a'ígíí yidááhdę́ę́' deizį' .
PRED:	And the princes of the princes , the princes , and the princes , and the princes , and the princes , and all the princes , and all the princes of the princes , came , and stood before the king Nebuchadnezzar .
GOLD:	So all these officials came and stood before the statue King Nebuchadnezzar had set up .

ID:	4240
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , hashísííd , áádóó shíní<unk> ; shijéí índa shíni' nabínítaahgo hanisííd .
PRED:	Look at me , O Lord , and keep my heart , and let my heart be troubled .
GOLD:	Put me on trial , Lord , and cross-examine me.Test my motives and my heart .

ID:	4241
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hach'į' haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Ádaa ádahołyą́ , áko diné doo ła' yóó'adanihidínóo'ah da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Be careful , so that no one will turn away from you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ Do n't let anyone mislead you ,

ID:	4242
INPUT:	Éí bąągo bidinééh danilíinii éí Bóhólníihii doo hąą bił hózhǫ́ǫ da dooleeł , áádóó áłchíní dabizhé'é ádaadinii áádóó asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii doo yaa a'áhí dínóozįįł da , háálá t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'óó ádahozhdil'į́ áádóó doo yá'át'éhígi ádajit'į́ índa t'áá ádzaagóó yádajiłti' . Azhą́ díí t'áá ałtsojį' kóhoolaa nidi , t'ah hach'į' báháchį'go hak'ijį' k'ídées'nii' .
PRED:	Therefore the Lord will not rejoice with the young men , and the fatherless , and the widow , and the widow , because they are not ashamed , because they are evil , and his anger is not poured out upon them .
GOLD:	That is why the Lord takes no pleasure in the young menand shows no mercy even to the widows and orphans.For they are all wicked hypocrites , and they all speak foolishness.But even then the Lord 's anger will not be satisfied.His fist is still poised to strike .

ID:	4243
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é yaa ádahalyáanii bik'ijį' nílį́įgo handziih ; aa ádahojilyáanii t'áá hó hach'į' handziihgo áhodiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel dine'é yaa ádahalyáanii t'áá bí t'éiyá t'áá ádíighahígo t'áá bí t'éí da'ayą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Dibé yaa áhályáanii yee' dibé ya'ałtso' dooleeł .
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against the prophets of Israel , and say to them , ‘ Thus says the Lord God : Woe to the wise men of Israel , but to those who eat the flock . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy against the shepherds , the leaders of Israel . Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : What sorrow awaits you shepherds who feed yourselves instead of your flocks . Should n't shepherds feed their sheep ?

ID:	4244
INPUT:	Gíbar ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii náhást'édiindóó ba'aan ashdla' .
PRED:	The sons of Gibeon , two hundred and five .
GOLD:	The family of Gibbar95

ID:	4245
INPUT:	Tó tsi'na'iiłáii ałtso dayoodlą́ą'go t'áá áłahjį' bida'ajił yaa deíkááh ; binanit'a'í danilíinii baa yáhásinii t'éí bił ayóó ádahoot'é .
PRED:	They drink all the waters of water , and go down to their princes ; their princes are filled with shame .
GOLD:	When the rulers of Israel finish their drinking , off they go to find some prostitutes.They love shame more than honor .

ID:	4246
INPUT:	Béíyal wolyéii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náájiisnii'go biniinaa atíhodeeshłííł . <unk> tł'óół índa tsé da'ílíinii t'éí bee háázhdiit'įįh áádóó bił ałch'į' dah dajilwo'ii bikéé' yóó'aníjílwo' áádóó shaa jiyooznah , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will destroy the burnt offering of Baal because of the burnt offering , and the stones of those who served him , and have forgotten me , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I will punish her for all those timeswhen she burned incense to her images of Baal , when she put on her earrings and jewelsand went out to look for her loversbut forgot all about me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4247
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí adą́ą́dą́ą́' Néíbath bidił áádóó biye'ké bidił yiiłtsą́ągo kwe'é haz'ánígi k'éédideeshnííł , ní Bóhólníihii . K'ad Bóhólníihii yee haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo ni'jį' ahołhan .
PRED:	I will give Naboth the blood of Naboth and his sons in this place , ” says the Lord . “ Now go down to the ground according to the word of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	‘ I solemnly swear that I will repay him here on this plot of land , says the Lord , for the murder of Naboth and his sons that I saw yesterday . ' So throw him out on Naboth 's property , just as the Lord said . ”

ID:	4248
INPUT:	áádóó dáń'dítį́įhgi ándahwii'aahii shik'is dajílį́įgo <unk> chíní bizhé'é ádaadinii bide ádahwíínísin ládą́ą́' ;
PRED:	And if thou hast set a judge in the gate , and hast not taken up the fatherless of my father 's house .
GOLD:	“ If I raised my hand against an orphan , knowing the judges would take my side ,

ID:	4249
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Féro éí Ízrel dine'é yéé'níłnii'go Diyin God éí Filístiya dine'é bikéyah góne' doo dahodii'eezh da , azhą́ áájí áhání nidi , háálá Diyin God ání , Éí doodaléi' anaa' hodooleeł yaa ákodaniizį́į'go łahgo át'éego tsíńdadookosgo Ííjip kéyahgóó t'ą́ą́' nihéédoo'nééł .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Pharaoh sent the children of Israel into the land of the Philistines , that God would not go into the land of the Philistines , but he said , ‘ God shall return to Egypt . '
GOLD:	When Pharaoh finally let the people go , God did not lead them along the main road that runs through Philistine territory , even though that was the shortest route to the Promised Land . God said , “ If the people are faced with a battle , they might change their minds and return to Egypt . ”

ID:	4250
INPUT:	Ayóó át'éii bik'a' dadeeníinii índa gad bitsííd lą́ą .
PRED:	The arrows of his arrows , and the flame of his arrows .
GOLD:	You will be pierced with sharp arrowsand burned with glowing coals .

ID:	4251
INPUT:	Behétł'óól tó t'óó ahayóí nílį́įjį' łeeh daneesánígíí bee bits'áoz'a' ayóó ádaníłnééz daazlį́į́' , áko ayóó át'éego t'óó baa dzólníigo sikaad .
PRED:	The waters of the waters were full of branches , and the branches of the waters became great , and it was great .
GOLD:	It was strong and beautiful , with wide-spreading branches , for its roots went deepinto abundant water .

ID:	4252
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Kéin áyidííniid , Háájíshą' nitsilí Éíbel ? Áko ázhdííniid , Doo shił bééhózin da . Shí hanii bitsilí yaa áhályáanii nishłį́ ?
PRED:	And the Lord said unto Korah , Where is thy brother ? And he said , I know not : I am a fool of his brother ?
GOLD:	Afterward the Lord asked Cain , “ Where is your brother ? Where is Abel ? ” “ I do n't know , ” Cain responded . “ Am I my brother 's guardian ? ”

ID:	4253
INPUT:	éí yá ch'énádáah doo índa yilą́ąjį' yah anáhádáahgo yoo'ish doo índa yah anáyii'éesh doo , áko éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó dah oonéłígíí doo dibé yaa áhályáanii bee ádinígíigi ádaat'ée da doo .
PRED:	He will go out before them , and bring them back to them , and they will bring them back to them , and they will not be like a shepherd of sheep .
GOLD:	Give them someone who will guide them wherever they go and will lead them into battle , so the community of the Lord will not be like sheep without a shepherd . ”

ID:	4254
INPUT:	2Kgs . 23 : 31-35
PRED:	King Hezekiah of Judah
GOLD:	Jehoiachin Rules in Judah

ID:	4255
INPUT:	Áko yééhoosįįdgo ádííniid , Jó , shiye' bi'éétsoh át'é ; naaldlooshii da'aldeełii boolghal sha'shin ; t'áá aaníí Jóseph yę́ę nibi'diisdláád lá .
PRED:	And when he saw it , he said , Behold , my son is my robe ; and the beast lifted up his eyes ; yea , Joseph was taken away .
GOLD:	Their father recognized it immediately . “ Yes , ” he said , “ it is my son 's robe . A wild animal must have eaten him . Joseph has clearly been torn to pieces ! ”

ID:	4256
INPUT:	Hane' baa hózhóonii bił béédahózinii bik'idahojidlí . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , éí ninii' bee i'díídííngóó hool'ingo deíkááh .
PRED:	Blessed are those who know the Good News , O Lord , and walk in light .
GOLD:	Happy are those who hear the joyful call to worship , for they will walk in the light of your presence , Lord .

ID:	4257
INPUT:	Áádóó David éí didlidgo nááhániihii índa hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii ałtso náájiisnii'go t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bízhi' binahjį' diné yik'ijisdli' .
PRED:	David offered burnt offering and peace offerings , and blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	When he had finished his sacrifices , David blessed the people in the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4258
INPUT:	Éí kéyahdi dáń'dítį́į́h bine' na'adzi'gi bee ąąh oolch'íhí hatahgóó tádíítą́ . Ha'áłchíní haghahásh'nil . Shidine'é atéshłaa , háálá ádaat'éii t'áadoo yits'ąą t'ą́ą́' dah nídiikai da .
PRED:	I will scatter them among the gates of the land , and I will scatter his children ; I will punish my people , because they have not turned back from their wickedness .
GOLD:	I will winnow you like grain at the gates of your citiesand take away the children you hold dear.I will destroy my own people , because they refuse to change their evil ways .

ID:	4259
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso nibee haz'áanii dayiitíihgo ádíníinii doo yik'eh dahóół'įįd da , áko Mózes ninaal'a'í nilíinii bee haz'áanii biyi' yee ak'e'ashchį́įgo hóyée'jį' nihá ha'oodzíi'go bee nihoot'áanii nihik'i hoole' , háálá Diyin God bich'į' ádił da'niilzíí' .
PRED:	But all Israel did not obey the law of the law , and they did not obey the law of Moses the servant of Moses , because we have sinned against our God .
GOLD:	All Israel has disobeyed your instruction and turned away , refusing to listen to your voice. “ So now the solemn curses and judgments written in the Law of Moses , the servant of God , have been poured down on us because of our sin .

ID:	4260
INPUT:	Mk . 2 : 1-12
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	4261
INPUT:	Áko t'áá háiida Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee józhíigo níjooskanígíí yisdáhodoołtééł , háálá Dził Záíyan bighą́ą'di índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áadi kéédahat' íinii bá ch'ídahwiizt'i' doo . Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' yę́ęgi át'éego daadzíi'ii bitahgi Bóhólníihii yíká ádííniidígíí kééhat'į́į doo .
PRED:	And he shall deliver him from the name of the Lord , for he shall deliver him out of Mount Zion , and to his inheritance , as the Lord commanded him .
GOLD:	But everyone who calls on the name of the Lordwill be saved , for some on Mount Zion in Jerusalem will escape , just as the Lord has said.These will be among the survivorswhom the Lord has called .

ID:	4262
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' índa Líívai dine'é t'áá bí ádá áádóó nááda'iiłniihii ałdó' yá da'ast'é , háálá nááda'iiłniihii Éran biye' náás ahoolchíiłii éí didlidgo náádahaniihii áádóó ak'ah náádayiiłniih bindaanishgo hiłiijį́į́' ; éí bąą Líívai dine'é t'áá bí ádá áádóó nááda'iiłniihii Éran biye' náás ahoolchíiłii ałdó' yá da'ast'é .
PRED:	And it came to pass , after that , that the Levites and the priests , for the sons of Aaron , the son of Aaron the priest , and the oil of the priests , and the oil of the Levites , and the sons of Aaron , and the sons of Aaron .
GOLD:	Afterward the Levites prepared Passover offerings for themselves and for the priests — the descendants of Aaron — because the priests had been busy from morning till night offering the burnt offerings and the fat portions . The Levites took responsibility for all these preparations .

ID:	4263
INPUT:	áko abínígo índa Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii deidoołtsééł , háálá éí bich'į' saad dahonohłónígíí yidiits'a' . Nihíshą' ha'át'íí niidlį́įgo nihich'į' saad dahonohłǫ́ ?
PRED:	And they shall see the glory of the Lord in the morning and in the morning , because ye hear the word of the Lord ; why are ye with us ?
GOLD:	In the morning you will see the glory of the Lord , because he has heard your complaints , which are against him , not against us . What have we done that you should complain about us ? ”

ID:	4264
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é ádaaní , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé nihik'iidoohjahgo nihí niikánoohkai ? Nít'éé' ádahodííniid , Sámson bida'diitł'óół biniyé niikai ; t'áá ánihijiilaaígi áńdahodiilnííł .
PRED:	The people of Judah said , “ Why have you come up to fight against us ? ” They answered , “ We have come to Samson , just as he has done to us . ”
GOLD:	The men of Judah asked the Philistines , “ Why are you attacking us ? ” The Philistines replied , “ We 've come to capture Samson . We 've come to pay him back for what he did to us . ”

ID:	4265
INPUT:	John lá háádę́ę́' bee óhólníihii bik'ehgo tó yee asį́į́h nít'éé' , yá'ąąshdę́ę́' daats'í , éí doodaléi' diné bits'ą́ą́dóó daats'í ? Bee shił dahołne' .
PRED:	For John was baptized in the kingdom of the kingdom , or from heaven , tell me whether there is a man from heaven ?
GOLD:	“ Did John 's authority to baptize come from heaven , or was it merely human ? Answer me ! ”

ID:	4266
INPUT:	Ákohgo ádííniid , Nits'ą́ąjį' ch'íshidi'yeelghan ; azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , nikin bii' sohodizin dílzinii si'ą́ą́góó sonáádideeszįįł .
PRED:	Then he said , “ We have turned away from you , but I will pray to the temple . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , ‘ O Lord , you have driven me from your presence.Yet I will look once more toward your holy Temple . '

ID:	4267
INPUT:	áko t'áadoo nidadeelchidígi át'éego doo haada nihidi'doolníił da , áádóó nihí yá'át'éehgi ádaniil'į́ , áádóó k'é daniidzingo yóó'adanisiil'a' , áko k'ad Bóhólníihii bik'ijidlíhígíí sínílį́į́' .
PRED:	so that we may not be able to be able to do good , and we have forsaken him , and we have loved him , and now the Lord has blessed us .
GOLD:	Swear that you will not harm us , just as we have never troubled you . We have always treated you well , and we sent you away from us in peace . And now look how the Lord has blessed you ! ”

ID:	4268
INPUT:	Áádóó tł'óo'jigo ahééhool'áhígíí bich'į'go ch'é'étiingi tsin yadaa'áhígíí bąąhjį' páam sikaadii bééda'alyaago nidaask'ęę' , áádóó dah náhást'ánígíí bich'į' tseebíigo ałk'i hoo'niłí haaz'á .
PRED:	And there were palm trees on the entrance of the court , and on the side of the court , and on the side of the court were eight cubits .
GOLD:	The entry room to the south gateway faced into the outer courtyard . It had palm tree decorations on its columns , and there were eight steps leading to its entrance .

ID:	4269
INPUT:	Áko siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í , Díidí bee shił hwíínílne'ígíí t'ááká diné ła'da bee bił hóólne' yíila' , yiłníigo éí dinééh yéé'níłnii' .
PRED:	And the captain of the army said to him , “ This is the words that you have told me , ‘ Let no man go . '
GOLD:	“ Do n't let anyone know you told me this , ” the commander warned the young man .

ID:	4270
INPUT:	Ánathath kin haal'áádóó dine'é t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin tseebíí .
PRED:	The men of Kohath , one hundred and eight .
GOLD:	The people of Anathoth128

ID:	4271
INPUT:	Ła'ts'áadah jį́ aleeh góne' Ásher dine'é naat'áanii nilíinii Ákran biye' Péígiyel náá'iisnii' :
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the prince of the children of Asher , prince of the children of Asher , offer an offering :
GOLD:	On the eleventh day Pagiel son of Ocran , leader of the tribe of Asher , presented his offering .

ID:	4272
INPUT:	Áádóó Jííhu éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é bitahgóó i'iis'a' ; Béíyal yich'į' nidahałáii t'áá ałtso nidahaaskai , áko t'áadoo ła' doodaí diné t'áá ałtso neheeskai . Nít'éé' Béíyal bá kin si'ání góne' áłah dzizlį́į'go kin góne' ałtso hazhdéébįįd .
PRED:	And Jehu sent messengers among all Israel ; and all the men of Baal came together , and all the people gathered together in the house of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	4273
INPUT:	Bitsásk'ehgi diné doo <unk> át'éii ła' bee óhólnííh bił haz'áanii bee ił ídlíinii t'áadoo baa deet'áanii ákwii néidoodzįįł ; éí k'é nídzingo índa łídílchíigo doogááł , áko bee óhólníihii bił haz'áanii aghaididoot'ááł .
PRED:	And there shall be no man in his place , and there shall be no law in his place ; and he shall come , and he shall take away his kingdom .
GOLD:	“ The next to come to power will be a despicable man who is not in line for royal succession . He will slip in when least expected and take over the kingdom by flattery and intrigue .

ID:	4274
INPUT:	Nidi łééchąą'í áádóó binda'adlo'go álílee k'ehgo nidahałáii áádóó na'ageh yee tsi'nidaakaii áádóó diné nideiłtseedii áádóó e'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáii , índa t'ááłá'í nítínígo wooch'ííd ayóó'ádayó'níinii éí t'áá ałtso tł'óo'di naaldeeh , ní Jesus .
PRED:	But the dogs , and those who speak lies , and their idols , and their idols , and their idols , and all those who love lies in the midst of Jesus .
GOLD:	Outside the city are the dogs — the sorcerers , the sexually immoral , the murderers , the idol worshipers , and all who love to live a lie .

ID:	4275
INPUT:	Éí Daráíyas aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naaki náhááh góne' hastą́ą́h nídízííd binih , naadiin dį́į́'góó yoołkáałgo áhóót'įįd .
PRED:	In the second year of Darius king Darius , in the fourteenth month , on the fourteenth day of the month of the month of King Darius .
GOLD:	on September 21 of the second year of King Darius 's reign .

ID:	4276
INPUT:	Náhookǫsjí ałdó' t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin ké silá ánízah ; ííyah danii'áii naadiin áádóó bitł'ááh naaznilígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí ałdó' naadiin ; éí béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaa , nidi ííyah danii'áii bąąh hada'azhahígíí áádóó bita'ndaaz'áhígíí éí béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	And the north side of the north side , twenty cubits , and their pillars , and their pillars , and their pillars , and their pillars , and their pillars were of silver .
GOLD:	He made a similar set of curtains for the north side — 150 feet of curtains held up by twenty posts set securely in bronze bases . He hung the curtains with silver hooks and rings .

ID:	4277
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé shí áádóó nihí nihita'gi bee ééhózinii át'éego shiháá'áyį́į́h jį́ ná'oodleełii hodílzingo ádeínóhsin doo .
PRED:	You shall know that I am the Lord your God , that you may know that I am a sign between you and you , that I am the Sabbath .
GOLD:	and keep my Sabbath days holy , for they are a sign to remind you that I am the Lord your God . '

ID:	4278
INPUT:	Yah a'atiin bíighahgóó ałdó' yah i' iildéhígi éí ałts'ą́ą́hjí bikáá' adání naaki sinil ; éí bikáa'gi didlidgo náádahaniihii áádóó ádił ni'iidzííhjí náádahaniihii índa ádił oodzíi'gi bee k'ééhodooldǫǫłgo náádahaniihii ákwii nidaatseed .
PRED:	The man who is near to the gate is unclean in the middle of the gate , on each side of the altar and on the other side of the burnt offering and the sin offering and the sin offering .
GOLD:	On each side of this entry room were two tables , where the sacrificial animals were slaughtered for the burnt offerings , sin offerings , and guilt offerings .

ID:	4279
INPUT:	Bee bił chohoo'íinii k'ídla' . Na'ashjé'ii bitł'óól k'ídla'ígi át'įįh .
PRED:	The hope of the hope are five cubits , like the bars of the roots .
GOLD:	Their confidence hangs by a thread.They are leaning on a spider 's web .

ID:	4280
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihá nabídíłkid , háálá Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar nihik'iijeeh . Bóhólníihii t'óó bik'e'ayóigo naashnishígíí t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo Nébukadnézzar nihits'ádoonéłígíí biniyé nihíká adoolwołgo da'át'é .
PRED:	Tell us , because Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon will fight against us . He will help us . He will help us . He will help us . He will help us . He will help us . He will help us .
GOLD:	“ Please speak to the Lord for us and ask him to help us . King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon is attacking Judah . Perhaps the Lord will be gracious and do a mighty miracle as he has done in the past . Perhaps he will force Nebuchadnezzar to withdraw his armies . ”

ID:	4281
INPUT:	Shikin haal'áádóó bich'é'éké ábi'dil'ínígíí yish'į́įgo biniinaa shijéí yineesgai .
PRED:	My heart is troubled because of the daughters of my city , because I have seen the daughters of my daughter .
GOLD:	My heart is breakingover the fate of all the women of Jerusalem .

ID:	4282
INPUT:	Éé' t'áá sahdii át'éego naashch'ąą'ii yii' sitį́ , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii bitsi'ké bízháán nidaakaii éé' ákót'éii yii' naaztį́ . Ámnan bá naal'a'í hoł ch'íní'áazhgo hach'ą́ą́h dá'di'níłkaal .
PRED:	She was clothed with fine clothes , because the king 's daughters were clothed with him . Amnon 's servant was shut up and shut him .
GOLD:	So the servant put her out and locked the door behind her . She was wearing a long , beautiful robe , as was the custom in those days for the king 's virgin daughters .

ID:	4283
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání , Ts'ídá t'áá háiida hoosdląądgo haa dzoozlíi'ii éí doo t'óó baa yáhásinígi ábidi'doolníił da .
PRED:	The Scriptures says , “ Whoever believes in him will not be ashamed . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures tell us , “ Anyone who trusts in him will never be disgraced . ”

ID:	4284
INPUT:	áádóó , Bíla' yee dah daníłteehgo doo tsé bik'ą́ą́h didííltał da .
PRED:	And they shall lay their hands upon their hands , and they shall not fight against the rock .
GOLD:	And they will hold you up with their handsso you wo n't even hurt your foot on a stone . ' ”

ID:	4285
INPUT:	Kédaayahdóó dadiyin t'áá ałtso bitahdóó háídíígíishą' hakéyah shighaideet'ą́ , áko Bóhólníihii éí Jerúsalem doo shighaididoot'áał da ?
PRED:	Who has taken away my land from all the gods of the land ? And the Lord will not take away Jerusalem from me ?
GOLD:	What god of any nation has ever been able to save its people from my power ? So what makes you think that the Lord can rescue Jerusalem from me ? ”

ID:	4286
INPUT:	Ákohgo Héíman éí aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras áyidííniid , Diné danilíinii ła' ałtso tadaoskaigo aláahgo bee nóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii t'áá át'é biyi'góó ałtso nihinéést'e' . Ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bich'į'go bibee nahaz'áanii t'áá sahdii ádaat'é , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bibee haz'áanii doo yik'eh dahół'į́į da ; éí bąą t'áá dahináago baa didoot'áłígíí aláahgo naat'áanii doo bá yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	Then Haman said to King Ahasuerus , “ The people are gathered together together , and the kingdom is filled with all the kingdoms of the nations , and all the law is holy to the king , and it is not good to the king . ”
GOLD:	Then Haman approached King Xerxes and said , “ There is a certain race of people scattered through all the provinces of your empire who keep themselves separate from everyone else . Their laws are different from those of any other people , and they refuse to obey the laws of the king . So it is not in the king 's interest to let them live .

ID:	4287
INPUT:	Nidi baohkah yę́ę bits'ą́ą́dóó nihineest'ą' danilínígíí bik'ehgo atídanihideeshłííł , áádóó tsin bee hodíłch'ilgo yíl'áhígíí bohodideeshniłgo ałtso adidook'ą́ą́ł , áko bik'i dinaagóó yíl'áhígíí ts'ídá ałtso dadidoolił , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But I will punish you according to your fruit , and I will destroy you by the fruit of your fruit , and I will burn up the forest of the forest , and burn it with fire , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	And I myself will punish you for your sinfulness , says the Lord.I will light a fire in your foreststhat will burn up everything around you . ' ”

ID:	4288
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihigaan t'óó nihąąh nidahaaznilii áádóó nihigodta' doo daniłdzil da daazlį́į'ii bidziilgo ánídaahdle' !
PRED:	Therefore make your arm weak and weak , and the weak are weak .
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	4289
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jézriyelgi ha'ídées'į́į'ii na'alzídí bikáá'dóó sizį́įgo Jííhu yił yikahígíí haideel'į́į'go ání , Níléídę́ę́' ła' jookah . Jóram ání , Diné ła' łį́į́' bee bidááhgóó díł'áago áyididooniił , K'éésh biniyé ádaoht'į́ ?
PRED:	And Jehu saw that he was standing on the throne of Jezreel , and saw that he was standing in Jezreel , and he said to him , “ There is no one to say to him , ‘ Is it peace for you ? '
GOLD:	The watchman on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu and his company approaching , so he shouted to Joram , “ I see a company of troops coming ! ” “ Send out a rider to ask if they are coming in peace , ” King Joram ordered .

ID:	4290
INPUT:	Kédaayahgi diné índa naaldlooshii doo ła' bikáá' hólǫ́ǫ da , áádóó Kaldíya dine'é baa deet'ą́ , dadohníinii ákwe'é kéyah nináádahaniih doo .
PRED:	There shall no man or beast in the land , and give it to the Chaldeans , saying , There shall be a sacrifice there .
GOLD:	Fields will again be bought and sold in this land about which you now say , ‘ It has been ravaged by the Babylonians , a desolate land where people and animals have all disappeared . '

ID:	4291
INPUT:	Shidine'é bich'é'é éí Sádam kin haal'áagi diné kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę yiláahgo ádił asiih . Éí diné yę́ę jishgishígíí nahalingo t'áadoo hodeelnii'ígóó áho'disdįįd .
PRED:	My daughter Sodom has sinned more than the inhabitants of Sodom . They are destroyed like a man who has not been destroyed .
GOLD:	The guilt of my peopleis greater than that of Sodom , where utter disaster struck in a momentand no hand offered help .

ID:	4292
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá ádzíłtso t'óó hoł adahayóigo nida'ahízhdílkidgo ádajiní , Díí lá ha'át'íí át'é ? Jó , na'nitin ániidíii át'é ! Níłch'i danchxǫ́'í nidi bee óhólnííh yee yich'į' hahadziihgo bik'eh dahół'į́ .
PRED:	They were all amazed and asked , “ What is this ? It is a new teaching ! ” They answered , “ It is a new spirit ! ”
GOLD:	Amazement gripped the audience , and they began to discuss what had happened . “ What sort of new teaching is this ? ” they asked excitedly . “ It has such authority ! Even evil spirits obey his orders ! ”

ID:	4293
INPUT:	Ákohgo Maikéíyah ání , Hodiiyeelgo néínídzáá ládą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii doo shee haadzíi' da doo . Áádóó ání , Dine'é nohłíinii , t'áá ánółtso da'íísółts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Micaiah said , “ If you return , the Lord has not spoken to me . ” And Micaiah said , “ Listen , all you people ! ”
GOLD:	But Micaiah replied , “ If you return safely , it will mean that the Lord has not spoken through me ! ” Then he added to those standing around , “ Everyone mark my words ! ”

ID:	4294
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii [ áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii] índa Jew dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii , Kéíyafas wolyéhígíí , bighangi áłah silį́į́' ,
PRED:	Then the chief priests and the elders of the law gathered together together at the house of John the high priest .
GOLD:	At that same time the leading priests and elders were meeting at the residence of Caiaphas , the high priest ,

ID:	4295
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Ííní'į́ nánídleeh ; ne'oodlą' bee doo ánít'éhí da násínídlį́į́' .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Look at your eyes , and you have become your faith . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said , “ All right , receive your sight ! Your faith has healed you . ”

ID:	4296
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áádóó áádóó Jerúsalem bik'i dinaago nidahós'a'dóó índa Bénjamin kéyahdę́ę́' áádóó halgaidę́ę́' índa dził naaznildę́ę́' áádóó shádi'ááhdę́ę́' didlidgo nááhániihii índa náádahidoonihii áádóó ak'áán náádahidoonihii índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii áádóó Diyin God baa hojiniihgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ą́ąjį' nidayiijáah doo .
PRED:	And they shall bring the cities of Judah , and upon the cities of Judah , and in the land of Benjamin , and in the hill country , and in the hill country , and in the south , and in the south , and in the south , and in the south , and in the south , and in the south , and in the house of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	And from all around Jerusalem , from the towns of Judah and Benjamin , from the western foothills and the hill country and the Negev , the people will come with their burnt offerings and sacrifices . They will bring their grain offerings , frankincense , and thanksgiving offerings to the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	4297
INPUT:	Nidi diné bahojoobá'íii doo nihił dáálįįd da . Jó , da'at'íinii ts'ídá nihide ádahósin ya' ? Jó , aa nídahat'į́įjį' ts'ídá adanihii'éésh ya' ?
PRED:	But the poor do not honor the poor , for the rich are oppressed ? For they are not trying to come to you ?
GOLD:	But you dishonor the poor ! Is n't it the rich who oppress you and drag you into court ?

ID:	4298
INPUT:	T'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'ésh'íinii bee hainísht'į́įgo k'ééhodideeshdlííł , áko k'ééhodiishdlaago , Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will pour out my wrath on them , and they shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will execute terrible vengeance against them to punish them for what they have done . And when I have inflicted my revenge , they will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	4299
INPUT:	Peter éí da'oodlání Jerúsalemgi áłah nádleehii ádahóót'įįdii yee yił hoolne'
PRED:	Peter told the church in Jerusalem
GOLD:	Peter Explains His Actions

ID:	4300
INPUT:	kóníigo , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God biinéé' hazhó'ó deísółts'ą́ą'go áádóó yá'át'éehgo binááł ádaahníiłgo , áádóó bibik' eh ó'oo'níiłii índa yee nihwiiz'áanii t'áá ałtso deísółts'ą́ą'go bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo naałniih éí Ííjip dine'é bik'ijį' kóshłaaígíí doo ła' nihik'ijį' kódeeshłíił da , háálá shí , Bóhólníihii hadaałt'é ánánihoodlíiłii nishłį́ .
PRED:	He said , “ Listen to the voice of the Lord your God , and do what is good , and do what is right in his sight , and do all his statutes , and do all his statutes , because I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ If you will listen carefully to the voice of the Lord your God and do what is right in his sight , obeying his commands and keeping all his decrees , then I will not make you suffer any of the diseases I sent on the Egyptians ; for I am the Lord who heals you . ”

ID:	4301
INPUT:	Díí t'áá íiyisí shił bééhózin : Diyin God naanish yá'át'éehii nihiyi' yaa nídiidzáhígíí éí náásgóó nihinaalnishgo Jesus Christ nádzá bijį́įjį' ałtso ła'yidoolííł .
PRED:	I know that the good works of God will come to you until the day of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And I am certain that God , who began the good work within you , will continue his work until it is finally finished on the day when Christ Jesus returns .

ID:	4302
INPUT:	Éí doo yá'át'éehii yaa nidaakaigo bił nidahoozhǫǫh áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bidoo yá'áshǫ' doo nahjį' nideidó'ááł át'éégóó deíkáahii t'áá íiyisí bił nidahooshǫǫh .
PRED:	They will rejoice in the wicked , and you will rejoice in the day of the wicked .
GOLD:	They take pleasure in doing wrong , and they enjoy the twisted ways of evil .

ID:	4303
INPUT:	Ándahwii'aahii áádóó bídahólníihii nihikin dah naazhjaa'góó nidahidoohnił ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígíí biyi' nihidine'é bik'ehgo ákódadoohłííł , áko ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego diné yá nidahodii'aah doo .
PRED:	You shall take the judge and the princes of the Lord your God , as the Lord your God has given you , and you shall judge the righteous .
GOLD:	“ Appoint judges and officials for yourselves from each of your tribes in all the towns the Lord your God is giving you . They must judge the people fairly .

ID:	4304
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í Jó'ab bił sikéego áyidííniid , Nílááh , Ízrel dadóone'é danilínígíí t'áá ałtso bitahgóó dínáahgo Dan kin haal'áádóó Bíyer-shííba kin shijaa'jį' diné yídííłtah ; éí dine'é ánéelą́'ígíí shił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	The king said to Joab , “ Go to all the tribes of Israel , and I will know that there are many people from Dan . ”
GOLD:	So the king said to Joab and the commanders of the army , “ Take a census of all the tribes of Israel — from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south — so I may know how many people there are . ”

ID:	4305
INPUT:	<unk> dzih biniyé chánah áshíínísin , áko bee nihoyíní'áanii áłahjį' shił nilį́į doo !
PRED:	Give ear to me , and I will always be your statutes always .
GOLD:	Sustain me , and I will be rescued ; then I will meditate continually on your decrees .

ID:	4306
INPUT:	Halgaigóó béégashii hadah yikahígi át'éego Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i háádajilyį́įhgo áhoolaa , áko nízhi' ayóó ánóolningo ch'ídeidit'áah doo biniyé nidine'é ch'íiní'eezh .
PRED:	The Spirit of the Lord has given him rest as a wild animals in the wilderness , and he brought his people out into captivity .
GOLD:	As with cattle going down into a peaceful valley , the Spirit of the Lord gave them rest.You led your people , Lord , and gained a magnificent reputation . ”

ID:	4307
INPUT:	índa t'áá ha'át'íhída chodayooł'į́įgo yee nidaalnishígíí t'áá át'é náádei'dii'niłgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' nidaal'a'go chodayooł'ínígíí éí na'at'ą́hí yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí yił ałch'į' áńdayiil'įįhgo nahashch'id bikágí yik'ínídeiłtih doo índa tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí yikáá' ninádeiłtsos doo .
PRED:	and they shall take all the vessels of them , and make them of fine linen , and put them in the sanctuary ; and they shall cover them with fine linen , and put them on the altar .
GOLD:	They must take all the remaining furnishings of the sanctuary and wrap them in a blue cloth , cover them with fine goatskin leather , and place them on the carrying frame .

ID:	4308
INPUT:	Jéíkab be'asdzą́ą́ Réíchel biyáázhké éí Jóseph índa Bénjamin wolyé .
PRED:	The sons of Jacob 's wife were Joseph and Benjamin .
GOLD:	The sons of Jacob 's wife Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin .

ID:	4309
INPUT:	Nít'éé' hóhooł'aahii ázhdííniidígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá áłah Jesus yikéé' dah dii'áázh .
PRED:	When the disciples heard this , they followed Jesus .
GOLD:	When John 's two disciples heard this , they followed Jesus .

ID:	4310
INPUT:	Áko akéé' góne' ak'éí nilíinii Bó'az ííłní , Ádá nahíłniih , níigo bikee' haidiidlá .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Give up your foot , ” she said , “ He has taken his feet . ”
GOLD:	So the other family redeemer drew off his sandal as he said to Boaz , “ You buy the land . ”

ID:	4311
INPUT:	Mk . 10 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Two Blind Men

ID:	4312
INPUT:	Jó , díí nihił béédahózin : haash yit'éego Ííjip kéyahdi kééhwiit'į́į́ nít'éé' índa haash yit'éego ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó hadii'náago bik'ee'ąą ahéédahisooná .
PRED:	For ye know that we dwell in Egypt , and how have ye gone forth among the nations ?
GOLD:	“ You remember how we lived in the land of Egypt and how we traveled through the lands of enemy nations as we left .

ID:	4313
INPUT:	Éí bąą Christ bá ha'át'íhída doo bich'į' shidziilii , jó , éí saad bee shíni' nehe'aah , shité'é'į' , atíshi'dil'į́ , yéego shich'į' naho'diilná , díí t'áá ałtso baa shił hózhǫ́ǫgo í'dííníszin , háálá doo shidziil da nidi , shidziilgo át'é .
PRED:	Therefore , I am not able to speak to me , because the word of Christ is given to me , because I am filled with all these words , but I am strong .
GOLD:	That 's why I take pleasure in my weaknesses , and in the insults , hardships , persecutions , and troubles that I suffer for Christ . For when I am weak , then I am strong .

ID:	4314
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihí ałdó' hasht'e'áda'díínółzin , háálá Diné Silį́į'ii doo nidayínóhłíi da yę́ęgi hoolzhishgo doogááł .
PRED:	Therefore , be ready , for the hour of the Son of Man will come .
GOLD:	You also must be ready all the time , for the Son of Man will come when least expected . ”

ID:	4315
INPUT:	Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóigo Ériyel yił da'ahóbáahii , t'áá éí hach'į' áádóó yine' naadzi'ii yich'į' nidaabaahii t'áá ałtso índa hach'į' nidahwiiłnáanii éí tł'ée'go baa na'iisgeelígíí nidahalin doo .
PRED:	And the nations shall become a great cry , and a great cry , and all those who fight against him shall be like the night .
GOLD:	All the nations fighting against Jerusalemwill vanish like a dream ! Those who are attacking her wallswill vanish like a vision in the night .

ID:	4316
INPUT:	Nihikéyahgi dé'éyóní ła' t'óó átsééd nihił kééhat'į́įgo t'áadoo bich'į' nahwiyołnání .
PRED:	If a stranger dwell in your land , you shall not return to him .
GOLD:	“ Do not take advantage of foreigners who live among you in your land .

ID:	4317
INPUT:	Áko náánáłahjigo anídzoodzá ; Bétheljį' jiníyá yę́ędę́ę́' doo t'áá ákóne' t'ą́ą́' nídzídzáa da .
PRED:	So he went back to Bethel , and did not return to Bethel .
GOLD:	So he left Bethel and went home another way .

ID:	4318
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Jéíkab éí t'iis áádóó tsin héízel wolyéii índa <unk> <unk> wolyéii bits'áoz'a' daditłé'ígíí néidiinilgo náhineesk'ęę'go yídayíízǫ́ǫzgo łigaigo noodǫ́ǫzgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Jacob had cut off the tree , and cut off the branches of the tree , and cut it upon the head of the earth .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	4319
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph bíniik'ehgo tsosts'id nááhaijį' Ííjip kéyahgi ch'iyáán t'áá át'éé áłah ádajiilaago Ííjip kin hadaas'áhígi ahandadziizyį́ ; éí t'áá hadáda'ak'ehídę́ę́' t'áá kin hadaas'áhígi ch'iyáán nooh dajishchį́ .
PRED:	And Joseph gathered together all the land of Egypt for seven years , and brought them to the cities of Egypt , and brought them to the cities of Egypt , which were in all the cities of the field .
GOLD:	During those years , Joseph gathered all the crops grown in Egypt and stored the grain from the surrounding fields in the cities .

ID:	4320
INPUT:	Háálá ná naal'a'í bizhé'é kwíidííniid yę́ędą́ą́' ání , Ashkii bá naashtłizh doo ; t'áadoo bił naa nánísht'áázhgóó hool'áágóó shizhé'é shik'íhá'áah doo .
PRED:	For the boy said to his father , “ If the boy is not with me , I will not bring him back to you , my father will always be angry with me forever . ”
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	4321
INPUT:	Nihiye'ké áádóó nihitsi'ké éí Júdah dine'é bich'į' nahideeshnihgo Sabíyadóó dine'é , éí dine'é nízaadi kéédahat'íinii yich'į' nináádahodiyoołnih ; jó , Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	I will give you your sons and daughters to Judah , and they will offer a sacrifice to the inhabitants of Samaria ; for the Lord has spoken .
GOLD:	I will sell your sons and daughters to the people of Judah , and they will sell them to the people of Arabia , a nation far away . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	4322
INPUT:	Nidi díí t'áá át'é t'ah doo ánééhgóó danihiidoołtsołgo atídanihił'į́į doo , kin bii' áłah nída'adleehígíí índa awáalyaajį' adanihii'éeshgo , áádóó shízhi' biniinaa aláahgo naat'áanii índa naat'áanii naazdáágóó bidááhdę́ę́' nidanihii'éesh doo .
PRED:	But they shall bring us to you all these things , and they shall bring us into prison , and bring us into prison , and they shall stand before the king and the princes .
GOLD:	“ But before all this occurs , there will be a time of great persecution . You will be dragged into synagogues and prisons , and you will stand trial before kings and governors because you are my followers .

ID:	4323
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya dine'é t'áá íiyisí nídaasdzííd , háálá ádaaní , Dah da'ínéehgi Diyin God ga' níyáá lá . Áko ádaaní , Hatíhíláane'ee' ! Háálá t'ah doo kóhánéeh da nít'éé' .
PRED:	The Philistines were afraid of him , because they said , “ God has gone away from us ! ” And they said , “ It was not yet yet yet yet yet yet yet yet yet yet come . ”
GOLD:	they panicked . “ The gods have come into their camp ! ” they cried . “ This is a disaster ! We have never had to face anything like this before !

ID:	4324
INPUT:	áádóó <unk> dine'é áádóó Zémar dine'é índa Héíma dine'é éí Kéínan bá niheezhchį́ . Áádóó bik'ijį' Kéínan dine'é ałts'ádahaazná .
PRED:	And they were born unto them the sons of Ammon , and unto the Canaanites . And the Canaanites departed from them .
GOLD:	Arvadites , Zemarites , and Hamathites . The Canaanite clans eventually spread out ,

ID:	4325
INPUT:	Diné doo áhályáanii doo bił ahiníłt'ée da dooleeł biniyé bidoo hóshkał bik'ehgo doo bich'į' háádíídzih da .
PRED:	Do n't speak to a fool , so that he may not be a fool .
GOLD:	Do n't answer the foolish arguments of fools , or you will become as foolish as they are .

ID:	4326
INPUT:	Mk . 7 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Many People

ID:	4327
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God ánihijiilaii niidlį́ . Christ bee yá'át'éehgo ádeii'níił doo biniyé ánihijiilaago éí baa nideiikai dooleełii t'áá bítséedi nihá binahodziz'ą́ .
PRED:	For we are our God , who created us , who made us to do good in Christ Jesus , to do good .
GOLD:	For we are God 's masterpiece . He has created us anew in Christ Jesus , so we can do the good things he planned for us long ago .

ID:	4328
INPUT:	náá'ákóne' Éízor éí Zéídak há yizhchį́ , áádóó índa Zéídak éí Éíkim há yizhchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Éíkim éí Iiláíyad há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	And Zadok became the father of Zadok , and Zadok became the father of Zadok , and he became the father of Jehoiakim .
GOLD:	Azor was the father of Zadok.Zadok was the father of Akim.Akim was the father of Eliud .

ID:	4329
INPUT:	Áko haasdzíi'go ádíshní , Bóhólníihii , háishą' ánít'į́ ? Áko shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go ání , Shí Názarethdóó Jesus atíníł'ínígíí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	I answered , “ Lord , who are you ? ” He answered , “ I am Jesus of Nazareth . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ Who are you , lord ? ' I asked. “ And the voice replied , ‘ I am Jesus the Nazarene , the one you are persecuting . '

ID:	4330
INPUT:	Áádóó ákwii hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' Jáshowa hadine'é bił t'ą́ą́' níjíkaigo Héízor kin haal'áii dadzisnáago éí aláahgo binanit'a'í diltłish bee dadziisxį́ , háálá Héízor kin haal'áii éí bítséédą́ą́' díí aláahgo bee ídahólníihgo bił nahaz'áanii t'áá ałtso yee bídahólnííh nít'éé' .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , when Joshua went back to his people , that they struck him with the sword of the king , and killed him the sword , because Haman was over all the kingdoms of the kingdom .
GOLD:	Joshua then turned back and captured Hazor and killed its king . ( Hazor had at one time been the capital of all these kingdoms . )

ID:	4331
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , yá'ąąsh biláahgo ayóó ánít'ée le' ! Bee ayóó ánít'éii nahasdzáán t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' biláahgo baa ha'niih le' !
PRED:	O God , be exalted above heaven ; be thy glory above all the earth .
GOLD:	Be exalted , O God , above the highest heavens.May your glory shine over all the earth .

ID:	4332
INPUT:	éí t'áá aaníí k'eelyéí t'áá ałtso ts'ídá bi'oh áníshéhígíí át'ée nidi ch'il t'áá ałtso yilááh áníłtsogo ninisééh , áko tsin sikaadii yileehgo tsídii nidahat'ahgo tsin bits'áoz'a' bąąhgóó bit'oh ádayiił'įįh .
PRED:	The seed is greater than all the seed , but it is more than the tree , and when it grew up , it makes it grow in its branches .
GOLD:	It is the smallest of all seeds , but it becomes the largest of garden plants ; it grows into a tree , and birds come and make nests in its branches . ”

ID:	4333
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Bee ádanoht'éii hazhó'ó nabik'ítsídaołkees .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts , See your ways .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Look at what 's happening to you !

ID:	4334
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Díí ááhyiłní , <unk> tá'ígíí éí táá' yidoołkááł .
PRED:	Joseph said to them , “ This is three days . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph told him . “ The three baskets also represent three days .

ID:	4335
INPUT:	Nííbo kin shijaa'dóó diné ashdladiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	The men of Gad , two hundred and two .
GOLD:	The citizens of Nebo52

ID:	4336
INPUT:	Ádeijódlí joolnáa'ii áádóó ádaa dzódlíigo nitsíkeesii éí diné doo yá'áshóonii bee adinídíinii át'éego ádił ni'iidzíihii át'é .
PRED:	The proud and the proud are proud , and the proud are the sin of the wicked .
GOLD:	Haughty eyes , a proud heart , and evil actions are all sin .

ID:	4337
INPUT:	Arfáksad éí Shíílah há yizhchį́į́dóó bik'ijį' jiináago dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan táá' honínáánááhaígíí biyi' haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	After he had lived four hundred and four years , he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Shelah , Arphaxad lived another 403 years and had other sons and daughters .

ID:	4338
INPUT:	áádóó Beth-píyor áádóó Ásh<unk> gah índa Beth-jéshimath dahoolyéhígíí
PRED:	and at Riblah , and at Beth Shemesh , and in the valley of Hamath ,
GOLD:	Beth-peor , the slopes of Pisgah , and Beth-jeshimoth .

ID:	4339
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii k'éédabidi'doolníłígíí nináá' bee t'óó yidííłtsééł .
PRED:	You will see the eyes of the wicked , and you will see their eyes .
GOLD:	Just open your eyes , and see how the wicked are punished .

ID:	4340
INPUT:	Hoł hóyée'ii hwee áhoot'éii éí hosh binázt'i' nahalin , nidi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii éí azdoolkǫ'góó yigááł .
PRED:	A man who is found in a sleep , but a righteous man goes into the house of the righteous .
GOLD:	A lazy person 's way is blocked with briers , but the path of the upright is an open highway .

ID:	4341
INPUT:	Áko yee nihwiiz'áanii áádóó bibee haz'áanii bik'eh dahojíł'į́ . Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	And ye shall keep his statutes and his law , and bless the Lord .
GOLD:	All this happened so they would follow his decreesand obey his instructions.Praise the Lord !

ID:	4342
INPUT:	,
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	The Burial of Jesus

ID:	4343
INPUT:	Áko Bárnabas éí Saul bí<unk> dínóotaał biniyé <unk> góó ajííyá .
PRED:	So Barnabas went to seek Saul , to seek it .
GOLD:	Then Barnabas went on to Tarsus to look for Saul .

ID:	4344
INPUT:	Áko Líívai dine'é bizhé'é danilíinii bada'áłchíní yá aląąjį' naazíinii éí náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízer áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa índa Ízrel dine'é bizhé'é danilíinii bada'áłchíní yá aląąjį' naazíinii yaa yíkai ,
PRED:	And the heads of the Levites came to Eleazar the priest , Eleazar the son of Nun , and to the heads of the sons of Israel ,
GOLD:	Then the leaders of the tribe of Levi came to consult with Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of the other tribes of Israel .

ID:	4345
INPUT:	Áádóó kót'ée doo : nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii deí'aah dooígíí taah dadeestáalgo , éí nahasdzáán t'áá át'é bee Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee Jórdan tooh áhodidoolzih , áko Jórdan tooh wódahdę́ę́' nílínígíí áhodiilzee'go doo nílį́į da dooleeł índa nihidii'áa dooleeł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when the priests set up the ark of the Lord of the earth , that the ark of the Lord of the whole earth may be destroyed , and the ark of the Jordan shall stand down , and stood before it .
GOLD:	The priests will carry the Ark of the Lord , the Lord of all the earth . As soon as their feet touch the water , the flow of water will be cut off upstream , and the river will stand up like a wall . ”

ID:	4346
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahgi k'adę́ę jínéehgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ Sérai ábizhdííniid , Shoo , nidi'níl'į́įgo asdzání baa dzólníinii nílį́įgo shił bééhózin ;
PRED:	When he was about to go to Egypt , she said to Abram , “ Behold , I know that you are a beautiful woman .
GOLD:	As he was approaching the border of Egypt , Abram said to his wife , Sarai , “ Look , you are a very beautiful woman .

ID:	4347
INPUT:	Áádóó Téímar éí halah Ámnan bighandi sitį́įgo baazhníyá . Ak'áán ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníką́ągo áadi tadzooznii' , áádóó binááł bááh nímazí ájiilaago dzist'é .
PRED:	And she went to Amnon 's house , and brought it to her house : and he sold the grain offering , and laid it before her before her .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	4348
INPUT:	Łeeh hojíígeedii t'áá hóda biih nízhdootłish áádóó tsé ahénátł'inii bighá jíłne'ígíí tł'iishda hodoołhash .
PRED:	He will die in the pit , and the serpent will not break down the wall .
GOLD:	When you dig a well , you might fall in.When you demolish an old wall , you could be bitten by a snake .

ID:	4349
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii díí saad yee Ízrel dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é yaa halne'go haadzíí' .
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Israel and Judah .
GOLD:	This is the message the Lord gave concerning Israel and Judah .

ID:	4350
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih ! Bóhólníihii dadíínóhsinii , Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , you Levites ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	O Levites , praise the Lord ! All you who fear the Lord , praise the Lord !

ID:	4351
INPUT:	Jéíkab ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii kǫ' nidahalin , áádóó Jóseph ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii éí kǫ' dah nídíno'ii nidahalin , nidi Íísa ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ehégod nidahojílingo hohodidoo'niłgo ahodi'doolk'ą́ąłgo doo ła' doodzih da , háálá Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	The descendants of Jacob are like fire , and Joseph 's descendants are like fire , but Esau 's descendants will be like fire , because the Lord has spoken .
GOLD:	The people of Israel will be a raging fire , and Edom a field of dry stubble.The descendants of Joseph will be a flameroaring across the field , devouring everything.There will be no survivors in Edom.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	4352
INPUT:	<unk> kahdóó dah náádii'náago Hashmónah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out from there , and camped in the valley of Olives .
GOLD:	They left Mithcah and camped at Hashmonah .

ID:	4353
INPUT:	éí bąą Diné Silį́į'ii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ nidi bee bóhólnííh .
PRED:	Therefore the Son of Man is Lord over the Sabbath .
GOLD:	So the Son of Man is Lord , even over the Sabbath ! ”

ID:	4354
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bik'ijį' tsííd t'óó ahayóí nidoołtį́į́ł ; tsííd t'áá dadiltłi'go índa tsékǫ' łitsooí nidoołtį́į́ł , áádóó níyol a<unk> go níyol doo ; díí bee adlání yee deidoodlį́įłgo k'éédabidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	I will send fire upon the wicked , fire , and fire , and fire shall come to pass , and the wind shall drink it , and drink it .
GOLD:	He will rain down blazing coals and burning sulfur on the wicked , punishing them with scorching winds .

ID:	4355
INPUT:	David bá nidaal'a'í hazhó'ógo ałch'į' yádaałti'go David yaa ákoniizį́į'go awéé' daaztsą́ą́ lá niizį́į́' ; éí bąą David bá nidaal'a'í áyidííniid , Da' awéé'ésh daaztsą́ ? Aoo' , daaztsą́ , dahodííniid .
PRED:	When David saw that David was speaking with his servants , he was dead , and David said to his servants , “ Are you dead ? ”
GOLD:	When David saw them whispering , he realized what had happened . “ Is the child dead ? ” he asked. “ Yes , ” they replied , “ he is dead . ”

ID:	4356
INPUT:	Nahachagiitsoh da'agháazhii nanise' yi'oh da'ííyą́ą'ii éí nahachagiitsoh naanááséłígíí dayííyą́ą́' áádóó nahachagiitsoh naanááséłígíí nanise' yi'oh da'ííyą́ą'ii éí ch'osh nidaa'na'ii dayííyą́ą́' . Áko ch'osh nidaa'na'ii nanise' yi'oh da'ííyą́ą'ii éí nahachagiitsoh nanise' yaa nahodikaii ałtso dayííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the locusts ate the locusts which I had eaten , and the locusts ate , and the locusts ate , and the locusts ate . And the locusts ate the locusts of the locusts . And the locusts ate the locusts .
GOLD:	After the cutting locusts finished eating the crops , the swarming locusts took what was left ! After them came the hopping locusts , and then the stripping locusts , too !

ID:	4357
INPUT:	Bijéí ak'i'diyiitįįhii ił ééhózin hát'į́ , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii doo áháyą' bił daalkan .
PRED:	The heart of the wise is a knowledge , but the mouth of the fools are fools .
GOLD:	A wise person is hungry for knowledge , while the fool feeds on trash .

ID:	4358
INPUT:	Jó , díí kin haal'áhígíí t'óó nii'nil yę́ędóó díí jį́įjį' ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí shánídahałchįįhgo t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego bee atí'ésh'íinii hayiyííłtah , áko doo nísh'į́į da doo biniyé nahjį' kódeeshłííł .
PRED:	For I will pour out my wrath upon the inhabitants of this city until this day , and I will not remove them from the day of my wrath .
GOLD:	“ From the time this city was built until now , it has done nothing but anger me , so I am determined to get rid of it .

ID:	4359
INPUT:	Háálá , Ts'ídá doo azhdilée da , nínígíí ałdó' , Diné ts'ídá doo diyííłhéeł da , ní . Áko doo adílée da nidi diné síníłhį́įgo bee haz'áanii yilááh nideeltáalii sínílį́į́' .
PRED:	For thou shalt not steal , Thou shalt not kill ; and thou shalt not kill . And thou shalt not kill the law , but thou hast taken the law .
GOLD:	For the same God who said , “ You must not commit adultery , ” also said , “ You must not murder. ” So if you murder someone but do not commit adultery , you have still broken the law .

ID:	4360
INPUT:	Níłch'i Diyinii binaanish
PRED:	The Holy Spirit
GOLD:	The Work of the Holy Spirit

ID:	4361
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihich'į' ho'níłnii'go hó áádóó haye'ké índa hodine'é ałtso bił ádahosiildįįd .
PRED:	And we destroyed the Lord our God , and destroyed him , and his sons , and all his people .
GOLD:	But the Lord our God handed him over to us , and we crushed him , his sons , and all his people .

ID:	4362
INPUT:	Áko éí kéyahígi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' diné nihidadiijée'go t'áá haa nídahodiits'į́į́hgóó áádę́ę́' diné bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí beeldléí yikáa'gi naaztį́įgo hach'į' nidayiijáahgo yaa nídiikai .
PRED:	And when the people of the land heard about us , they came and heard it , and when they heard it , they took up their robe , and brought them to them .
GOLD:	and they ran throughout the whole area , carrying sick people on mats to wherever they heard he was .

ID:	4363
INPUT:	Kédorleiyómer t'áá bik'eh dahojíł'į́įgo naakits'áadah nááhai , áko táá'ts'áadah náhááh góne' bich'į' nidadzistee' .
PRED:	And they turned against him twelve years , and rebelled against him in the twelfth year of the month .
GOLD:	For twelve years they had been subject to King Kedorlaomer , but in the thirteenth year they rebelled against him .

ID:	4364
INPUT:	áko dahayi'di ahétł'óól ádaadin , nidi t'óó kónígháníjį' hwee dahodina' , áko nít'éé' saadígíí biniinaa hach'į' nidahwii'náago , doodaii' atídaho'dil'į́įgo haa ní'diildahgo t'áá áko bits'áníjiijeeh .
PRED:	And there was no root in them , but there was a little while ; and when they were troubled , they were afflicted , or distress , and fled from them .
GOLD:	But since they do n't have deep roots , they do n't last long . They fall away as soon as they have problems or are persecuted for believing God 's word .

ID:	4365
INPUT:	Ákondi ana'í nilį́įgo éí t'áadoo baa nitsídaahkeesí , nidi ak'is nilį́įgo baa nitsídaahkeesgo hazhó'ó nidanohtin .
PRED:	But do not think about the enemy , but teach your brother .
GOLD:	Do n't think of them as enemies , but warn them as you would a brother or sister .

ID:	4366
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí Filístiya dine'é bikéyahdi si'ą́ągo tsosts'id nídeezid .
PRED:	And the ark of the Lord was seven months in the land of the Philistines seven months .
GOLD:	The Ark of the Lord remained in Philistine territory seven months in all .

ID:	4367
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Jó , bich'į' yoołkááł , David bidine'é ahoolchíiłii éí bits'ą́ą́dóó t'áá ákogi át'éego a<unk> a' ła' hadínóoséełgo yidootsoh ; éí aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo hóyą́ągo nant'áa doo . Kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' doo haada yit'éégóó áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éego ááníił doo .
PRED:	The Lord said , “ Behold , the days of David will be a king 's house , and a king will rule over all the land .
GOLD:	“ For the time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will raise up a righteous descendantfrom King David 's line.He will be a King who rules with wisdom.He will do what is just and right throughout the land .

ID:	4368
INPUT:	Tsídii yá nináda'a'niłii éí biloh bits'ą́ąjį' tsídii dah diit'a'ígi át'éego nihí bits'ádahineechą́ą́' . Łoh k'ínídláadgo nihí dah diijéé' !
PRED:	We have found him as a bird from a bird , like a bird from a bird , and we have found him .
GOLD:	We escaped like a bird from a hunter 's trap.The trap is broken , and we are free !

ID:	4369
INPUT:	Díí nił bééhózin : shizhé'é David yę́ę Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bízhi' binahjį' kin bii' sohodizin ázhdoolíiłgo t'áadoo yee hadi'ní'ą́ą da , háálá hanaagóó t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' hach'į' anaa' nídahoołeełgo bąą Bóhólníihii ałtso hayaa ayííniljį' t'áadoo há bohónéesdzą́ą da .
PRED:	You know that the Lord , the God of my father David , did not let him build a temple in the name of the Lord his father David , for he was not able to go up to war against him .
GOLD:	“ You know that my father , David , was not able to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord his God because of the many wars waged against him by surrounding nations . He could not build until the Lord gave him victory over all his enemies .

ID:	4370
INPUT:	Tó doo danílį́į da dooleeł biniyé yidáda'diłtł'į́įhgodoo daat'íinii daat'į́ neheleeh .
PRED:	Those who are ready to stand up for water , so that they may not be water .
GOLD:	They dam up the trickling streamsand bring to light the hidden treasures .

ID:	4371
INPUT:	Nich'į' dah nídiishnih ; kéyah dibáá' nilínígi át'éego shii' sizíinii dibáá' nilį́ nahalingo nídin nilį́ . Síilah .
PRED:	I turn my face unto thee , and my soul is thirsty as thirsty . Selah .
GOLD:	I lift my hands to you in prayer.I thirst for you as parched land thirsts for rain.Interlude

ID:	4372
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ahímeiyaz hahoyííníi'go aláahgo naat'áanii ííłní , T'áá ałtso yá'át'ééh . Áádóó ni'jį' aláahgo naat'áanii biyaajį' tsé'yaa jineeshjoolgo ábijiní , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God baa ha'niih le' ; éí diné danilíinii bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' anaa' danízin yę́ę ałtso doo ła' yidziihgóó áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then Ahimaaz said to the king , “ It is good ! ” And the king fell down before the ground , and said , “ Blessed be the Lord your God , the people of war against the king . ”
GOLD:	Then Ahimaaz cried out to the king , “ Everything is all right ! ” He bowed before the king with his face to the ground and said , “ Praise to the Lord your God , who has handed over the rebels who dared to stand against my lord the king . ”

ID:	4373
INPUT:	Áko Akéya hoolyéejį' tsé'naagóó deeshááł jiniizį́į'go ałk'isóó danilíinii há bił yá'ádaat'ééh , áko ídahooł'aahii bił baa hózhǫ́ǫgo baazhdoogááł biniyé bich'į' naaltsoos ádayiilaa . Áadi jiníyáago Diyin God bibee ajooba' binahjį' da'oosdląądígíí lą'ígóó hana'nitin bee bíká ajoolwod ,
PRED:	And when he saw that he was going to go through the land of Assyria , he sent it to his brethren , and he sent it to his disciples , and he came to pass through the grace of God , and taught many .
GOLD:	Apollos had been thinking about going to Achaia , and the brothers and sisters in Ephesus encouraged him to go . They wrote to the believers in Achaia , asking them to welcome him . When he arrived there , he proved to be of great benefit to those who , by God 's grace , had believed .

ID:	4374
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké bi'níłníihgo ábidiní , Díí didlidgo nááhániihjí bee haz'áanii át'é : didlidgo nááhániihii wolyé , háálá tł'éé' bíighah bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi dook'ą́ąłgo náhool'įįh doo ; bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi kǫ'ígíí éí t'áá diltłi'go óolzin doo .
PRED:	“ Tell Aaron and his sons , ‘ This is the law of burnt offering . It is a burnt offering . It is a burnt offering . It will burn it on the altar . It will burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron and his sons the following instructions regarding the burnt offering . The burnt offering must be left on top of the altar until the next morning , and the fire on the altar must be kept burning all night .

ID:	4375
INPUT:	T'áá nahont'inee ha'alyéehgo bee doo háháchįįh da , áádóó aa neel'į́'ígíí át'ajoo'nilgo t'áá íiyisí áháchį' néidooshǫǫł .
PRED:	He will not be angry in the secret places , and he will be angry with him .
GOLD:	A secret gift calms anger ; a bribe under the table pacifies fury .

ID:	4376
INPUT:	Jó , ádíní , Na'nishtinígíí ts'ídá t'áadoo bee bąąh dah haz'ání daáádóó ninááł t'áá íiyisí yá'ánísht'ééh .
PRED:	For you say , ‘ Teacher , I am pure and pure . '
GOLD:	You claim , ‘ My beliefs are pure , 'and ‘ I am clean in the sight of God . '

ID:	4377
INPUT:	Doo yá'áshxǫ́ǫ́góó índa adilyé yee ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii hadeintá , nidi bee ééhózinii doo ła' bá ádoolníił da , t'áá hazhó'ó Jónah bee ééhoozinii t'éiyá , bizhdííniidgo bits'ą́ą́' dashdiiyá .
PRED:	And there is a sign for them that are evil and honey , but there is no sign for them , but he left them , but he left them .
GOLD:	Only an evil , adulterous generation would demand a miraculous sign , but the only sign I will give them is the sign of the prophet Jonah. ” Then Jesus left them and went away .

ID:	4378
INPUT:	Díí éí Názarait ádee haadzí'ígíí bá bee haz'áanii át'é , áádóó ats'á'ádeet'ą́ą́jí bá Bóhólníihii yich'į' néidiyoołnihígíí , índa t'áá ha'át'íhída t'áá yíneel'ánígi néidiyoołnihígíí ałdó' bá bee haz'áanii át'é ; ádee hadzoodzí'ígíí bik'ehgo ádee hadzoodzíí' ; ákót'éego Názarait nilį́įgo ats'á'ádeet'ánígíí bá bee haz'áanii yik'ehgo é'éł'į́į doo .
PRED:	This is the law of a vow for the Lord , and for all that he shall offer , and for all that he shall offer , according to the law , according to the commandment of a vow , according to the law of the law , according to the law of the law .
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law of the Nazirites , who vow to bring these offerings to the Lord . They may also bring additional offerings if they can afford it . And they must be careful to do whatever they vowed when they set themselves apart as Nazirites . ”

ID:	4379
INPUT:	Háálá Diné Silį́į'ii éí yóó'adahaaskaígíí haidínóotaałgo áádóó yisdánéidiyoo'niłgo yiniyé níyá .
PRED:	For the Son of Man came to save those who love him , to save them .
GOLD:	For the Son of Man came to seek and save those who are lost . ”

ID:	4380
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' hadíídzihgo ábididííniił , Bóhólníihii kóní , Náádahidoołnihii shaa dahidoohjih ; diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo bił hóódlee'ii shich'į' nááhidoonihígíí naa deidiyoojih .
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , saying , Thus saith the Lord : Take me again , and bring him to me ; every man shall bring his gift to me .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel to bring me their sacred offerings . Accept the contributions from all whose hearts are moved to offer them .

ID:	4381
INPUT:	Háálá aye' nilíinii bizhé'é doo bił nilį́į da áádóó ach'é'é nilíinii bimá yik'ijį' nilį́ índa azháá'áád nilíinii éí yizháá'áád nilíinii yik'ijį' nilį́ ; diné éí t'áá bighandóó bi'ana'í hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For his son is not against his father , and against her daughter , and against her mother 's daughter , and she is against her daughter-in-law ; she is a man in his house .
GOLD:	For the son despises his father.The daughter defies her mother.The daughter-in-law defies her mother-in-law.Your enemies are right in your own household !

ID:	4382
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4383
INPUT:	Díí éí Júdah dine'é bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ ; éí tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan hastą́ądi mííldóó ba'aan ashdladi neeznádiingo ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	These are the families of Judah according to their families : the number of them were six hundred and six hundred .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Judah . Their registered troops numbered 76,500 .

ID:	4384
INPUT:	Sárah daaztsą́ągo Éíbraham éí łeeh hwii'níłígíí yá nayiisnii'
PRED:	Sarah 's Death
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	4385
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' naagháhígíí éí Ahólah wolyé ; bideezhí éí Ahólibah wolyé ; éí t'áá áłah shíí' silį́į́' , áko bich'é'éké índa biyáázhké niyiishchį́ . Ahólah éí Samériya ááhyiłní , áádóó Ahólibah éí Jerúsalem ááhyiłní .
PRED:	The first is the name of the firstborn , the name of his sister , whom the name of his sister was mine ; and she gave birth to his sons and sons , and the name of Samaria is Samaria .
GOLD:	The older girl was named Oholah , and her sister was Oholibah . I married them , and they bore me sons and daughters . I am speaking of Samaria and Jerusalem , for Oholah is Samaria and Oholibah is Jerusalem .

ID:	4386
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	one male goat for a sin offering ;
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	4387
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Nílááh , nídídááh ; niye' náádiidzá . Áko Jesus saad yee hach'į' haadzí'ígíí dzoosdląądgo anídzoodzá .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Go back , your son . ” So Jesus went to him and believed in him .
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ Go back home . Your son will live ! ” And the man believed what Jesus said and started home .

ID:	4388
INPUT:	Atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii baa na'asdee'
PRED:	The Passover
GOLD:	Preparations for Passover

ID:	4389
INPUT:	Dził Záíyandóó Bóhólníihii ayóó íits'a'go ádidooniił , áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áádę́ę́' biinéé' didoots'į́į́ł , índa nida'niłkaadii bidahootsogóó hojoobá'ígo nahaz'ą́ą doo áádóó Dził Kármel aghádahaz'áágóó dahodoogą́ą́ł .
PRED:	The Lord will hear his voice from Zion , and he will hear his voice from Jerusalem , and he will be poor in the hills of Carmel .
GOLD:	This is what he saw and heard : “ The Lord 's voice will roar from Zionand thunder from Jerusalem ! The lush pastures of the shepherds will dry up ; the grass on Mount Carmel will wither and die . ”

ID:	4390
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí Éran ak'ah hak'i yeidooziłgo hóósį́į'go áádóó diyingo bits'ąą hasti'ii jílį́įgo nijil'a' doo biniyé hazhé'é bitsásk'ehgi náá'iiłniihii jílį́įgo bee k'ééhodoodǫǫłii áńjiil'įįh doo áádóó na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo bee éé' ályaii dílzinii bee háázhdiit'įįh doo .
PRED:	And the priest shall anoint Aaron , and anointed him , and he shall make him a priest in his place , and he shall make atonement for him in linen .
GOLD:	In future generations , the purification ceremony will be performed by the priest who has been anointed and ordained to serve as high priest in place of his ancestor Aaron . He will put on the holy linen garments

ID:	4391
INPUT:	Shik'éí danilíinii doo shaa daókááh át'ée daínda diné hánígo shik'is danilíinii shaa dayooznah .
PRED:	It is not the time to come to me , my brothers have forgotten me .
GOLD:	My family is gone , and my close friends have forgotten me .

ID:	4392
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' Bóhólníihii bee bi'oh hodidilyéehii hadéébįįdgo biniinaa doo yah adaokááh át'ée da .
PRED:	The priests were filled with the glory of the Lord , because the glory of the Lord was filled with the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	The priests could not enter the Temple of the Lord because the glorious presence of the Lord filled it .

ID:	4393
INPUT:	Áko náá'áłdó' nááná ła' há nidaal'a'í áłtséédą́'ígíí t'ah bilááh ánéelą́ą'go ákǫ́ǫ́ anáádziis'a' , áko éí ałdó' t'áá ákónáádayiidlaa .
PRED:	And he sent another more than the first servants , and they also did the same thing .
GOLD:	So the landowner sent a larger group of his servants to collect for him , but the results were the same .

ID:	4394
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bits'ą́ąjigo dashdiiyáii' , náánáła' bich'į' t'áá ákót'éego hanáádzoodzíí' , áko t'áá átséedi hach'į' hadaasdzí'ígi át'éego hach'į' hanáádaasdzíí' .
PRED:	And she went out from her , and spake unto him as he had said , and they spake unto him as they had spoken unto him .
GOLD:	He walked over to some others and asked them the same thing and received the same answer .

ID:	4395
INPUT:	Nił bééhózin lą́ą , háálá íídą́ą́' ni'dizh<unk> dóó t'óó ahayóí niiską́ !
PRED:	You know that there is many days from the beginning .
GOLD:	But of course you know all this ! For you were born before it was all created , and you are so very experienced !

ID:	4396
INPUT:	Ániidíii danilíinii baa hodoonih
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	God 's Stubborn People

ID:	4397
INPUT:	Diné éí Jesus baa dahojilne'ígíí deiniidlą́ , nidi Diyin God t'áá bí biYe' yaa halne'jígo agháago bidziil , háálá Diyin God éí Jesus biTaa' jílį́įgo oo'íinii jílį́įgo baa hojilne' .
PRED:	If we believe that Jesus is the Son of God , he is the Son of God , for he is the Son of God .
GOLD:	Since we believe human testimony , surely we can believe the greater testimony that comes from God . And God has testified about his Son .

ID:	4398
INPUT:	Nidziil baa hashne'go hashtaał doo . T'áá aaníí , abínígo aa a'ááh nínízinii yéego baa hashne'go hashtaał doo . Háálá shich'į' nahwii'náago ninahjį' nehesdzííh nít'éé' áádóó bine' ahinishchéehii nílį́ .
PRED:	I will sing to your strength ; yea , I will sing to you in the morning of your mercy , for you are my refuge and my refuge .
GOLD:	But as for me , I will sing about your power.Each morning I will sing with joy about your unfailing love.For you have been my refuge , a place of safety when I am in distress .

ID:	4399
INPUT:	Nidi náá'áłdó' Féro bijéí náánáátł'isgo bąą t'áadoo diné yéé'níłnii' da .
PRED:	But the heart of Pharaoh was stubborn , and he did not let the people go .
GOLD:	But Pharaoh again became stubborn and refused to let the people go .

ID:	4400
INPUT:	Íílim kéyahdóó dah náádii'náago Ízrel dine'é yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso honoojí Sin nahós'a'gi éí Íílim kéyah áádóó Dził Sáínai bita'gi ákwii niníná ; Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' hajíínáádóó bik'ijį' naaki nídízííd binih ashdla'áadah jį́į́ góne' dashdiiná .
PRED:	On the second day of the second month , the whole community of Israel went out of the wilderness of Sinai and Mount Sinai . On the second day of the second month , on the second day of the second month of the month .
GOLD:	Then the whole community of Israel set out from Elim and journeyed into the wilderness of Sin , between Elim and Mount Sinai . They arrived there on the fifteenth day of the second month , one month after leaving the land of Egypt .

ID:	4401
INPUT:	Kin bii' nooh nída'achíhígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá ałtsoní bii' hadadeezbin le' . Nihikéyah bikáá'góó nihidibé miildóó neeznáadi miildóó yówehjį' bits'ą́ą́dóó nídahoodleeł doo .
PRED:	Let all his house be filled with water , and let them return from the thousands of our land , from the thousands of thousands .
GOLD:	May our barns be filledwith crops of every kind.May the flocks in our fields multiply by the thousands , even tens of thousands ,

ID:	4402
INPUT:	Áádóó diné yíl'áhígíí hágo bizhdííniidgo ábijiní , Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' áádóó díí bik'ida'doohtįįh :
PRED:	He called the crowd and said to them , “ Listen to this and understand it .
GOLD:	Then Jesus called to the crowd to come and hear . “ Listen , ” he said , “ and try to understand .

ID:	4403
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	4404
INPUT:	Áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' Jew dine'é bibee haz'áanii k'ízhníti'ígíí biniinaa Jew dine'é dahodiyiilyééł daniizį́į́' , nidi doo t'áá éí t'éiyá biniinaa da , nidi Diyin God shiTaa' bijiníigo Diyin God bił ahijíłt'éego ízh'dólzinígíí biniinaa t'ah aláhídi át'éego dahodiyiilyééł daniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And the Jews sought to kill him because of the law , but because he had found the Father .
GOLD:	So the Jewish leaders tried all the harder to find a way to kill him . For he not only broke the Sabbath , he called God his Father , thereby making himself equal with God .

ID:	4405
INPUT:	Áko Jesus yich'į' hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , Doo nihił béédahózin da . Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Shí ałdó' bee óhólnííh bik'ehgo díidí baa naasháhígíí doo bee nihił hodeeshnih da .
PRED:	They answered Jesus , “ We do n't know . ” Jesus answered , “ I do n't tell you what I do these things . ”
GOLD:	So they finally replied , “ We do n't know. ” And Jesus responded , “ Then I wo n't tell you by what authority I do these things . ”

ID:	4406
INPUT:	Áko Líívai dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é t'áá ałtso éí náá'iiłniihii Jiihóíyada hach'į' yee haadzíi'ii t'áá át'é bik'ehgo ádadziidzaa . T'ááłá'í jinítínígo hasiláo háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' dadeeshnishígíí éí nidahaashnishígíí bił yah azhdookah , háálá náá'iiłniihii Jiihóíyada doo hwéé'íłníih da .
PRED:	And the Levites and all Judah did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded him , and every man that went in in to the sabbath on the sabbath , because he was not able to rule over Jehoiada .
GOLD:	So the Levites and all the people of Judah did everything as Jehoiada the priest ordered . The commanders took charge of the men reporting for duty that Sabbath , as well as those who were going off duty . Jehoiada the priest did not let anyone go home after their shift ended .

ID:	4407
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Ádadohníigo Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó Jerúsalem kintaa da'aztiingóó éí ákǫ́ǫ́ doo naagháhí da . Diné nidi , doo ła' naagháa da , índa doo ła' kéédahojit'į́į da , áádóó naaldlooshii nidi ádin . T'áadoo biniyéhígóó haz'ą́ . Diné índa naaldlooshii łá'í nidi ádin , dadohnínígíí ákwe'é díí náádadiits'a' doo ;
PRED:	Thus says the Lord : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ There is no one in the streets of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem . There is no one to dwell in it . There is no one in it , and there is no one to hear it .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord says : You have said , ‘ This is a desolate land where people and animals have all disappeared . ' Yet in the empty streets of Jerusalem and Judah 's other towns , there will be heard once more

ID:	4408
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' <unk> biye' Jedéíyah éí bighan bíighahjį' tsé néíztł'in . Náá'ákóne' Ha<unk> náíyah biye' Hátash tsé néíztł'in .
PRED:	And next to him , the son of Uriah , built a wall of the house of his house , and next to him .
GOLD:	Next Jedaiah son of Harumaph repaired the wall across from his own house , and next to him was Hattush son of Hashabneiah .

ID:	4409
INPUT:	Áádóó nówehjį' náás dah náádooht'áazhgo Téíbor chéch'il sikaadíjį' woh'ashgo diné tált'éego Béthel haz'ání góde Diyin God yich'į' nidahodoohłaał yiniyé yikahgo bidááh dooh'ash : ła' éí tł'ízí yázhí táa'go yoojih doo , náánáła' éí bááh táa'go yoojih doo , áádóó náánáła'ígíí éí tó abid yee wáin yoołtsos doo .
PRED:	And when you go up to meet him , three men shall go up to worship God in Bethel to worship God , and they shall bring three young goats , and the third shall bring them into the mouth of wine .
GOLD:	“ When you get to the oak of Tabor , you will see three men coming toward you who are on their way to worship God at Bethel . One will be bringing three young goats , another will have three loaves of bread , and the third will be carrying a wineskin full of wine .

ID:	4410
INPUT:	Aháílad biye' Béíyana éí Téíyanak kin haal'áádę́ę́' áádóó Megído kin haal'áádę́ę́' índa Beth-shíyan nahós'a' t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó éí Jézriyel kin haal'á biyeigóó <unk> nah haz'ání bíighahgóó nahós'a'ígíí índa Beth-shíyan kin haal'áádóó Éí<unk> hólah kin shijaa'jį' éí Jákniyam kin shijaa' bilááhdę́ę́' ch'iyáán nináyiijááh .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that was , the son of Amoz , the son of Amoz , and all the inhabitants of Jezreel , and all the inhabitants of Jezreel , to the inhabitants of Jezreel , which is by the border of Jezreel , and to the inhabitants of Jezreel , which is by the border of Jezreel .
GOLD:	Baana son of Ahilud , in Taanach and Megiddo , all of Beth-shan near Zarethan below Jezreel , and all the territory from Beth-shan to Abel-meholah and over to Jokmeam .

ID:	4411
INPUT:	éí diné t'áá ájíłah saad ahíjít'áhígíí éí Bóhólníihii áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó ándahwii'aahii ákwii hólǫ́ǫgo yoołkáłígíí bidááhdóó nizhdoo'ash .
PRED:	The people shall stand before the Lord , the priests , the judges , and the judges .
GOLD:	then both the accuser and accused must appear before the Lord by coming to the priests and judges in office at that time .

ID:	4412
INPUT:	Áko ha'al'éés góyaa dashdiiyá áádóó bizháá'áád jílíní t'áá áhodííniidígi ádziidzaa .
PRED:	And he went down to his feet , and did as he had commanded her .
GOLD:	So she went down to the threshing floor that night and followed the instructions of her mother-in-law .

ID:	4413
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , T'áá aaníí , t'áá aaníígóó ándishní , Diné éí tó índa Níłch'i Diyinii doo bee nááho'dizhchį́į́góó Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii doo biih jóya' át'ée da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Most certainly I tell you , it is not able to enter the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I assure you , no one can enter the Kingdom of God without being born of water and the Spirit .

ID:	4414
INPUT:	Áko t'áá sáhí ats'ájíkaigo tsinaa'eeł bee doo naagháhígóó ajookai .
PRED:	So they left alone and went away into the boat .
GOLD:	So they left by boat for a quiet place , where they could be alone .

ID:	4415
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí Ííjip kéyah góyaa dii'néełgo áadi kéédahwiit'į́į doo danízinígíí nahjį' kóhodeeshłííł , áko éí Ííjip kéyahdi dazhdínóonééł ; diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił áádóó dichin dahodooghą́ą́ł ; a'oh ádaat'éédóó ayóó ádaat'éejį' diltłish bee dazhdínóonééł índa dichin nidahodoołtsił ; dabi'dódziihii áádóó bik'ee t'óó ił adahayóii áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó bá yáti'ii índa t'óó bá nahat'i'ii dazhdooleeł .
PRED:	I will cut off the remnant of Judah into Egypt , and they shall die in the land of Egypt ; they shall die by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , and by the wicked .
GOLD:	I will take this remnant of Judah — those who were determined to come here and live in Egypt — and I will consume them . They will fall here in Egypt , killed by war and famine . All will die , from the least to the greatest . They will be an object of damnation , horror , cursing , and mockery .

ID:	4416
INPUT:	t'áá ákót'éego yádiłhił ásdįįdjį'diné noonéełii doo náádidoojah da , índa doo ch'éédabidoosiłí da .
PRED:	In this way the sky will no more go up to the desert , neither will they stand up .
GOLD:	people are laid to rest and do not rise again.Until the heavens are no more , they will not wake upnor be roused from their sleep .

ID:	4417
INPUT:	Diné ła' kéyah bee hoodzooígíí biniyé tsé adaaz'áago ádaalyaa yę́ę hadayiinííł ; dibé naakaígíí t'áá na'níle'dii adeiniiłkaadgo t'áá bí yada'ałtso' łeh .
PRED:	If a man takes up the stones of the land , he makes the sheep and feed them , and feed them .
GOLD:	Evil people steal land by moving the boundary markers.They steal livestock and put them in their own pastures .

ID:	4418
INPUT:	Diltłish deeníinii nahalingo bizaad dabi<unk> <unk> da atída'ał'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' badahojoobá'íii yisdáyiinííł .
PRED:	The words of the sword is gone away from the hand of the needy , and he shall deliver them from the hand of the needy .
GOLD:	He rescues the poor from the cutting words of the strong , and rescues them from the clutches of the powerful .

ID:	4419
INPUT:	Shoo , kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' , índa Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nilíinii áádóó nááda'iiłniihii índa naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó kéyahdóó dine'é kéédahat'íinii bik'ijį' nahonílingo kin haal'á ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inii , béésh nitł'izii íí'áii índa béésh łitsoii bee binaa ahéé'ítł'inii nahonílingo díí jį́ áníshłééh , jó'akon .
PRED:	Behold , I have set up the whole land , the king of Judah , the princes , and the princes of Judah , and the princes of the land , and the inhabitants of the land , and the inhabitants of his people , as iron , and iron .
GOLD:	For see , today I have made you stronglike a fortified city that can not be captured , like an iron pillar or a bronze wall.You will stand against the whole land — the kings , officials , priests , and people of Judah .

ID:	4420
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí biniyé ákót'éego bich'į' saad honíłǫ́ . Jó , yaa naagháhígíí doo t'áá ałtso yee ádaa ch'íhwiit'aah da ?
PRED:	Why is he with him ? For he hath not done all that he did ?
GOLD:	So why are you bringing a charge against him ? Why say he does not respond to people 's complaints ?

ID:	4421
INPUT:	Háálá wáin bee tsi'na'adáhígi át'éego ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'áanii t'áá ałtso t'óó báhádzidgo na'ageh yee tsi'naagháii bił tsi'nidziskai . Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii hoł ahá nida'asgeh , índa jit'íinii t'óó bee nijinéego binahjį' nahasdzáán bikáá'góó diné baa nida'iiniihii da'at'į́ daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	For they have committed adultery with all the nations , as wine as wine , and with all the kingdoms of the earth . And the kings of the earth have committed adultery , and their wealth , and their wealth .
GOLD:	For all the nations have fallenbecause of the wine of her passionate immorality.The kings of the worldhave committed adultery with her.Because of her desires for extravagant luxury , the merchants of the world have grown rich . ”

ID:	4422
INPUT:	Yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Kóhath dine'é bíí' dooleełii bá bééhoozin . Áko náá'iiłniihii Éran joolyéii ha'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii , Líívai dine'é danilį́įgo , yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Júdah áádóó Símiyan índa Bénjamin dine'é táá'ts'áadahgo bikin hadaas'áhígíí Líívai dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	This is the inheritance of the tribe of Kohath according to the families of Aaron the priest , the Levites , the tribe of Levi , the tribe of Levi , and the twelve cities of Benjamin .
GOLD:	The descendants of Aaron , who were members of the Kohathite clan within the tribe of Levi , were allotted thirteen towns that were originally assigned to the tribes of Judah , Simeon , and Benjamin .

ID:	4423
INPUT:	áko ájíní , Jó'akon , yá'ąąsh ąą át'éego , Diné Silį́į'ii Diyin God binish'náájí sizį́įgo yish'į́ .
PRED:	And he said , Behold , I see heaven , and see the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God .
GOLD:	And he told them , “ Look , I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand ! ”

ID:	4424
INPUT:	Bits'áoz'a' ła' biyi'dę́ę́' kǫ' hadíínóodgo bineest'ą' ałtso iidííłk'ą́ą́' , áádóó bits'áoz'a' bidziilii doo ła' ánászįįd da , áko naat'á gish doo ła' náhodoodleeł da . Díí lą́ą baa atínáhodindleeh ni , áádóó baa cha hasingo hodeeshzhiizh ni .
PRED:	And a fire came out of his branches , and the fruit of his branches shall be cut off , and no one shall be cut off ; and there shall be no man to mourn , and I will weep .
GOLD:	A fire has burst out from its branchesand devoured its fruit.Its remaining limbs are notstrong enough to be a ruler 's scepter. “ This is a funeral song , and it will be used in a funeral . ”

ID:	4425
INPUT:	Áádóó bee nástł'ahjí aláahgo naat'áanii dah nánídaahígi dah neezdá , áádóó Jánathan yiizį' , áádóó Ábner éí Saul bíighahgi dah neezdá ; David dah nánídaah yę́ęgi éí doo naagháhí da .
PRED:	And the king sat down on his side , and Jonathan stood beside the roof ; and Abner sat beside the place where David sat down .
GOLD:	He sat at his usual place against the wall , with Jonathan sitting opposite him and Abner beside him . But David 's place was empty .

ID:	4426
INPUT:	Áko Jesus díidí yidiizts'ą́ą'go hak'ee t'óó bił ahóóyóí , áádóó názyizgo diné bikéé' nooyéłígíí áyidííniid , Ánihidishní , Oodlą́ bee aa dzódlí kót'éii Ízrel dine'é bitahgi nidi t'ah doo ła' bik'ínísháah da .
PRED:	When Jesus heard these things , he was amazed and said to the people , “ I say to you , I have found no faith in Israel . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to the crowd that was following him , he said , “ I tell you , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel ! ”

ID:	4427
INPUT:	Saul oosdląąd
PRED:	Saul 's Death
GOLD:	Saul 's Conversion

ID:	4428
INPUT:	T'áá díí jį́ t'áá íiyisí shináháshch'íi'go saad honish'į́ ; dinish'nínígíí biláahgo shił nahoni<unk> .
PRED:	I am very sad today , and you have set me above your right hand .
GOLD:	“ My complaint today is still a bitter one , and I try hard not to groan aloud .

ID:	4429
INPUT:	Áko eda'alyaii bich'į' ch'iyáán náádahaaznii'ii yidą́ą́jí baa náánéinísht'į́ . Eda'alyaii éí ts'ídá t'áadoo nilíní da , nidi Diyin God t'éiyá t'ááłá'í hólǫ́ǫgo nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	And I brought them to the idols which they offered to idols , but ye know that there is none of them except God .
GOLD:	So , what about eating meat that has been offered to idols ? Well , we all know that an idol is not really a god and that there is only one God .

ID:	4430
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké éí tł'aaji'éé' yiih nídaat'isgo níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' yee yah anídaakah doo , doodaii' shá nidaal'a' doo biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí si'áníjį' hodiyingo haz'ánígi yee yah anídaakah doo , áko doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí doo yee ádidahodidoolt'ih da áádóó doo dadínóonéeł da . Díí yee nihoní'áanii ahoyéel'áágóó Éran índa bits'ą́ą́dóó náás da'ahidoolchíłígíí bá át'ée doo .
PRED:	And Aaron and his sons shall put on his clothes , and put them in the tent of meeting , and put them in the sanctuary , that they may serve me in the sanctuary of the sanctuary , that they may bear their iniquity , and their iniquity shall be for ever and for ever .
GOLD:	These must be worn whenever Aaron and his sons enter the Tabernacle or approach the altar in the Holy Place to perform their priestly duties . Then they will not incur guilt and die . This is a permanent law for Aaron and all his descendants after him .

ID:	4431
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph nádzáago t'áá jíík'eh baa dahizhdooníłígíí bił yah adajiizhjaa'go ni'jį' bich'į' tsé'yaa dazhneeshjool .
PRED:	And they brought them into the house of Joseph , and brought them to the ground , and fell upon the ground .
GOLD:	When Joseph came home , they gave him the gifts they had brought him , then bowed low to the ground before him .

ID:	4432
INPUT:	Jó , diné yá nihwii'aahínda ch'iyáán t'óó ahayóí yeidiyii'aah .
PRED:	For he gives his judge to the judge , and he gives him many food .
GOLD:	By these mighty acts he nourishes the people , giving them food in abundance .

ID:	4433
INPUT:	áko ábizhdííniid , Ch'ínóhkááh ; jó , at'ééd doo daaztsą́ą da , t'óó ałhosh . Nidi t'óó haa daadloh .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Come , I will not sleep . ” But they will not sleep .
GOLD:	“ Get out ! ” he told them . “ The girl is n't dead ; she 's only asleep. ” But the crowd laughed at him .

ID:	4434
INPUT:	Da' ákoósh Níneveh ayóó át'é kin haal'áii doo baa a'ááh dínéesįįł da ? Jó , ákwe'é t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi mííl bilááh ánéelą́ą'go áłchíní t'ah doo ákodaniizįįhígíí nish'náajigo índa nishtł'ajigo nitsáhákees doo bił béédahózin da , áádóó naaldlooshii daałį́'ígíí lą'ída hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Do n't I have mercy on the great city of Ai ? For they have not known the right hand and the left hand of the beast , and the beasts of the beasts of the beast .
GOLD:	But Nineveh has more than 120,000 people living in spiritual darkness , not to mention all the animals . Should n't I feel sorry for such a great city ? ”

ID:	4435
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ákwii nidzizį́įgo abínídóó ałní'ní'ą́ąjį' naaltsoos biyi'dóó Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bibee haz'áanii dajííłta' , áádóó ałní'ní'ą́ą́dóó i'íí'ą́ąjį' ádił nida'dziisí'ígíí bee ádaa ch'ídahodziist'ą́ áádóó Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bich'į' nidahodzisá .
PRED:	And in the morning they read the law of the Lord their God in the morning until evening , and they worshipped the Lord their God until evening and evening .
GOLD:	They remained standing in place for three hours while the Book of the Law of the Lord their God was read aloud to them . Then for three more hours they confessed their sins and worshiped the Lord their God .

ID:	4436
INPUT:	Áko Iiláíjah éí Éíhab baazhdoogááłgóó dashdiiyá ; nít'éé' Samériyagi t'áá íiyisí hodííchįįd lá .
PRED:	Elijah went to Ahab , and he was very angry in Samaria .
GOLD:	So Elijah went to appear before Ahab.Meanwhile , the famine had become very severe in Samaria .

ID:	4437
INPUT:	Kin hadaas'áagi bąąhági ádaat'éii yaa deíkáahii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Jesus ' Prayer of Thanksgiving

ID:	4438
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí bideezhí áyidííniid , Nihizhé'é haastih ; diné ádaat'ínígi át'éego nihá dooyehígíí nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'ááłá'í nidi doo ła' naagháa da .
PRED:	He said to his firstborn , “ Our father is old , and there is no one in the world . ”
GOLD:	One day the older daughter said to her sister , “ There are no men left anywhere in this entire area , so we ca n't get married like everyone else . And our father will soon be too old to have children .

ID:	4439
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii aa a'ááh nízinígíí áádóó t'óó bik'eda'ayóii diné bada'áłchíní yá yaa naayáhígíí yaa dahaniih laanaa !
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for his mercy and for his wonderful deeds .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	4440
INPUT:	Hódzą́ éí adziil biláahdi yá'át'ééh
PRED:	Wisdom is better than wisdom
GOLD:	Thoughts on Wisdom and Folly

ID:	4441
INPUT:	Jó , áadi naat'agii éí atsį' hadeintáii doo hólǫ́ǫ da , áádóó jeeshóó' doo hoo'į́į da ;
PRED:	For the wild animal shall not find it ; and the valley shall not be gathered .
GOLD:	These are treasures no bird of prey can see , no falcon 's eye observe .

ID:	4442
INPUT:	Dooládó' <unk> go hwiidoo'aał da , háálá Bóhólníihii nídoodáałjį' beiníłką́ , índa Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii í'doołdįįł baa hodoolzhish .
PRED:	How can the day of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) come , for the day of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ] come , and the day of the Almighty shall perish .
GOLD:	The day of the Lord is near , the day when destruction comes from the Almighty.How terrible that day will be !

ID:	4443
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Éí bijį́įdi Íídam kéyahdóó hastóí dahóyáanii ts'ídá ádeeshdįįł ; Íísa bidziłdóó ak'i'diitįįhii ádeeshdįįł .
PRED:	In that day I will destroy the wise men of Edom , and I will destroy Esau from the mountain of Esau .
GOLD:	At that time not a single wise personwill be left in the whole land of Edom , ” says the Lord. “ For on the mountains of EdomI will destroy everyone who has understanding .

ID:	4444
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Kéyah nahaaznii'ígíí bee ééhózinii dá'deeljé'ígíí áádóó ła' doo dá'deeljé'ígíí t'áá áłah nídiinííł , áko nízaadgóó didoonaał biniyé hashtł'ish ásaa' biih dííniłgo ákóne' sinil doo .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , says : “ Take a sign that has been left , and one door will be shut up , and you will put it in the clay . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Take both this sealed deed and the unsealed copy , and put them into a pottery jar to preserve them for a long time . '

ID:	4445
INPUT:	Bee nóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ayóó át'éii yaa dahalne' doo , áádóó nidziilígíí yaa yádaałti' doo ,
PRED:	Your kingdom will declare your glory , and your strength will speak to you .
GOLD:	They will speak of the glory of your kingdom ; they will give examples of your power .

ID:	4446
INPUT:	Dił éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bik'ísíníłtahii t'áá bíí'ohígíí áádóó ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́hígíí ła' nídidííkáałgo Éran áádóó bi'éé' bik'ídííłtah , índa haye'ké áádóó dabi'éé' ałdó' bik'ídadííłtah , áko hó índa ha'éé' dadiyin doo ; haye'ké áádóó dabi'éé' ałdó' dadiyin doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the blood of the altar , and the oil , and the oil , and the oil , and the garments of Aaron , and his sons , and his garments , and his sons , and their garments , and their garments shall be holy .
GOLD:	Then take some of the blood from the altar and some of the anointing oil , and sprinkle it on Aaron and his sons and on their garments . In this way , they and their garments will be set apart as holy .

ID:	4447
INPUT:	Éí bąągo bee haz'áanii ła' áshłééh : Diné danilíinii , ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii índa bizaad ał'ąą át'éego yee yádaałti'ii éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo biDiyin God bidazhdiilkaalgo bik'ijį' yádajiłti'ii nidahodii'nish doo índa dahaghan kints'iil t'éí ádeidoolííł , háálá kót'éego Diyin God yisdá'iinííł dooleełii doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	Therefore I am one of the law , men , and speak against the nations , and against the tongue , and against the nations , and against the tongue of God , and against the house of God , for there is no one to save it .
GOLD:	Therefore , I make this decree : If any people , whatever their race or nation or language , speak a word against the God of Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego , they will be torn limb from limb , and their houses will be turned into heaps of rubble . There is no other god who can rescue like this ! ”

ID:	4448
INPUT:	áádóó áhodííniid , Da'oht'į́įgo nihighangóó nídeínóhkááh ; nihilį́į́' t'óó adahayóigo áádóó béésh łigaii áádóó óola áádóó béésh łitsoii áádóó béésh nitł'izii índa éé' t'óó ahayóí nihee dahólǫ́ǫgo nihi'ana'í bindaalye'é bąąh nida'soołtseedígíí nihik'isóó bił ałts'ádadi'doohnił .
PRED:	and he said to them , “ Go home to your own home . You will take away silver , silver , silver , iron , iron , iron , iron , and clothes .
GOLD:	he said to them , “ Go back to your homes with the great wealth you have taken from your enemies — the vast herds of livestock , the silver , gold , bronze , and iron , and the large supply of clothing . Share the plunder with your relatives . ”

ID:	4449
INPUT:	Jesus bídahooł'aahii éí John bídahooł'aahii bilááh ánéelą́ą́' silį́į'go áádóó tó yee da'asį́įhgo Férisii danilíinii Jesus yaa dahodiizts'ą́ą́' . Éí Bóhólníihii bił bééhoozin ,
PRED:	When the disciples heard that John was more than his disciples , and the Pharisees heard that the Lord Jesus was very much more .
GOLD:	Jesus knew the Pharisees had heard that he was baptizing and making more disciples than John

ID:	4450
INPUT:	Ła'da Diyin God bidááhdóó haa náhódóot'įįłí<unk> Diyin God doo hach'į' ííshjání áyósin da .
PRED:	For no one is able to stand before God .
GOLD:	We do n't set the timewhen we will come before God in judgment .

ID:	4451
INPUT:	Nít'éé' , shoo , David bá nidaal'a'í éí Jó'ab yił ana'í yikéé' ííjéé' yę́ędę́ę́' nákaigo ana'í bindaalye'é t'óó ahayóí nídeizhjaa' , nidi Ábner éí Hííbran kin haal'áagi David doo yił naa'aash da , háálá yéé'níłnii'go hózhǫ́ǫgo anáádzáa ni' .
PRED:	And , behold , David 's servants came after Joab , and they brought many spoil to the enemy , but Abner did not go with David in Hebron , because he had gone with him .
GOLD:	But just after David had sent Abner away in safety , Joab and some of David 's troops returned from a raid , bringing much plunder with them .

ID:	4452
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , aláahgo nihinanit'a'í áádóó nihinaat'áanii danilíinii índa nihizhé'é dajílíinii hoł t'óó nihaa yádahasingo nihił dahalą́ , háálá bąąhági ádeiidzaago hoł nich'į' ádił da'siilziih .
PRED:	We have sinned against you , O Lord , our king , our princes , and our fathers , and our fathers , because we have sinned against you .
GOLD:	O Lord , we and our kings , princes , and ancestors are covered with shame because we have sinned against you .

ID:	4453
INPUT:	Nizaad t'áá íiyisí niłtólí yee' ; éí bąą ná naal'a'í nizaad ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	Your word is very good ; therefore your servant loves your word .
GOLD:	Your promises have been thoroughly tested ; that is why I love them so much .

ID:	4454
INPUT:	Saul éí bee bił hóóne'go bá nidaal'a'í ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ anááyiis'a' , nít'éé' éí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego Diyin God yá náádahoolne' . Táadi aleeh góne' Saul éí nidaal'a'í ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ anáádziis'a' , nít'éé' éí ałdó' Diyin God yá náádahoolne' .
PRED:	And Saul sent messengers to the servants of Saul , and there was also the same time . And the third time Saul sent messengers to the servants of God . And Saul sent another time .
GOLD:	When Saul heard what had happened , he sent other troops , but they , too , prophesied ! The same thing happened a third time .

ID:	4455
INPUT:	Hak'igi k'os yildohgo ánáyiil'įįh nít'éé' , áádóó tł'ée'go kǫ' há bee hool'ingo ánáyiil'įįh nít'éé' .
PRED:	He made the clouds in the clouds , and he made them light in the night .
GOLD:	The Lord spread a cloud above them as a coveringand gave them a great fire to light the darkness .

ID:	4456
INPUT:	Áko siláo binanit'a'í bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' náhóóne'go índa Jesus bits'íís yę́ę Jóseph yeidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	When the captain of the army heard about this , he gave it to Joseph and to his body .
GOLD:	The officer confirmed that Jesus was dead , so Pilate told Joseph he could have the body .

ID:	4457
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Záíyangi kéédahoht'íinii , shidine'é nohłíinii , t'áá Ííjip dine'é ádáát'įįdígi át'éego Asíriya dine'é bigish yee atídanihiilaago áádóó bitsihał yee nihik'ijį' daazlį́į'go éí t'áadoo béédaałdzidí doo .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts , O inhabitants of Zion , shall ye not be afraid , O my people , as they have done to Egypt , and they shall not be afraid of them , saith the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ O my people in Zion , do not be afraid of the Assyrians when they oppress you with rod and club as the Egyptians did long ago .

ID:	4458
INPUT:	Kót'éego nihił béédahózin : diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bee haz'áanii doo bá ályaa da , nidi doo yik'ehgóó ádaaníiłii índa doo ak'eh dahół'íinii bá ályaa , áádóó doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii índa bąąhági ádaaníiłii ałdó' bá ályaa , doo bił dahodiyinii índa Diyin God yee da'ódziihii , bizhé'é índa bimá nideiłtseedii , diné nideiłtseedii bá ályaa ,
PRED:	You know that the law of the righteous is not made for the righteous , but to do not obey them , and to do evil , and to those who do evil , and to the God of their fathers , and to the mother of their fathers ,
GOLD:	For the law was not intended for people who do what is right . It is for people who are lawless and rebellious , who are ungodly and sinful , who consider nothing sacred and defile what is holy , who kill their father or mother or commit other murders .

ID:	4459
INPUT:	T'ah doo e'e'aahgóó , t'ah doo chaha'oh iildóóhgóó tsin bijeeh łikání halchinii mir wolyéii dził bił daní'áágóó índa tsin bijeeh łikání halchinii fránkinsens wolyéii bił dah daask'idgóó deeshááł .
PRED:	But when the sun came , I will go down to the mountains , until the sun had not been cut down , and I will pour out incense on the hill .
GOLD:	Before the dawn breezes blowand the night shadows flee , I will hurry to the mountain of myrrhand to the hill of frankincense .

ID:	4460
INPUT:	Bee nide áhoot'éhígíí Bóhólníihii baa diní'aah , áko naa áhályą́ą doo . Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii nahjį' kóbidi'doolníłígíí ts'ídá doo yee hwiidooł'aał da .
PRED:	Give to the Lord your troubles , and he will keep you . He will not let the righteous go away from you .
GOLD:	Give your burdens to the Lord , and he will take care of you.He will not permit the godly to slip and fall .

ID:	4461
INPUT:	Doo áhályáanii t'áadoo bich'į' yáníłti'í , háálá saad bee hódzáanii bee yáníłti'ígíí yidoo'įįł .
PRED:	Do not speak to the fool , for the words of the wise shall see .
GOLD:	Do n't waste your breath on fools , for they will despise the wisest advice .

ID:	4462
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go ashkii áłts'íísígíí áádóó bimá ałdó' bił t'áá tł'éé' Ííjipgóó ajookai .
PRED:	So he rose up and went with the boy and his mother in the night .
GOLD:	That night Joseph left for Egypt with the child and Mary , his mother ,

ID:	4463
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso doo ádahalyą́ą da índa doo bił éédahózin da . Óola deitsidii t'áá ałtso eda'alyaii ádeił'íinii yaa yádanízingo ádaalne' , háálá bi'eda'alyaii wooch'ííd ádaat'é índa doo nidadidzih da .
PRED:	All the people do not know , nor knowledge , nor knowledge of gold ; for they have made idols of gold , and their idols shall not be put to shame .
GOLD:	The whole human race is foolish and has no knowledge ! The craftsmen are disgraced by the idols they make , for their carefully shaped works are a fraud.These idols have no breath or power .

ID:	4464
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hazaad yik'idi' yiitįįhgo doo hoł béédahózin da , háálá ata' halne'í há ata' halne' .
PRED:	And they do not know what Joseph had said , for there is a witness between them .
GOLD:	Of course , they did n't know that Joseph understood them , for he had been speaking to them through an interpreter .

ID:	4465
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ákódaanéehgo doo t'áá k'ad yaa ákodaniizį́į' da ; jó , Diyin God bizaad bik'ehgo yót'ááh hiníláii ałk'idą́ą́' hólǫ́ , áádóó ni' táyi'dę́ę́' háá'á áádóó tó bee hasht'eelyaa
PRED:	This is what the heavens did not know , because the heavens were in the word of God , and the waters of the waters were prepared .
GOLD:	They deliberately forget that God made the heavens long ago by the word of his command , and he brought the earth out from the water and surrounded it with water .

ID:	4466
INPUT:	Háísh hóyą́ągo k'os yídóołtahgo yíneel'ą́ ? Háísh wódahdi tó abid yadeidiyooziłgo yíneel'ą́ ?
PRED:	Who is able to stand in the clouds ? Who can pour out the rivers ?
GOLD:	Who is wise enough to count all the clouds ? Who can tilt the water jars of heaven

ID:	4467
INPUT:	áádóó k'ad yihahígíí Bóhólníihii doogáałgo bá ashja'ósin índa nihiDiyin God k'éédidoo'nííł baa hodoolzhishígíí dishníigo baa hashne' doo biniyé shiníł'a' , áádóó daachaii t'áá ałtso bił nídahodoojǫǫł .
PRED:	And now the end of the Lord will come to me , and I will declare to you , that the end of the Lord your God may come , and I will see all that he has done to you .
GOLD:	He has sent me to tell those who mournthat the time of the Lord 's favor has come , and with it , the day of God 's anger against their enemies .

ID:	4468
INPUT:	Nidi diné iisxíinii kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdázhnííchą́'ídóó t'áá hoolzhishgi hoodzo bitis jííyáago
PRED:	But when he went out of the city of refuge , he went through the city ,
GOLD:	“ But if the slayer ever leaves the limits of the city of refuge ,

ID:	4469
INPUT:	Nidi aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii éí ádahooníiłii ayóó ádaat'éii baa nijiyáhígíí , áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' áłchíní , David biYe' nilíinii baa ha'niih doo ! daaníigo dadilwoshgo dayiiłtsą́ągo doo bił dahóózhǫǫd da ,
PRED:	But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the great things he did , they cried out in the temple , saying , “ Blessed are the Son of David , the Son of David ! ”
GOLD:	The leading priests and the teachers of religious law saw these wonderful miracles and heard even the children in the Temple shouting , “ Praise God for the Son of David. ” But the leaders were indignant .

ID:	4470
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é áyooł'įįłii
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Rebellion of Israel

ID:	4471
INPUT:	Joogááłgóó bee dah hizhdidoogáałii biishdoogááł , áádóó łoh biishdoolwoł .
PRED:	The spirit of a spirit shall enter into a net , and he shall enter into a net .
GOLD:	A trap grabs them by the heel.A snare holds them tight .

ID:	4472
INPUT:	Diné ła'da yoołkáałii ła' t'ah atisígo át'éego yidísin łeh , nidi diné ła' náánásdzį́ , éí yoołkáałii t'áá ałtso aheełt'éego yidísin łeh . Bíni'dii diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bí doo bił naaki danilį́į́ góne' yaa nitsídaakees .
PRED:	If a man is still alive , but the one who is standing in the right hand , let every man know his own ways .
GOLD:	In the same way , some think one day is more holy than another day , while others think every day is alike . You should each be fully convinced that whichever day you choose is acceptable .

ID:	4473
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí bee haz'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go ák'ina'ooldláád .
PRED:	When the king heard the book of the law , he tore his clothes .
GOLD:	When the king heard what was written in the Book of the Law , he tore his clothes in despair .

ID:	4474
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Ádam yíká ádííniidgo áyidííniid , Háadish naniná ?
PRED:	And the Lord God called Edom , and said unto them , Where are thy sister ?
GOLD:	Then the Lord God called to the man , “ Where are you ? ”

ID:	4475
INPUT:	Mt . 19 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death

ID:	4476
INPUT:	Éí bąą ayóó át'éii nílį́ , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ; jó , doo ła' nigi át'ée da , doodaii' t'áá ni t'éiyá Diyin God nílį́ ; t'áá át'é deísíníilts'ą́'ígíí bik'ehgo ni t'éiyá ayóó át'éii nílį́ .
PRED:	Therefore thou art great , O Lord God , there is no one like thee ; thou art God , and thou art a God , and thou art great , according to all that we hear .
GOLD:	“ How great you are , O Sovereign Lord ! There is no one like you . We have never even heard of another God like you !

ID:	4477
INPUT:	Jesus t'óó nídí'níitą́ą́' yę́ędą́ą́' tádiin daats'í binááhai , éí Jóseph biye' ( bi'dó'níigo ) , Jóseph éí Híílai biye' ,
PRED:	When Jesus taught them about thirty years , the son of Joseph was the son of Joseph , the son of Joseph ,
GOLD:	Jesus was about thirty years old when he began his public ministry.Jesus was known as the son of Joseph.Joseph was the son of Heli .

ID:	4478
INPUT:	Nijéí joozba'go áádóó Diyin God binááł a'ohgo ádi'nilyaago bizaad yee díí kéyah índa ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí yik'ijį' haadzíi'go dísíníts'ą́ą'go , shinááł t'áá ni a'ohgo ádi'nilyaago áádóó ni'éé' ák'inéíníldláád índa shinááł nichago biniinaa shí ałdó' nisodizin diséts'ą́ą́' , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And when thou hast heard the word of thy heart , and hast spoken unto these words , and hast spoken unto this land , and hast spoken unto me , and hast covered thy clothes , and thy clothes , and thy clothes , and thy clothes , and thy clothes , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	You were sorry and humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this city and its people . You humbled yourself and tore your clothing in despair and wept before me in repentance . And I have indeed heard you , says the Lord .

ID:	4479
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'éí bee yisdá'iildéehii bee hólǫ́ ; bee ak'ijiinídlíii éí nidine'é bee dahólǫ́ǫ le' ! Síilah .
PRED:	The Lord is a salvation of salvation ; let thy people be blessed . Selah .
GOLD:	Victory comes from you , O Lord.May you bless your people.Interlude

ID:	4480
INPUT:	Belsházar wáin dzizlįhgo hazhé'é Nébukadnézzar yę́ę Jerúsalemgi kin bii' sohodizin biyi'dóó óola łeets'aa' índa béésh łigaii łeets'aa' ch'íyiizhjaa'ii nináhidoojihgo bee hadzoodzíí' , áko aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó hakéé'dóó bídahólníihii índa hwe'asdzą́ą́ danilíinii áádóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ dajíł'ínída éí yee da'doodlį́į́ł .
PRED:	When King Nebuchadnezzar had finished wine , he told his father Nebuchadnezzar , the gold , the silver , and the vessels of the temple , and the king , and his wife , and his wife , and his wife , and his wife .
GOLD:	While Belshazzar was drinking the wine , he gave orders to bring in the gold and silver cups that his predecessor , Nebuchadnezzar , had taken from the Temple in Jerusalem . He wanted to drink from them with his nobles , his wives , and his concubines .

ID:	4481
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí naat'áanii biyaa sinilígíí yah aakaigo ata' gi dań'dítį́hígi dineezbin ; éí kódaolyé : Néíyergal-sharíízer áádóó Sám<unk> bo , <unk> kim , Rábsaris nilíinii , Néíyergal-sharíízer , éí Rábmag nilíinii áádóó ałdó' Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í naat'áanii biyaa sinilígíí náádaała' yił dineezbin .
PRED:	And the king of Babylon was sitting on the doors of the king of Babylon , and he sat in the midst of the king of Babylon : and there was a man named Hananiah , and Hananiah , and Hananiah , the chief of the king of Babylon , and the princes of Babylon .
GOLD:	All the officers of the Babylonian army came in and sat in triumph at the Middle Gate : Nergal-sharezer of Samgar , and Nebo-sarsekim , a chief officer , and Nergal-sharezer , the king 's adviser , and all the other officers of the king of Babylon .

ID:	4482
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í t'áá ałtso éí aláahgo naat'áanii bidáń'dítį́hígi nidaakaígíí hach'į' yaa áńdaat'įįhgo Héíman deidósin łeh , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii hódéét'i'ii yee haadzíí' . Nidi Mórdiikai éí doo hach'į' yaa ánát'įįh da índa doo hodósin da .
PRED:	And all the servants of the king came down to the gate of the king 's gate , for Haman had spoken to Haman , and Mordecai bowed down before him , and fear him .
GOLD:	All the king 's officials would bow down before Haman to show him respect whenever he passed by , for so the king had commanded . But Mordecai refused to bow down or show him respect .

ID:	4483
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jó'ab ni'jį' nitsideelgo'go tsé'yaa neeztį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' ahééh niizį́į́' , áko Jó'ab ádííniid , Díí jį́ ná naal'a'í nishłíinii díí shił bééhoozin : ajooba' bee shich'oha'néego shąąh tsídíníkééz , bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í bíyókeedígíí yá t' áá ákót'éego áyiilaa .
PRED:	Joab fell down to the ground and gave thanks to the king . Joab said to Joab , “ I know that I have found favor in your sight today , my lord , my lord the king has done this . ”
GOLD:	Joab bowed with his face to the ground in deep respect and said , “ At last I know that I have gained your approval , my lord the king , for you have granted me this request ! ”

ID:	4484
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ádzíłtso da'jííyą́ą'go hwiih dadzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	And they ate , and were filled with water .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted ,

ID:	4485
INPUT:	Naal'a'í jílíinii ákójít'į́įgo hananit'a'í níyáago éí hak'ihojidlí .
PRED:	Blessed is the servant who comes to his master , and blessed is he who is his master .
GOLD:	If the master returns and finds that the servant has done a good job , there will be a reward .

ID:	4486
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii yizhchį́
PRED:	John the Baptist
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist

ID:	4487
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é éí hak'is Símiyan dine'é ádabizhdííniid , Haa'íshą' kéyah nihaa deet'ánígíí bich'į' nihił doohkahgo Kéínan dine'é bił da'ahidiigą́ą́ł . Índa nihí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego kéyah nihaa deet'ánígíí bich'į' nihił dadiibah . Áko Símiyan dine'é hodiikaigo hoł dah diikai .
PRED:	And Judah said unto the sons of Simeon , Let us go and fight against us , and we will fight with the Canaanites , and we will fight against us . And the children of Simeon went with him .
GOLD:	The men of Judah said to their relatives from the tribe of Simeon , “ Join with us to fight against the Canaanites living in the territory allotted to us . Then we will help you conquer your territory. ” So the men of Simeon went with Judah .

ID:	4488
INPUT:	Asdzání ha'niyóodii Féro áyidííniid , Díí Hííbrew asdzání doo Ííjip asdzánígi ádaat'ée da , háálá éí dabiinéigo ha'niyóodii éí t'áadoo yílyeedí t'ahaa'go nida'iiłchííh .
PRED:	The woman said to Pharaoh , “ This woman is not like women , because they are born to him , because they were born to him . ”
GOLD:	“ The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women , ” the midwives replied . “ They are more vigorous and have their babies so quickly that we can not get there in time . ”

ID:	4489
INPUT:	aláahgo bee níhólníihgo nił haz'áanii biyi' diné léi' diyin danilíinii biníłch'i bii' hólǫ́ . Nizhé'é bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' bee hódzáanii áádóó bee ak'idi'yiitįįhii bee éí diyin danilíinii bibee hódzáanii bii' hólónígíí bééhoozin índa aláahgo naat'áanii Nébukadnézzar nizhé'é yę́ę éí álílee k'ehgo ída'ooł'įįłii , déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii , Kaldíya dine'é danilíinii áádóó náásgóó ádahodooníiłii yaa halne'ii yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo ábi'diilyaa .
PRED:	And there was a certain man in the kingdom of thy father , in the days of thy father , in the days of thy father Nebuchadnezzar , in the days of wisdom , and in the wisdom , and in the wisdom , and in the wisdom , and in the wisdom , and in the hand of the Chaldeans , and in the hand of the Chaldeans , and in the Chaldeans .
GOLD:	There is a man in your kingdom who has within him the spirit of the holy gods . During Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , this man was found to have insight , understanding , and wisdom like that of the gods . Your predecessor , the king — your predecessor King Nebuchadnezzar — made him chief over all the magicians , enchanters , astrologers , and fortune-tellers of Babylon .

ID:	4490
INPUT:	Dził Záíyandi , Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'į́ danohłíinii , doo atínínáádadinohdleeh da doo ; nicha yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí nihaa jiidoobaał ; t'áá yidiizts'ą'í nihich'į' ééhodoosįįł .
PRED:	You inhabitants of Zion , Jerusalem , do not weep , you inhabitants of Jerusalem ; you will cry out for help , and he will answer you .
GOLD:	O people of Zion , who live in Jerusalem , you will weep no more.He will be gracious if you ask for help.He will surely respond to the sound of your cries .

ID:	4491
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ákódzaago hastą́ą́h jį́ aleeh góne' bááh naakidi ákódanéelt'e'go nídayiizláá' : ómer bee í'neel'ąąhí naakidi ookááł bíighah hódáághah , áko dah oonéłígíí bitahdóó bídahólníihii t'áá ałtso Mózes yaa yíkaigo yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the sixth day , in the sixth day , that they took two ephah of fine flour , and they brought to Moses , and told him all the princes of the congregation .
GOLD:	On the sixth day , they gathered twice as much as usual — four quarts for each person instead of two . Then all the leaders of the community came and asked Moses for an explanation .

ID:	4492
INPUT:	Áko ch'ééh hadahoneeztą́ą'go Jéísan áádóó ałk'isóó danilíinii kin haal'áagi naat'áanii yaa dayiizdzį́įzgo hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Díí diné éí t'áá ałtsogóó diné yił hadahoneeshchaadígíí t'áá éí ní'áazhgo ,
PRED:	And when they had sought him , they brought him to the governor of the city , and they cried out , saying , This man was a man in all things ;
GOLD:	Not finding them there , they dragged out Jason and some of the other believers instead and took them before the city council . “ Paul and Silas have caused trouble all over the world , ” they shouted , “ and now they are here disturbing our city , too .

ID:	4493
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ák'ina'ooldláadgo ání , Diyin God baa'ihgo bá hadzoodzíí' . Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ła' ch'ínáádahót'aah doo ? Jó , k'ad Diyin God baa'ihgo bá hadzoodzíi'go dahosidoots'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The high priest tore his clothes , and said , “ Why do you say anything wrong ? Why do you say that God has spoken against you ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest tore his clothing to show his horror and said , “ Blasphemy ! Why do we need other witnesses ? You have all heard his blasphemy .

ID:	4494
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Queen Athaliah Rules in Judah

ID:	4495
INPUT:	óola łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo shékel wolyéii neeznáá dah hidiidloh bíighahgo éí bii' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadeezbingo ,
PRED:	one golden golden shekels of gold , full of incense ;
GOLD:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .

ID:	4496
INPUT:	Ak'i'diitįįh bee ádinii éí doo hóshkał yaa bił hózhǫ́ , nidi diné ak'i'diitįįhii éí yigááłgóó k'íhoołdǫǫł .
PRED:	A fool is glad in his wisdom , but a wise man shall make atonement for him .
GOLD:	Foolishness brings joy to those with no sense ; a sensible person stays on the right path .

ID:	4497
INPUT:	David honoojíidi naagháago éí Néíbal bidibé táidigéeshgo yiyíínii' .
PRED:	David cut off the sheep of Nabal in the wilderness , and cut it off .
GOLD:	When David heard that Nabal was shearing his sheep ,

ID:	4498
INPUT:	Dinégi át'éego ayóó'ó'ó'ní bee át'ááh <unk> nil . Ha'deestsoł biniyé hach'į' yaa ásdzaago hazáát'i'í haa diinil .
PRED:	As a man is called together , so that they may be called together .
GOLD:	I led Israel alongwith my ropes of kindness and love.I lifted the yoke from his neck , and I myself stooped to feed him .

ID:	4499
INPUT:	Díí bąą kót'éego ha'oodzíí' , Ałhoshí nílíinii , ch'éénídzííd , dasínítsą́ą́dę́ę́' nídiidááh ! Áko Christ nik'i' diiłdíin doo .
PRED:	So this is what he said : “ Be afraid ! Get up from the dead ! ” So he will make his face shine on him .
GOLD:	for the light makes everything visible . This is why it is said , “ Awake , O sleeper , rise up from the dead , and Christ will give you light . ”

ID:	4500
INPUT:	Doo dahonohsáanii , hódzą́ nabik'ítsáhákeesii bik'ida'doohtįįh , áádóó doo dahóyáanii danohłíinii , ak'ida'doohtįįh .
PRED:	You foolish women , understand wisdom , and understand understanding .
GOLD:	You simple people , use good judgment.You foolish people , show some understanding .

ID:	4501
INPUT:	Óola áádóó béésh łigaii daashíínéelą́ą'di miildi ánéelą́'ígíí biláahgo bee hosíníł'áanii bee hahídziihígíí shił yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	It is good to me to be better than gold and silver .
GOLD:	Your instructions are more valuable to methan millions in gold and silver .

ID:	4502
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é dabijéí bii' baa'ihii ádaadinii yaa jooba' .
PRED:	Yes , God is kind to those who are evil in Israel .
GOLD:	Truly God is good to Israel , to those whose hearts are pure .

ID:	4503
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Jó , yá'ąąshdę́ę́' bááh nináłtį́įhgo nihá ádeeshłííł , áko diné ch'éédajikahgo t'áá hwíighahígo t'áá ákwíí jį́ nínádajiidlah doo , áádóó hahasíid doo , áko shibee haz'áanii daats'í bik'ehgo jookah doo , doo daats'í bik'ehgo jookah da doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Behold , I will make you bread from heaven , and I will gather the people together and gather them every day , and they will not walk in my law . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Look , I 'm going to rain down food from heaven for you . Each day the people can go out and pick up as much food as they need for that day . I will test them in this to see whether or not they will follow my instructions .

ID:	4504
INPUT:	Nídiidáahgo Dził Ábarim ní'áhígíí bighą́ą'gi Nííbo dahats'osíjį' éí Mó'ab kéyah biyi' Jériko binaashiijį' hasínáahgo Kéínan kéyah éí Ízrel dine'é bíí' dooleełgo baa diní'ánígíí dínííł'įįł .
PRED:	Arise , go up and see the land of Moab , which is in the mountains of Moab , and behold , I will see the land of Canaan which I have given to Israel .
GOLD:	“ Go to Moab , to the mountains east of the river , and climb Mount Nebo , which is across from Jericho . Look out across the land of Canaan , the land I am giving to the people of Israel as their own special possession .

ID:	4505
INPUT:	Doo ákwii át'éii k'izhdííláhígíí éí t'áadoo dabiniyéhíii áłah ázhdoolííł , áádóó háháchį'go nazhnit'áhígíí nidoot'ih .
PRED:	He who does wrong will gather the wicked , and his anger will come upon him .
GOLD:	Those who plant injustice will harvest disaster , and their reign of terror will come to an end .

ID:	4506
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniihí bíighahgi Bóhólníihii sizį́įgo yiiłtsą́ áádóó áshíłní , Kin bíyah daniitł'inígíí bílátahgi nídiiłhaałgo ch'é'étiingi naa dah sitání ditsxizgo bąą áyah daniitł'inii t'áá ájít'é hak'ijį' nidahałdaasgo ádíílííł , áko dadzidziihígíí diltłish bee nidahodeestsił . Bitahdę́ę́' ch'íjílyeed nidi , doo yóó'azhdoolwoł da áádóó bitahdę́ę́' ch'íjígháah nidi , doo yisdázhdoogáał da .
PRED:	I saw the Lord standing by the altar , and said to me , “ You will strike all the walls of the house with fear , and you will strike them with fear , and you will not escape by the sword . ”
GOLD:	Then I saw a vision of the Lord standing beside the altar . He said , “ Strike the tops of the Temple columns , so that the foundation will shake.Bring down the roofon the heads of the people below.I will kill with the sword those who survive.No one will escape !

ID:	4507
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nihinaadeełí áádóó nihits'ą́ą́dóó nidahachíihii áádóó nihilį́į́' nidahachíihii índa nihidáda'ak'ehdóó aneest'ą' lą'í nihee nídahoodleełgo íidoolííł ; danihizhé'é yę́ę kéyah yeididoo'áałgo yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíi'ii bikáa'gi nihik'idahojidlíigo íidoolííł .
PRED:	The Lord will give you life , and your livestock , and your cattle , and your cattle , and the land he swore to your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will give you prosperity in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you , blessing you with many children , numerous livestock , and abundant crops .

ID:	4508
INPUT:	Náhááh bii' ééhidichídígíí
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Release for Debtors

ID:	4509
INPUT:	Náánáła' Íílam nááhoolyéédóó diné t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindóó ba'aan dį́į́' .
PRED:	The men of Elam , one thousand and two hundred and two .
GOLD:	The citizens of West Elam1,254

ID:	4510
INPUT:	Áko David nízhdii'na'go Júdah kéyahgi Béíyal kin shijaa'dóó diné hoł naakaígíí t'áá ałtso bił dashdiikai ; áádę́ę́' Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii nídazhdoo'ááł biniyé ádajit'į́ ; éí diyingo naal'a'í chérabim wolyéii ałch'į' sizínígíí bidejí hólǫ́ǫgo éí tsits'aa' t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee bi'dójí .
PRED:	So David rose up and took all the men of Judah , and they took the ark of God , and they set up the ark of the God of hosts ; and the ark of the Lord of hosts was with them .
GOLD:	He led them to Baalah of Judah to bring back the Ark of God , which bears the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim .

ID:	4511
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá íiyisí bąąh bíni' , nidi ádee hadzoodzí'ígíí índa haa haaskaigo bił nidzíiztánígíí biniinaa at'ééd t'óó jidínóo'ahígíí doo háni' nilį́į da .
PRED:	And the king was very angry , but when he had made a vow , she came to him , and sat with him because she sat with her , she was not able to sit with her .
GOLD:	Then the king deeply regretted what he had said ; but because of the vows he had made in front of his guests , he could n't refuse her .

ID:	4512
INPUT:	T'óó áhodil'íní nílíinii , áłtsé nástáán ninák'ee sitánígíí hanitįįh , áko índa hazhó'ó ííní'į́įgo nik'is binák'e oolts'idígíí bá hadíí'ááł .
PRED:	And he said unto him , Take a spear in thy hand , and take it into the hand of thy brother 's brother 's eye .
GOLD:	Hypocrite ! First get rid of the log in your own eye ; then you will see well enough to deal with the speck in your friend 's eye .

ID:	4513
INPUT:	Náádahaniihii t'áadoo biniyéhí daígíí t'áadoo nidahohjáhí ; tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii áádóó hááníbąsgo nihi'áłah ná'ádleehígíí áádóó nihihá'áyį́į́h jį́ áádóó dílzingo áłah nídaahdleehígíí doo yinishdin da ; doo ákwii át'éii bił naazhóodgo baa áłah nídaahdleehgo doo shił aaníi da .
PRED:	You shall not be called by fire ; you shall burn incense and incense , and the feast , and the feast , and the feast , and the feast ; you shall not be gathered together with me .
GOLD:	Stop bringing me your meaningless gifts ; the incense of your offerings disgusts me ! As for your celebrations of the new moon and the Sabbathand your special days for fasting — they are all sinful and false.I want no more of your pious meetings .

ID:	4514
INPUT:	Kédaayah naaznilígíí t'áá ałtso bii'dę́ę́' áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahdóó nínánihidiyeeshdlahgo t'áá nihí nihikéyah biih nánihideeshnił .
PRED:	I will gather you out of all the countries , and I will gather you among the nations , and I will bring you into the land .
GOLD:	For I will gather you up from all the nations and bring you home again to your land .

ID:	4515
INPUT:	Shich'il na'atł'o'ii k'idoolyáhígíí ha'át'íí lá t'áá íídą́ą́' t'áá ha'át'éhígoda ánáádeeshłííł nít'éé' lá . Ch'il na'atł'o'ii yá'át'éehii bíká dínísh'į́į'ii ha'át'éegoshą' ch'il na'atł'o'ii dík'ǫ́zhígíida bąąh hazlį́į́' lá ?
PRED:	What have I done in my vineyard ? I have not done good things ? What have I found in the vine ? What did I not have ?
GOLD:	What more could I have done for my vineyardthat I have not already done ? When I expected sweet grapes , why did my vineyard give me bitter grapes ?

ID:	4516
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , Géízadóó dajílíinii táadi , doodaii' dį́įdi bee haz'áanii k'ídajizti'go biniinaa dooshą' léi' t'áadoo atíháshłééh lá , háálá diné t'áá ałtso t'óó ninádeideez'ą́ągo yisnááh biniyé Íídam dine'é yaa deideez'ą́ .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish Edom three or three sins , because they have given Edom to Edom . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Gaza have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They sent whole villages into exile , selling them as slaves to Edom .

ID:	4517
INPUT:	Diné t'áá aaníígóó halne'ii danohłį́įgo bíni'dii nihik'is ła' t'áá kǫ́ǫ́ awáalyaa sidáa doo . Nidi nihí t'éiyá niha'áłchíní dichin danilíinii bich'į' tł'oh naadą́ą́' nihidadoohééł .
PRED:	If you are the truth , let your brother sit in prison . But your children will kill you .
GOLD:	If you really are honest men , choose one of your brothers to remain in prison . The rest of you may go home with grain for your starving families .

ID:	4518
INPUT:	Áko kin bighą́ą'di Ábsalam bá níbaal dah deisbaal áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso binááł Ábsalam hazhé'é ba'ákéí yíł'íní bił yah aníjídááh .
PRED:	So Absalom went in to meet Absalom on the roof of the tent and all Israel with Absalom his father .
GOLD:	So they set up a tent on the palace roof where everyone could see it , and Absalom went in and had sex with his father 's concubines .

ID:	4519
INPUT:	Nít'éé' áhodííniid , Nitsilí nádzáago , nizhé'é éí béégashii yáázh neesk'ahígíí yiyiisxį́ , háálá doo haa dayidzaagóó índa doo át'éhígóó haa nádzá .
PRED:	And he said unto him , Thy brother , when thy father had gone , thy father killed the calf , because they had not done it , and returned to him .
GOLD:	‘ Your brother is back , ' he was told , ‘ and your father has killed the fattened calf . We are celebrating because of his safe return . '

ID:	4520
INPUT:	Bilą́ąjį' kǫ' ó'oołdįįł índa bikéédę́ę́' kǫ' naanídoonałígíí i'diiłk'ą́ą́h . Bidáahgi éí Ííden dá'ák'eh yę́ę honoolnin , nidi bikéédę́ę́' honoojíígóó t'áá át'é t'áá ádzaaí silį́į'ii nahalin , áádóó ts'ídá doo yisdáhóót'i' da hazlį́į́' .
PRED:	He will burn the fire before him , and fire from before him . He will be like the garden of Lebanon , but all the land of the wilderness will be a desolation , and it will not be saved .
GOLD:	Fire burns in front of them , and flames follow after them.Ahead of them the land liesas beautiful as the Garden of Eden.Behind them is nothing but desolation ; not one thing escapes .

ID:	4521
INPUT:	Áádóó nihiBóhólníihii nízaadgóó ha'ólnínígíí yisdá'iildééh át'éego baa nitsídaahkees . Nihik'is Paul ayóó'ádeíníi'níinii bee hódzáanii baa deet'ánígíí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego yee nihich'į' ak'e'ashchį́ .
PRED:	And as the Lord has given you a salvation of salvation , so it is written to you in the same way of our brother Paul , who gives you the wisdom of his friend .
GOLD:	And remember , our Lord 's patience gives people time to be saved . This is what our beloved brother Paul also wrote to you with the wisdom God gave him —

ID:	4522
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	This is another message that came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4523
INPUT:	Diné nahagizii doo nahjį' niidó'ááł át'éégóó hináanii éí hosh índa łoh bá hólǫ́ , nidi diné hwii' sizíinii baa áhojilyáanii éí ákót'éii nízaadi bits'ą́ądi hojílǫ́ .
PRED:	A person who does not take away his life , but the soul of a fool is far away from far away .
GOLD:	Corrupt people walk a thorny , treacherous road ; whoever values life will avoid it .

ID:	4524
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Blesses the Children

ID:	4525
INPUT:	Áyaanída Séítan t'áá bí níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í nilíinii nidi , łahgo át'éego diyingo naal'a'í bits'ádi'nídínígi át'éego yí'ínídiil'įįh .
PRED:	And Satan , who is the devil , but as one of the angels .
GOLD:	But I am not surprised ! Even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light .

ID:	4526
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God haYe' nilíinii nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' jiníł'a'ígíí éí doo nihokáá' dine'é yá nihodiyoo'ááł biniyé jiníł'a' da , nidi bí bee nihokáá' dine'é yisdádoo'nił biniyé jiníł'a' .
PRED:	For the Son of God sent him not to judge the world , but he sent him to save the world .
GOLD:	God sent his Son into the world not to judge the world , but to save the world through him .

ID:	4527
INPUT:	Áko lą'í dabibeeldléí atiingóó há dayíłkaad , náánáła' éí atiin bąąhgóó tsin bi'iil dadíłch'ilii dayiigéeshgo atiingóó há dayíłjeeh .
PRED:	Many of them threw their clothes on the road , and others cut them on the road , and cast them on the road .
GOLD:	Many in the crowd spread their garments on the road ahead of him , and others spread leafy branches they had cut in the fields .

ID:	4528
INPUT:	Ákohgo naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso Jeremáíyah yaa yíkaigo nidayídééłkid , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii nahoneeztą́ą́' yę́ęgi át'éego bich'į' hadzoodzíí' . Áko t'áadoo yił ahił náádahoolne' da , háálá ahił hoolne'ígíí t'áadoo yi'nii' da .
PRED:	Then all the princes came to Jeremiah and asked him as the king had taught him . They did not tell us what he had told us .
GOLD:	Sure enough , it was n't long before the king 's officials came to Jeremiah and asked him why the king had called for him . But Jeremiah followed the king 's instructions , and they left without finding out the truth . No one had overheard the conversation between Jeremiah and the king .

ID:	4529
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii t'áá ałtso hats'ą́ą́' dah diijée'go yóó'aheeswod .
PRED:	And all his disciples departed from him , and fled .
GOLD:	Then all his disciples deserted him and ran away .

ID:	4530
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go shił áhoodzaago diné léi' łį́į́' łichíí' léi' bił yildloshgo yiiłtsą́ , jó'akon . Bokooh góyaa mértal naazkaadígíí bitahgi łį́į́' bił sizį́ . Bikéédę́ę́' łį́į́' daalchíí' áádóó daastł'inii índa daalgaii naazį́ .
PRED:	And I saw a vision in the night , and behold , there was a man sitting in the midst of the wall , and in the midst of the city , and in the walls , and in the walls , and in the city .
GOLD:	In a vision during the night , I saw a man sitting on a red horse that was standing among some myrtle trees in a small valley . Behind him were riders on red , brown , and white horses .

ID:	4531
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binahat'a' hool'áágóó hólǫ́ ; t'áá ałtso oochííłgóó ni'níchį́ bijį́įjį' bijéí biyi'dóó yee yaa nitsíkeesii hool'áágóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The counsel of the Lord is for ever ; his heart is for ever and ever .
GOLD:	But the Lord 's plans stand firm forever ; his intentions can never be shaken .

ID:	4532
INPUT:	Áko díí bee há ha'oodzí'ígíí bik'ee Jóseph índa Mary t'óó bił ahayóí .
PRED:	And these things were filled with Joseph and Mary , and Mary .
GOLD:	Jesus ' parents were amazed at what was being said about him .

ID:	4533
INPUT:	Aheełt'éii índa ał'ąą át'éii áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éego bee na'nitinii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	More Proverbs of Solomon

ID:	4534
INPUT:	Abínígo náhást'éigi oolkiłgo tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł ada'askaal .
PRED:	And in the morning they crucified him in the morning .
GOLD:	It was nine o'clock in the morning when they crucified him .

ID:	4535
INPUT:	Áájí éí ats'íís t'éí hoł hólǫ́ , nidi nihí éí nihiDiyin God Bóhólníihii nihíká adoolwołgo anaa'gi nihá nidoobah . Áko diné éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Heziikáíyah saad hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí yee hada'oosníí' .
PRED:	He was with his body , but the Lord your God will help you in battle . He will help you . He will help you . He will help you . The people of Judah according to the words of Hezekiah king of Judah .
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	4536
INPUT:	Ła' diltłish aa aalgeedígíí nahalingo yáłti' , nidi diné hóyáanii bizaad éí chánah áná'oodlííł .
PRED:	The mouth of a sword is like a sword , but the words of the wise makes him strong .
GOLD:	Some people make cutting remarks , but the words of the wise bring healing .

ID:	4537
INPUT:	Kush biye'ké éí Sííba áádóó Hávilah áádóó <unk> ta áádóó Réíyamah índa <unk> tiika daolyé . Réíyamah biye'ké éí Shííba áádóó Díídan wolyé .
PRED:	The sons of Elam : Sheba , Ramah , and Ramah . The sons of Sheba were Sheba and Sheba .
GOLD:	The descendants of Cush were Seba , Havilah , Sabtah , Raamah , and Sabteca . The descendants of Raamah were Sheba and Dedan .

ID:	4538
INPUT:	bikáá' adání áádóó bibeedí t'áá ałtso índa bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áhígíí áádóó bił chodao'íinii t'áá ałtso índa bikáá' náá'iiniihí éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bá ályaaígíida
PRED:	the table , and all its vessels , and all its vessels , and all its vessels , and all its vessels ,
GOLD:	the table and all its utensils , the lampstand and all its accessories , the incense altar ,

ID:	4539
INPUT:	Áko ałdó' t'áá ádzaagóó Diyin God baa dahwiilne'go nihéédahoozin doo nít'éé' , háálá Diyin God éí Christ néidiisá dadii'níigo dahwiilne' . Jó , daneeznánígíí t'áá aaníí doo náábi'diiljeehgóogo , Diyin God éí Christ doo néidiisáa da doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	So we would know that God has raised him up , because we have raised him from the dead . For if the dead are not dead , God would not forget him .
GOLD:	And we apostles would all be lying about God — for we have said that God raised Christ from the grave . But that ca n't be true if there is no resurrection of the dead .

ID:	4540
INPUT:	T'áá áko hajeeyi' aní'díídláád índa hazaad doo át'éhígóó t'áá bééhózínígo hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	And in the same hour he spoke his word , and his words was not known .
GOLD:	Instantly the man could hear perfectly , and his tongue was freed so he could speak plainly !

ID:	4541
INPUT:	Nił honeezdogo t'áá íiyisí yínííł nanináa doo ; bik'ee ił nihooyeehii áádóó t'áadoo siláhígóó ádahale'ii bee adlání éí nádí Samériya bibee adlání át'é .
PRED:	But ten days will be troubled , and the cup that is in Samaria is a cup of Samaria .
GOLD:	Drunkenness and anguish will fill you , for your cup is filled to the brim with distress and desolation , the same cup your sister Samaria drank .

ID:	4542
INPUT:	Ákohgo Tahápaniizdi Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah at Riblah , saying ,
GOLD:	Then at Tahpanhes , the Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	4543
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' halgaidę́ę́' nááda'iiłniihii tsé nídeiztł'in .
PRED:	And the priests built up the high places of the field , which is in the field .
GOLD:	The next repairs were made by the priests from the surrounding region .

ID:	4544
INPUT:	t'óó doo áháshyą́ą da nít'éé' áádóó t'áadoo le'é doo shił bééhózin da nít'éé' ; ninááł naaldlooshii nahonishłin nít'éé' .
PRED:	I did n't know where I was , and I did n't know what you have done . I was like wild animals .
GOLD:	I was so foolish and ignorant — I must have seemed like a senseless animal to you .

ID:	4545
INPUT:	Ákwe'é tó t'óó ahayóigo bąą tsin yíl'áhígíí t'áá ałtso yilááh níísą́ , bits'áoz'a' lą'í áádóó danineez daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	There were many trees there , and all the trees grew more than their branches , and their heads were their heads .
GOLD:	This great tree towered high , higher than all the other trees around it.It prospered and grew long thick branchesbecause of all the water at its roots .

ID:	4546
INPUT:	Nidi Ámrii éí Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshóonii baa nijiyá , áádóó halą́ąjį' naat'áanii danilį́į́ nít'é'ígíí éí t'áá ałtso dabiláhígo ájíít'įįd .
PRED:	But he did evil in the sight of the Lord , and he did more than all the princes before him .
GOLD:	But Omri did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , even more than any of the kings before him .

ID:	4547
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó dé'éyóní nishłį́ ; nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii shits'ąą nídóół'įįh yíila' !
PRED:	I am a stranger in the earth ; do not hide my commandments from me .
GOLD:	I am only a foreigner in the land.Do n't hide your commands from me !

ID:	4548
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é danohłíinii índa Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó yóó'abí'oodzíi'ii danohłį́į́ yę́ędą́'ígi át'éego yisdánihideesh'niłgo nihits'ą́ą́dóó ak'ihojidlí hólǫ́ǫ doo . T'áadoo nihił daayé'í , nidi háni'dii danihidziilgo ída'dołnééh .
PRED:	O house of Judah and Israel , I will save you from the beginning of the nations , as you have been faithful among the nations , but be strong .
GOLD:	Among the other nations , Judah and Israel became symbols of a cursed nation . But no longer ! Now I will rescue you and make you both a symbol and a source of blessing . So do n't be afraid . Be strong , and get on with rebuilding the Temple !

ID:	4549
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Jó , danizhé'é yę́ę bił da'íłhosh doo áádóó díí dine'é nídahididookahgo dé'éyóní kéyahgi kéédahat'íinii bidiyin dabidi'níinii bee ahída'aldahii yikéé' naa nánoojahgo ałtah nihidooldah áádóó yóó'ashididoo'ááł índa shibee aha'deet'áanii bee bił ahadadi'nisht'áanii nideidiyootih .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Behold , you will sleep with your fathers , and this people will go after the gods of the foreigners who live in the land , and they will turn away from following the gods of the land , and my covenant with them . ”
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ You are about to die and join your ancestors . After you are gone , these people will begin to worship foreign gods , the gods of the land where they are going . They will abandon me and break my covenant that I have made with them .

ID:	4550
INPUT:	Áádóó éí oonéłígíí bíighah ch'ízhníyáago hánaaí baazhníyáajį' tsosts'idi ni'jį' yaa ádziidzaa .
PRED:	And when he came out of the camp , he came to his brother , and bowed down before his face seven times .
GOLD:	Then Jacob went on ahead . As he approached his brother , he bowed to the ground seven times before him .

ID:	4551
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Nílááh , díí Dził Ábarim góde hasínáahgo kéyah éí Ízrel dine'é baa diní'ánígíí dínííł'įįł .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Go up to the mountain , and see the land which you have given to Israel . ”
GOLD:	One day the Lord said to Moses , “ Climb one of the mountains east of the river , and look out over the land I have given the people of Israel .

ID:	4552
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bitahgóó t'áadoo biniyéhígóó ił áhát'ínígíí índa t'áá ádzaagóó ił ch'ídahwii'aahgo yee yádaałti'ii doo t'áá náás dayíłt'éeh da doo .
PRED:	It is not good for the people of Israel to do what they say .
GOLD:	“ There will be no more false visions and flattering predictions in Israel .

ID:	4553
INPUT:	Atsoo' nilínígíí
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Controlling the Tongue

ID:	4554
INPUT:	Nílááh , wohkah , baa nánihooshkąąh , áko nínádít'į́hígi nihił béédahodoozįįł áádóó háishą' áadi biiłtsą́ , háálá éí diné ayóogo bina'adlo'go shił hóóne' .
PRED:	Go , I pray you , and you will know that there is no one there , for I have seen a great man .
GOLD:	Go and check again to be sure of where he is staying and who has seen him there , for I know that he is very crafty .

ID:	4555
INPUT:	Háálá diné ayóó'ádadó'níi doo , béeso yíchą́deídéelni' doo , ádaa daha'niih doo , be'áshodahódli' doo , bizadahóchį' doo , bishchíinii doo yik'eh dahół'į́į da doo , doo ahééh danízin da doo , doo bił dahodiyin da doo ,
PRED:	For they shall love , love , and love , and love , and glory , and do not obey their parents , nor do they know their parents ,
GOLD:	For people will love only themselves and their money . They will be boastful and proud , scoffing at God , disobedient to their parents , and ungrateful . They will consider nothing sacred .

ID:	4556
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ádaahníiłii , Bóhólníihii bee nihił nidahoozhǫǫh ! T'áá ákogi ádaat'éii naa dahaniihgo beełt'é .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , you righteous , and rejoice in the Lord .
GOLD:	Let the godly sing for joy to the Lord ; it is fitting for the pure to praise him .

ID:	4557
INPUT:	áádóó Joána éí <unk> , Hérad bikin yaa áhályáanii be'asdzą́ą́ , áádóó <unk> na , índa sáanii náádaała' éí binaalye'é yee háká anájahígíí ałdó' hoł tádookai .
PRED:	and he also had a wife of Herod 's house , and with the other women who had been with him .
GOLD:	Joanna , the wife of Chuza , Herod 's business manager ; Susanna ; and many others who were contributing from their own resources to support Jesus and his disciples .

ID:	4558
INPUT:	Nihinanit'a'í binááł t'óó diné bił hólzhǫ́ t'éí biniyé ádaaht'į́įgo éí dooda , nidi Christ yá naalte' danohłį́įgo nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Diyin God íinízinii bida'oł'į́ .
PRED:	If you do not want to be happy in the sight of your master , but do the will of Christ your God .
GOLD:	Try to please them all the time , not just when they are watching you . As slaves of Christ , do the will of God with all your heart .

ID:	4559
INPUT:	Áko bá bee dahool'inígíí tsosts'idgo ádadoohłííł , índa bikáá' yí'nilgo bidáahjį' haz'ánígi bee hool'in doo biniyé ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt make seven lamps , and thou shalt make them a light in front of the court .
GOLD:	Then make the seven lamps for the lampstand , and set them so they reflect their light forward .

ID:	4560
INPUT:	T'óó hodíína'go doo dashooh'į́į da doo , áádóó t'áá nááhodoo'na'go náádashooht'į́į doo [ háálá aTaa' bich'į' dé<unk> .
PRED:	You will not see me , and you will not see me again , because I am going to the Father .
GOLD:	“ In a little while you wo n't see me anymore . But a little while after that , you will see me again . ”

ID:	4561
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Azáíyah Jerúsalemdi náhástł'ah aań'dítį́įhgi áádóó honíts'aa' aań'dítį́įhgi índa tsé naanástł'inígi yada'ii'áago bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And Amaziah built altars in Jerusalem , and built altars on the wall , and on the wall , and on the wall .
GOLD:	Uzziah built fortified towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate , at the Valley Gate , and at the angle in the wall .

ID:	4562
INPUT:	Nílááh , t'óó náádááł ; nił hózhǫ́ǫgo náádááł , áko Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í bił dahoníshǫ́ǫgo yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	Go back , and be glad ; and it is good to the princes of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Please do n't upset them , but go back quietly . ”

ID:	4563
INPUT:	Nidi nihokáa'gi t'óó bá nidahat'i'ii Diyin God nábiilááh , nihokáá' dine'é dahóyáanii t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł biniyé , áádóó doo dabidziilígíí ałdó' náyiilááh , éí ayóó ádaat'éii t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł biniyé .
PRED:	But the way of the world shall be ashamed , and the wise shall be ashamed , and more shall they be ashamed .
GOLD:	Instead , God chose things the world considers foolish in order to shame those who think they are wise . And he chose things that are powerless to shame those who are powerful .

ID:	4564
INPUT:	Áádóó Ííjip índa Kéínan kéyahgi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' hodííchįįd , índa ayóó át'éego ti'dahojoonííh , áko danihizhé'é yę́ę , dayíł<unk> dooleełii t'áá bá bídin hóyéé' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And there was a great famine in all the land of Egypt , and there was no fear for our fathers .
GOLD:	“ But a famine came upon Egypt and Canaan . There was great misery , and our ancestors ran out of food .

ID:	4565
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéíkab éí Léíban baa ákozniizį́į'go t'ah nahdę́ę́' hach'į' át'éé nít'éé' yę́ę doo ákót'ée da .
PRED:	When Jacob saw that Laban had gone , he was not able to do all that he had done .
GOLD:	And Jacob began to notice a change in Laban 's attitude toward him .

ID:	4566
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'í nilíinii Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́dóó yichíiłii danohłíinii , Jéíkab bada'áłchíní nídii'nilii danohłíinii , béédaałniih !
PRED:	Remember , you descendants of Jacob , you descendants of Jacob !
GOLD:	you children of his servant Abraham , you descendants of Jacob , his chosen ones .

ID:	4567
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo yił kéédahat'íinii yinda'alo' áádóó doo t'áá aaníígóó dahalne' . Wooch'ííd t'éiyá yee yádaałti' dooleełgo nida'ádineestą́ą́' . Doo ákwii ádadoonííłgóó haa'í shį́į́ doo nida'íłkeed da .
PRED:	And they have taught every man to his neighbor , and they speak lies in truth ; they have not asked him to speak lies .
GOLD:	They all fool and defraud each other ; no one tells the truth.With practiced tongues they tell lies ; they wear themselves out with all their sinning .

ID:	4568
INPUT:	John tó yee asį́į́h yę́ędóó wóshdę́ę́' nihits'ą́ą́' Jesus dego abi'dooltį́ bijį́įjį' nihił tázhdidookah biniyé ła' náho'didooltééł , áko Jesus daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náábi'diilzáhígíí nihitahdóó atah baa hojilne' doo .
PRED:	After John was baptized , he will be raised from you until he was raised up to you until he was raised from the dead . He will tell you what Jesus was raised from the dead .
GOLD:	from the time he was baptized by John until the day he was taken from us . Whoever is chosen will join us as a witness of Jesus ' resurrection . ”

ID:	4569
INPUT:	Nít'éé' áháłní , T'áá ni nizaadígíí bee naa nídéesht'įįł , bąąhági ááníiłgo naal'a'í nílíinii ! Jó , diné hashkéii nishłį́ , t'áá jíík'e sha'doolyééł t'éí nisin , índa t'áadoo k'idííláii náshgishgo nił bééhózin lá .
PRED:	And he said unto him , I will judge thee , and sin : for I am a man , that I may be given to thee , and know not .
GOLD:	“ ‘ You wicked servant ! ' the king roared . ‘ Your own words condemn you . If you knew that I 'm a hard man who takes what is n't mine and harvests crops I did n't plant ,

ID:	4570
INPUT:	Dį́į'go haz'ánígíí éí nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ádaałts'íísí yee' , nidi ts'ídá doo chohoo'į́į́góó dahóyą́ :
PRED:	There are many things on the four corners of the earth , but they do not have any hope .
GOLD:	There are four things on earth that are small but unusually wise :

ID:	4571
INPUT:	Hasih haz'ą́ yeidi'áahgo ák'inídiildził , nidi ádajít'éii hazhó'ó haisííd .
PRED:	He makes his face to the mountains , but makes his eyes look at the hills .
GOLD:	They may be allowed to live in security , but God is always watching them .

ID:	4572
INPUT:	nidi táłkáá' joogáałgo dahoołtsą́ągo , Ha'át'íí shį́į́ bich'į́įdii át'į́ ? daniizį́į'go hak'ee hadadeeshghaazh ,
PRED:	But when they saw him walking on the sea , they cried out , “ What is the dead ? ”
GOLD:	but when they saw him walking on the water , they cried out in terror , thinking he was a ghost .

ID:	4573
INPUT:	Áko a'ohgo ájít'éii áho'diilyaago doo ákót'éégóó haa hwiiníst'įįd . Háishą' oochíiłii bii' jiinánígíí hazhó'ó yaa hodoolnih ? Háálá nahasdzáán bits'ą́ąjį' hwii' sizíinii nídiilyá .
PRED:	And what did I do to him that was humble , and to whom shall he declare his seed ? For he went out from the face of the earth .
GOLD:	He was humiliated and received no justice.Who can speak of his descendants ? For his life was taken from the earth . ”

ID:	4574
INPUT:	Ákohgo t'áá shí binshishnishii áádóó shinaanish t'áá át'é baa nisíyáhígíí nééł'į́į́' , áko nít'éé' t'áá át'é ts'ídá t'áadoo nánídlíní da , jó'akon , áádóó níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalin índa oo'á łígíí biyaagi t'áadoo bee bilááh náodle'í da .
PRED:	Then I saw all my work and all my work , and all my work were vain ; and behold , there is nothing more than the wind and the sun .
GOLD:	But as I looked at everything I had worked so hard to accomplish , it was all so meaningless — like chasing the wind . There was nothing really worthwhile anywhere .

ID:	4575
INPUT:	T'áadoo ał'ohgo ahaa nitsídaahkeesí
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	A Warning against Prejudice

ID:	4576
INPUT:	Yínííł nidaakaígíí bik'idahojidlí , háálá hada'íídóolniił .
PRED:	Blessed are those who are afflicted , for they will be saved .
GOLD:	God blesses those who mourn , for they will be comforted .

ID:	4577
INPUT:	Áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii éí aláahgo naat'áanii índa diné t'áá át'é bidáahjį' ch'ídeizh'eezh . Áádóó éí yikáá' dah dadeesnii' .
PRED:	And the goat brought them out before the king and all the people . And they laid their hands on it .
GOLD:	The male goats for the sin offering were then brought before the king and the assembly of people , who laid their hands on them .

ID:	4578
INPUT:	t'áá háiida shitsį' jiyánígíí áádóó shidił jidlánígíí éí iiná doo ninít'i'ii hwee hólǫ́ , áko niiníłką́ądi dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' nááhodideeshłááł .
PRED:	Whoever eats my flesh and the blood of my blood is eternal life , and I will heal him in the last day .
GOLD:	But anyone who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life , and I will raise that person at the last day .

ID:	4579
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Líívai dine'é díí kin hadaas'áii áádóó binaagóó dahootsooígíí yaa deideez'ą́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes biniit'aa yee haadzíi'ii yik'eh ádaadzaa .
PRED:	And the children of Israel gave these cities , and their lands , according to the commandment of the Lord , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So the Israelites obeyed the Lord 's command to Moses and assigned these towns and pasturelands to the Levites by casting sacred lots .

ID:	4580
INPUT:	Béégashii bikágí , áádóó bitsį' , áádóó bidił índa bichaan hanááł didoodlił ,
PRED:	And the flesh , and the flesh , and the flesh , and the blood , and the blood of the blood , shall be burned in the sight of the ox ,
GOLD:	As Eleazar watches , the heifer must be burned — its hide , meat , blood , and dung .

ID:	4581
INPUT:	Táir dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í baa yínííł hasin
PRED:	The King of Tyre
GOLD:	A Message for Sidon

ID:	4582
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ádzíłtso Diyin God bibee adziil ayóó át'éii bąą t'óó hoł adahayóí . Nidi t'ah nidi t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá ałtsoní yaa naayáhígíí bąą t'óó hoł adahayóigo , Jesus bídahooł'aahii áyidííniid ,
PRED:	And all were amazed because of the power of God . But all things were amazed , and Jesus said to his disciples ,
GOLD:	Awe gripped the people as they saw this majestic display of God 's power.While everyone was marveling at everything he was doing , Jesus said to his disciples ,

ID:	4583
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel ádííniid , K'ad lą́ą , shiye' Jóseph hináá lá ; t'ah doo daastsaahdą́ą́' bich'į' deesháałgo néídeestsééł .
PRED:	And Israel said , “ Now , my son Joseph is dead , and I will come to see him before I die . ”
GOLD:	Then Jacob exclaimed , “ It must be true ! My son Joseph is alive ! I must go and see him before I die . ”

ID:	4584
INPUT:	Áko haadzíi'go ání , Ánihidishní , Azhą́ díí dadiiłheel nidi , tsé nidi hadadidoolwosh .
PRED:	Then he answered , “ I tell you , even though these people cry , they will cry out . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ If they kept quiet , the stones along the road would burst into cheers ! ”

ID:	4585
INPUT:	Tł'oh naadą́ą́' ts'ídá ałtso neest'ánígi át'éegosą́ bibadidíínáałgo yóó'ándi'doolnííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt go down to thy place , as a grain of grain , and shalt be gathered in thy place .
GOLD:	You will go to the grave at a ripe old age , like a sheaf of grain harvested at the proper time !

ID:	4586
INPUT:	éí nihijéí hada'ólníigo áyóle' , áádóó yá'át'ééh ádaahníiłgo índa saad yá'ádaat'éehii bee yádaałti'go nihidahoníłdzilgo ádanihóle' .
PRED:	that your heart may be full of heart , and that you may be able to do good and good words .
GOLD:	comfort you and strengthen you in every good thing you do and say .

ID:	4587
INPUT:	Áko iinéé' náázdiizts'ą́ą'go ánááhodi'ní , Diyin God ha'át'íhída hasht'eyiilaii éí t'áadoo t'áá bóhólníhígíí át'é bidiníní .
PRED:	Then a voice answered and said , “ Tell all the things that God has prepared for you . ”
GOLD:	But the voice spoke again : “ Do not call something unclean if God has made it clean . ”

ID:	4588
INPUT:	Néídab áádóó Abáíhu ádił asiih
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	The Sin of Nadab and Abihu

ID:	4589
INPUT:	Christ nilíinii ti'hooznii'go daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náádiidzáhígíí , éí t'áá ákónéehee ádzaago hazhó'ó bee bił hojilne'go bééhózingo ádajile' , áko ábijiní , Díí Jesus , bee nihił hweeshne'ígíí , éí Christ át'į́ .
PRED:	When Christ died , he was raised from the dead , he told them what he had done . He said to them , “ This is the Messiah Jesus . ”
GOLD:	He explained the prophecies and proved that the Messiah must suffer and rise from the dead . He said , “ This Jesus I 'm telling you about is the Messiah . ”

ID:	4590
INPUT:	éí bikéédę́ę́' Hoshéíyah áádóó Júdah bits'ą́ą́dóó naat'áanii danilíinii ałníí'dóó yinééł yił dah diiná ,
PRED:	and he took half of the princes of Judah , and of the princes of Judah , and with him ;
GOLD:	Hoshaiah and half the leaders of Judah followed them ,

ID:	4591
INPUT:	Da' danihizhé'é yę́ęésh ákódáát'įįd , áko nihiDiyin God doo yá'át'éhígi ánihííł'įįd índa díí kin haal'áhígi doo yá'át'éhígi áyííł'įįd , áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́ doo ílį́į́góó ádaohłéhígíí bee t'ah yówehgo t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'él'íinii Ízrel dine'é bik'ijį' ádaohłééh .
PRED:	Have you done this to our father , so that he has done evil to us , and has done evil in this city , and have done evil in the day of his fierce anger against the children of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Was n't it just this sort of thing that your ancestors did that caused our God to bring all this trouble upon us and our city ? Now you are bringing even more wrath upon Israel by permitting the Sabbath to be desecrated in this way ! ”

ID:	4592
INPUT:	Áko Ábner t'ą́ą́' nídéét'į́į'go hoołtsą́ągo áhodííniid , Niísh Éísahel ánít'į́ ? Áko ázhdííniid , Aoo' , shí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	When Abner saw him , he said to him , “ Are you Joab ? ” He answered , “ I am . ”
GOLD:	When Abner looked back and saw him coming , he called out , “ Is that you , Asahel ? ” “ Yes , it is , ” he replied .

ID:	4593
INPUT:	Ninahjį' nihi'ana'í ni'jį' naa'adahoyii'nííł . Anaa' danihił'íinii nízhi' binahjį' bik'i nideiikai .
PRED:	We will fight against our enemies ; we will fight against your name in battle .
GOLD:	Only by your power can we push back our enemies ; only in your name can we trample our foes .

ID:	4594
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' diné yich'į' hadanáádzáago diyingo diné ats'éidiní'ą́ , índa dabi'éé' deizgis .
PRED:	And Moses went up from the mountain , and lifted up the people from the mountain , and washed their clothes .
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people . He consecrated them for worship , and they washed their clothes .

ID:	4595
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nibee yisdá'iildéehii bíká shił chohoo'į́ , áádóó nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bi'iishłaa .
PRED:	I hope in your salvation , O Lord , and I have done your commandments .
GOLD:	I long for your rescue , Lord , so I have obeyed your commands .

ID:	4596
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' díí baa hodoolzhish : Záíyandi nidahaasdzí'ígíí áádóó Jerúsalemgi t'ah kéédahat'ínígíí diyin dabidi'níi doo , áádóó Jerúsalemgi t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Diyin God binaaltsoos biyi' házhi' daasdzohígíí ákódahodi'níi doo .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , that the remnant of Jerusalem shall be called by their gods , and every one that dwell in Jerusalem shall be called in the book of God .
GOLD:	All who remain in Zionwill be a holy people — those who survive the destruction of Jerusalemand are recorded among the living .

ID:	4597
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá háiida yíł'aadii bich'į' k'éznídzinígíí éí shich'į' k'éznídzin , índa t'áá háiida shich'į' k'éznídzinígíí éí shiníł'a'ii ałdó' bich'į' k'éznídzin .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , whoever hates me hates me hates me , and he who sent me .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , anyone who welcomes my messenger is welcoming me , and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming the Father who sent me . ”

ID:	4598
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ha'át'íí biniyé doo deeghánídi honílǫ́ ? Shich'į' náhodii'náahgo ha'át'íí biniyé nínádít'į́į́h ?
PRED:	Lord , why are you far off ? Why do you come to me ? Why do you bring back to me ?
GOLD:	O Lord , why do you stand so far away ? Why do you hide when I am in trouble ?

ID:	4599
INPUT:	Nit'íinii bee Bóhólníihii nił nilį́įgo baa hidí'aah ; nínáníłt'į́hígíí t'áá át'é áłtsé neest'áanii Bóhólníihii baa hidí'aah .
PRED:	Give us your riches to the Lord , and give us all the fruit of the field .
GOLD:	Honor the Lord with your wealthand with the best part of everything you produce .

ID:	4600
INPUT:	Deiniidláanii bína'niltin doo bééhózin da yę́ę éí ts'ídá doo naaki nilį́į́góó ayóó át'éii át'é : Diyin God éí ats'íís silį́į'go yit'íní ályaa , Níłch'i Diyinii bee ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'é ho'doo'niid , áádóó diyingo nidaal'a'ii dahoołtsą́ , ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó haa hóóne' , nihokáa'gi ho'doosdląądgo ha'oosdlíí' , yá'ąąshdi adinílííd biyi'jį' náho'diiltį́ .
PRED:	This is the glory of the faith that was not known in the body of God , which was revealed to the flesh of the Holy Spirit , and he was given to the angels in heaven ,
GOLD:	Without question , this is the great mystery of our faith : Christ was revealed in a human bodyand vindicated by the Spirit.He was seen by angelsand announced to the nations.He was believed in throughout the worldand taken to heaven in glory .

ID:	4601
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii a'ohgo í'diilyaago Bóhólníihii hashké niidzį́į'ii łahgo ánáyiidlaago t'áadoo ałtso áhásdįįd da , áádóó Júdah kéyahgi ałdó' yá'ádahoot'ééh nídahasdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the Lord hath made the humble and destroyed them , and they have done good in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	Because Rehoboam humbled himself , the Lord 's anger was turned away , and he did not destroy him completely . There were still some good things in the land of Judah .

ID:	4602
INPUT:	Táir hoolyéii bich'é'é , t'áá éí agháago da'at'íinii nihich'ozhdooniił danízingo deit'íinii naa deidiyoonił .
PRED:	The people of Tyre will come to you , O Tyre , to the east side of Tyre .
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	4603
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán biyi'di t'áá nahonit'inee shits'íís shá hadilnééh yę́ędą́ą́' nił bééhózingo doo nits'ąą nanil'in da nít'éé' .
PRED:	When you saw my body in the world , you would hide my body from the face of the earth .
GOLD:	You watched me as I was being formed in utter seclusion , as I was woven together in the dark of the womb .

ID:	4604
INPUT:	Da' asdzáníísh be'awéé' biłt'o'ii t'áá yeidiyoonah , áko biyáázh yishchíiniísh doo yaa a'ááh nízin da ? Aoo' , éí shį́į́ yaa deidiyoonah , nidi shí éí ts'ídá doo neidiyeeshnah da .
PRED:	Will the child forget the child 's child , and will she not forget his son ? They will forget him , but I will not forget him .
GOLD:	“ Never ! Can a mother forget her nursing child ? Can she feel no love for the child she has borne ? But even if that were possible , I would not forget you !

ID:	4605
INPUT:	T'áá nahalzhiishee ła' dine'é kééhat'į́ , éí doodaii' bee óhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ą́dóó nahjį' hahodeeshnił áádóó doo da'jílį́į́góó ádahodeeshłíiłgo atíhodeeshłííł , dishníigo baa yáshti'go ,
PRED:	If I say to a nation , ‘ I will take away from the kingdom , or from the kingdom , and I will punish them . '
GOLD:	If I announce that a certain nation or kingdom is to be uprooted , torn down , and destroyed ,

ID:	4606
INPUT:	Be'ełtį́į́' yiyiiłtaazgo k'aa' bee doolkahii nishłį́įgo áshiilaa .
PRED:	He made his bow to his bow , and he made me a arrows .
GOLD:	He has drawn his bowand made me the target for his arrows .

ID:	4607
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' ahigą́ągo biniinaa asdzání yiltsánígíí atíyiilaago áádóó bitsą́ha'íí'éelgo , nidi asdzánígíí éí t'áadoo ádzaaígóogo t'áá aaníí bik'é ninázh'doodlééł ; asdzání bahastiin áádóó ándahwii'aahii yee nihoní'ánígíí bik'ehgo ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	If a man sins against a man , he shall punish the woman , and she shall not pay her on her head , but the woman shall pay her , and her husband shall pay her according to the commandment of her husband .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose two men are fighting , and in the process they accidentally strike a pregnant woman so she gives birth prematurely . If no further injury results , the man who struck the woman must pay the amount of compensation the woman 's husband demands and the judges approve .

ID:	4608
INPUT:	Nídanooskango yisdéínínil ; naa dadzólíí nít'éé' , áko t'áadoo baa yádahóósįįd da .
PRED:	They cried out to you , and they trusted in you , and they did not be ashamed .
GOLD:	They cried out to you and were saved.They trusted in you and were never disgraced .

ID:	4609
INPUT:	Tíímandę́ę́' Diyin God honíle' , áádóó Dził Péíran hoolyéédę́ę́' Diyin Nilíinii níyá . SíilahYee ayóó át'éii éí yót'ááh hiníláii yik'i dah yiskaad , áádóó nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́góó bee baa ha'niih .
PRED:	O God , thou hast come up from the mount of Olives , O God , and hast cast his glory upon heaven , and hath cast his glory upon the earth , and the glory of the earth .
GOLD:	I see God moving across the deserts from Edom , the Holy One coming from Mount Paran.His brilliant splendor fills the heavens , and the earth is filled with his praise .

ID:	4610
INPUT:	Zanówah , Engánim , Tapúwah , Íínam ,
PRED:	And we said unto him , O thrown out , saying ,
GOLD:	Zanoah , En-gannim , Tappuah , Enam ,

ID:	4611
INPUT:	Áko Jéíkab hazhé'é Áízak bíighah nizhníyáago hódeesnii'go ání , Bizhí la' éí Jéíkab bizhí ; bíla' éí Íísa bíla' .
PRED:	And Jacob came near to Isaac his father , and said , “ Jacob 's hand is Esau 's hand . ”
GOLD:	So Jacob went closer to his father , and Isaac touched him . “ The voice is Jacob 's , but the hands are Esau 's , ” Isaac said .

ID:	4612
INPUT:	Áádóó nihe'oodlą' bee Christ nihijéí yii' hólǫ́ǫ doo , áko ayóó'ó'ó'ní bii' nihihétł'óól dahólǫ́ǫgo índa t'áá éí atł'ááh nástł'in nahalingo danołdzil doogo nihá sodiszin ,
PRED:	And in faith your hearts shall be in your hearts , and in love , and in love , and for your doors ,
GOLD:	Then Christ will make his home in your hearts as you trust in him . Your roots will grow down into God 's love and keep you strong .

ID:	4613
INPUT:	Háálá Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Kin áádóó kédaayah índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'éédadilyééhgóó éí díí kéyah bii' ninádahaniih doo .
PRED:	For thus saith the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , saying , In the land , and in the vineyards , and in the vineyards , and in the land .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Someday people will again own property here in this land and will buy and sell houses and vineyards and fields . ' ”

ID:	4614
INPUT:	Áko Jiihó'ahaz biye' Jiihó'ash éí Házeiyel biye' Ben-héídad éí kin hadaas'á hazhé'é Jiihó'ahaz anaa' bee yílák'eedóó hayíínilígíí bílák'ee háájoo'nil . Jó'ash táadi hak'eh nídeesdlį́į'go Ízrel dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígíí nínázhdii'nil .
PRED:	And Joash the son of Joash , the son of Joash , was in the hand of his father Ahaz , and delivered him into the hand of Ahaz his father , in the hand of Ahaz his father 's hand , and he gave them the cities of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Jehoash son of Jehoahaz recaptured from Ben-hadad son of Hazael the towns that had been taken from Jehoash 's father , Jehoahaz . Jehoash defeated Ben-hadad on three occasions , and he recovered the Israelite towns .

ID:	4615
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áádóó dashdiiyáago Táir índa Sáídan kéyah bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' ajííyá .
PRED:	Jesus left and went into the region of Tyre and Sidon .
GOLD:	Then Jesus left Galilee and went north to the region of Tyre and Sidon .

ID:	4616
INPUT:	náá'iiłniihii doogáałgo yidínóoł'įįł , áko jó , naałniih kin góne' k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizh lágo éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii kin góne' hólǫ́ ; éí t'óó baa'ih .
PRED:	And the priest shall look at him , and behold , the plague is in the house , and the plague is unclean in the house ; it is unclean .
GOLD:	the priest must return and inspect the house again . If he finds that the mildew has spread , the walls are clearly contaminated with a serious mildew , and the house is defiled .

ID:	4617
INPUT:	Áko hííłch'į'go hasht'ehodi'nééh bijį́ , jó , éí biiskání háá'áyį́į́h jį́ dooleełgo bąą ,
PRED:	And on the sabbath day , behold , it is the sabbath , that it may be a sabbath ,
GOLD:	This all happened on Friday , the day of preparation , the day before the Sabbath . As evening approached ,

ID:	4618
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Sálaman biye' Riihobówam éí Júdah dine'é yinant'á . Riihobówam éí dízdiindóó ba'aan t'ááłá'í binááhaigo hodeez'ą́ áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bitahdóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áhígíí éí Bóhólníihii náhodii'ánígíí bízhi' bee wójíi dooleełígi tsosts'idts'áadah nááhaijį' nant'áá nít'éé' . Bimá éí Áman dine'é ła' nilį́įgo Néíyamah wolyéé nít'éé' .
PRED:	At that time Rehoboam the son of Rehoboam began to reign over Judah . Rehoboam was forty years old when he had chosen him to be called the name of the Lord in Jerusalem for twelve years . He was the name of the children of Ammon .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Rehoboam son of Solomon was king in Judah . He was forty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem , the city the Lord had chosen from among all the tribes of Israel as the place to honor his name . Rehoboam 's mother was Naamah , an Ammonite woman .

ID:	4619
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God éí Éíbraham yeidiní'áanii bohodoolníłígíí bich'į' hoolzhishgo , Ííjipgi Éíbraham bidine'é k'ee'ąą dínéest'ą́ągo t'óó ahayóí silį́į́' .
PRED:	But it came to pass in the time that God gave to Abraham , that there was many nations in Egypt .
GOLD:	“ As the time drew near when God would fulfill his promise to Abraham , the number of our people in Egypt greatly increased .

ID:	4620
INPUT:	Hazíírathdóó dah náádii'náago Ríthmah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out from there , and camped at Beersheba .
GOLD:	They left Hazeroth and camped at Rithmah .

ID:	4621
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniihí bá béésh łitsoii ałnáshizhoozhgo bikáá' at'eesí áyiilaa ; bikáá' náá'iiniihí bidáa'gi ahééní'áhídóó yaago a <unk> gi béésh łitsoii ałnáshizhoozhgo bikáá' at'eesí dah si'ą́ągo áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he made an altar of brass , and he made it to the altar ; and he made it a cubit round about to the altar .
GOLD:	Next he made a bronze grating and installed it halfway down the side of the altar , under the ledge .

ID:	4622
INPUT:	Áko Kéínan hwíídíiską́ą́dóó náhást'éidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan neeznáá honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	And all the days of Canaan were one hundred and thirty years , and he died .
GOLD:	Kenan lived 910 years , and then he died .

ID:	4623
INPUT:	Mk . 16 : 1-8
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Purpose of the Book

ID:	4624
INPUT:	Asdzání hahastiin hólóonii hahastiin hináago bee haz'áanii yee hótą' , nidi hahastiin hats'ą́ą́' daaztsą́ągo bee haz'áanii bits'ą́ąjį' hwéédíchi' .
PRED:	The woman who has a husband who has a husband , but if her husband has heard the law , she has been cut off from the law .
GOLD:	For example , when a woman marries , the law binds her to her husband as long as he is alive . But if he dies , the laws of marriage no longer apply to her .

ID:	4625
INPUT:	Hanáá' atíyiilaago bidiníná bináá' atínízhdoodlííł , índa hawoo' atíyiilaago biwoo' atínízhdoodlííł , ha'níí nít'ée'go dasidoots'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	If you have heard that he will punish his eye , he will punish his teeth , and he will punish his teeth .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says the punishment must match the injury : ‘ An eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth . '

ID:	4626
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Ákoshą' háí ba'ahódlíigo índa hóyą́ągo aa áhályáanii nilį́ , éí binanit'a'í bighan haz'ą́ągi nidaakaígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá áajį' anáhwiilzhíishgo yaná'áltso' doo biniyé nibidi'dooltééł ?
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ Who is faithful and wise and wise , who is in the house of the master 's house , to give them all the days ? ”
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ A faithful , sensible servant is one to whom the master can give the responsibility of managing his other household servants and feeding them .

ID:	4627
INPUT:	Háálá dóola bidił , doodaii' tł'ízí bidił éí bąąhági át'éii doo ąąh tááyógis át'ée da .
PRED:	For it is not clean for the blood of the bull , or for the sin of the goats , and for the sin of the sin .
GOLD:	For it is not possible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins .

ID:	4628
INPUT:	Náánáła' diyingo naal'a'í , éí kǫ' bee bóhólníihii nilį́įgo , bikáá' náá'iiniihí yits'ą́ą́dóó ch'íníyá , áko bee iigéshí deeníigo dah yootį́łígíí yich'į' dilwoshgo kóní , Nibee iigéshí nídiitįįhgo nahasdzáán bikáá'góó ch'il na'atł'o'ii bineest'ą' áłah ánílééh , háálá éí daneest'ą́ .
PRED:	And another angel came out of the altar , and came out of the altar ; and he cried out to the servant , saying , “ Take your money , and gather the fruit of the earth . ”
GOLD:	Then another angel , who had power to destroy with fire , came from the altar . He shouted to the angel with the sharp sickle , “ Swing your sickle now to gather the clusters of grapes from the vines of the earth , for they are ripe for judgment . ”

ID:	4629
INPUT:	nibik'ehgo iináanii índa bee aa nánít'íinii bits' ániikaigo ádił nida'iyeelzíí' áádóó ts'ídá doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádeiit'įįd da índa ts'ídá doo yá'áshónígi ádeidzaago ádił nidaniiltee' .
PRED:	We have sinned against your precepts , and have sinned against you , and have sinned against evil and evil .
GOLD:	But we have sinned and done wrong . We have rebelled against you and scorned your commands and regulations .

ID:	4630
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii doo dajílį́į́góó doo shit'áahjį' dazhdookahgo shá nidazhdool'aał da , índa shidiyingo chodao'íinii éí t'áá íiyisí dadiyinígíí doo bit'áahjį' dazhdookah da , nidi t'óó bee haa yádahóósįįdii índa doo yildinígi ádajíít'įįdii bee hohodiit'i'go nidajikai doo .
PRED:	And they shall come near to me , and they shall not come near unto me , nor shall they come near to the holy things ; but they shall bear their shame , and their shame .
GOLD:	They may not approach me to minister as priests . They may not touch any of my holy things or the holy offerings , for they must bear the shame of all the detestable sins they have committed .

ID:	4631
INPUT:	Łį́į́' bee nidaohbaahii dadohbááh ; tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí bee nidaohbaahii at'ááh wohjeeh , áko diné dahayóii Iithiyópiya dine'é áádóó Líbiya dine'é éí naagé nideich'idii áádóó Lídiya dine'é éí ałtį́į́' nídayiiłtasgo nideich'idii náás dadoobah .
PRED:	Ye shall go out to battle with chariots , and with chariots , and with chariots , and with the men of Ethiopia , and with shields , and with them that are in battle ; and they shall go in battle .
GOLD:	Charge , you horses and chariots ; attack , you mighty warriors of Egypt ! Come , all you allies from Ethiopia , Libya , and Lydiawho are skilled with the shield and bow !

ID:	4632
INPUT:	Áko yanáalk'idjį' jiní'áazhgo , shoo , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii hadááh yíkai , áádóó Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii hak'i hoole'go éí bitahgi Diyin God bá hojoolne' .
PRED:	And when they came to the hill , behold , the Spirit of God came upon him , and he told God among them .
GOLD:	When Saul and his servant arrived at Gibeah , they saw a group of prophets coming toward them . Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he , too , began to prophesy .

ID:	4633
INPUT:	Tó ditáanii bik'i diilkǫ'go tségi át'éego táłtł'ááh níídee' .
PRED:	As a flood of water , and it was like a waters of water , and it was like the waters of water .
GOLD:	The deep waters gushed over them ; they sank to the bottom like a stone .

ID:	4634
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihik'ijidlíi doo , áádóó nihaa áhályą́ą doo ;
PRED:	The Lord will bless you , and he will be your shepherd .
GOLD:	‘ May the Lord bless youand protect you .

ID:	4635
INPUT:	éí danihizhé'é yę́ę Ííjip kéyah góyaa íínáago áádóó áadi kéédahwiit'į́įgo nízaad nihoolzhiizh , índa Ííjip dine'é éí ts'ídá doo ákwii ádanihííł'įįd da , áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę ałdó' ákódayííł'įįd ,
PRED:	And our fathers went down into Egypt , and dwelt there , and the land of Egypt , and the Egyptians did evil in us , and did as our fathers did .
GOLD:	Our ancestors went down to Egypt , and we lived there a long time , and we and our ancestors were brutally mistreated by the Egyptians .

ID:	4636
INPUT:	Héídid , Ziibówim , Niibálat ,
PRED:	Haman , Tobiah , Tobiah ,
GOLD:	Hadid , Zeboim , Neballat ,

ID:	4637
INPUT:	Haa'íshą' jį́įgo áhát'ínígíí beełt'éego hazhó'ó ádeii'níił doo , t'áadoo adlą́ baa nideiikaií , t'áadoo tó tsi'na'iiłáii deiidlání , t'áadoo ajił baa nideiikaií , t'áadoo baa'ihgo adádaniilníní , t'áadoo ahináádadiijahí , índa t'áadoo da'ahiilch'į́dí dooleeł .
PRED:	Let us do what we want to do . Let us do n't think we do . We do n't think that we do wrong . We do n't think that we do wrong . We do n't think that we are wrong . We do n't want to do anything wrong .
GOLD:	Because we belong to the day , we must live decent lives for all to see . Do n't participate in the darkness of wild parties and drunkenness , or in sexual promiscuity and immoral living , or in quarreling and jealousy .

ID:	4638
INPUT:	Jó , diné t'áá bí anishłį́ nízinígíí éí doo Bóhólníihii bee lą́ ałeeh da , nidi Bóhólníihii bił ajílínígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	For it is not a man who wants to be his own , but the one who loves the Lord is not the one who is with him .
GOLD:	When people commend themselves , it does n't count for much . The important thing is for the Lord to commend them .

ID:	4639
INPUT:	Díí bik'ehgo ádíílííł : náásee dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindi ké siláago naaniigo tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan ashdladi ké siláago , índa dego éí dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdladi ké siláago ádíílííł .
PRED:	This is what you shall do : four hundred and fifty cubits , and fifty cubits , and fifty cubits .
GOLD:	Make the boat 450 feet long , 75 feet wide , and 45 feet high .

ID:	4640
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nik'é niná'ídláii áádóó iishch'id biyi'di hasht'eniilaii ání , Shí Bóhólníihii t'áá ałtsoní áyiilaii áádóó yádiłhił t'áá sáhí k'íísts'ǫ́ǫdii índa nahasdzáán niiníłkaadii nishłį́ ;
PRED:	I am the Lord of hosts , who created you in the womb , who created you in the womb , who created you , who made heaven and earth .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer and Creator : “ I am the Lord , who made all things.I alone stretched out the heavens.Who was with mewhen I made the earth ?

ID:	4641
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshónígi ánáádáát'įįd . Áko Mó'ab kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Églan wolyéii Bóhólníihii bidziil ábiilaago Ízrel dine'é atíyiilaa , háálá Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshónígi ádajíít'įįd .
PRED:	And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord . And he made him strong in the hand of the king of Moab , because they did evil in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	Once again the Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight , and the Lord gave King Eglon of Moab control over Israel because of their evil .

ID:	4642
INPUT:	K'ad ánísht'éhígíí éí Diyin God shaa jooba'go ánísht'é , áko bibee ajooba' sheidiní'ánígíí doo t'áá ádzaaí silį́į' da , háálá daal'aadii t'áá ałtso biláahgo nisis'a' , nidi t'áá shí éí dooda , jó , Diyin God bibee ajooba' shił hólǫ́ǫgo nisis'a' .
PRED:	Now I have mercy on God , and I have not received the grace that he gave to me , because I have served all the apostles , but I have been with the grace of God .
GOLD:	But whatever I am now , it is all because God poured out his special favor on me — and not without results . For I have worked harder than any of the other apostles ; yet it was not I but God who was working through me by his grace .

ID:	4643
INPUT:	Áko hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , Nimá índa nitsilíké daniidiiltsééł danízingo tł'óo'di naazį́ .
PRED:	They told him , “ Your mother and your brothers stood outside , and we will see you . ”
GOLD:	Someone told Jesus , “ Your mother and your brothers are standing outside , and they want to see you . ”

ID:	4644
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso dazdiizts'ą́'ígíí éí kót'é : Diyin God díínísin , áádóó bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bik'eh honíł'į́ , háálá díí diné t'áá ałtso bee bá haz'ą́ .
PRED:	This is what you have heard : fear God , and keep his commandments ; for this is the law of all this people .
GOLD:	That 's the whole story . Here now is my final conclusion : Fear God and obey his commands , for this is everyone 's duty .

ID:	4645
INPUT:	Nidi Peter ádahóót'įįdígíí hazhó'ó ałkéé' niinínilgo yaa aho'niilne'go ání :
PRED:	But Peter took all the things that had been done , and said ,
GOLD:	Then Peter told them exactly what had happened .

ID:	4646
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' łahgo át'éego diné nidilt'é atiingóó yi'ashgo , bich'į' yit'íní ánáázh'diilyaa .
PRED:	And it came to pass , after that , that he appeared unto all the people in the way , saying ,
GOLD:	Afterward he appeared in a different form to two of his followers who were walking from Jerusalem into the country .

ID:	4647
INPUT:	Áko doodlį́įłii néidiiką́ągo sodoolzingo yaa ahééh niizį́į'go ádííniid , Díí nídadoohkaah áádóó ałtah dohkaahgo daahdlą́ ,
PRED:	And when he had taken the cup , he gave thanks to them , saying , “ Take this and drink . ”
GOLD:	Then he took a cup of wine and gave thanks to God for it . Then he said , “ Take this and share it among yourselves .

ID:	4648
INPUT:	Shich'iyą' , éí ak'áán áádóó áliv bik'ah índa tsés'ná bitł'izh éí naa hidish'aahgo na'iis<unk> dii łikání halchin biniyé bidááhdóó nidasíníką́ ; ts'ídá ákwíindzaa , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	“ My food , my food , and honey , and honey , before you , that you may see it , ” says the Lord God .
GOLD:	Imagine it ! You set before them as a sacrifice the choice flour , olive oil , and honey I had given you , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	4649
INPUT:	Áádóó bił ałghada'désht'ą́ągo hóyée'go há haasdzíí' , áádóó ła' hataa'síłts'ingo hatsii' hadaháłdláád índa doo ákónáádazhdoo'nííłgóó Diyin God bee ádee hadadziisdzíi'go áhodííniid , Nihitsi'ké éí dabiye'ké doo baa dahidoohnił da índa dabitsi'ké éí danihiye'ké doo baa dahidoohnił da , áádóó t'áá nihí nidi doo ádá shódeidoołt'eeł da .
PRED:	And I made a covenant with them , and gave it to them , and gave it to them , saying , “ You shall not give your daughters and daughters , and you shall not give your daughters , but you shall not take your daughters and your daughters . ”
GOLD:	So I confronted them and called down curses on them . I beat some of them and pulled out their hair . I made them swear in the name of God that they would not let their children intermarry with the pagan people of the land .

ID:	4650
INPUT:	Ídahooł'aahii ła' Sesaríyadę́ę́' ałdó' bił niikai , Sáíprasdóó t'áá ałk'idą́ą́' íhooł'aahii jílíinii , Néísan joolyéii , ha'ałk'ee naháatą́ą doo biniyé hoł yah iikai .
PRED:	And the disciples took him with him at Caesarea , and Cyprus , the disciple of Cyprus , the disciple of Cyprus , to dwell with him .
GOLD:	Some believers from Caesarea accompanied us , and they took us to the home of Mnason , a man originally from Cyprus and one of the early believers .

ID:	4651
INPUT:	Job t'áadoo bił bééhózinii yaa yáłti'áádóó bizaad hódzą́ bąąh ádin .
PRED:	Job does not know his words , and wisdom is not able to know his words .
GOLD:	‘ Job speaks out of ignorance ; his words lack insight . '

ID:	4652
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yikéé' dah didookah . Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ání nahalingo yéego áníi doo ; t'áá aaníí , yéego áníigo e'e'aahdę́ę́' Ízrel dine'é bitah dahoditłidgo ninádahidookah .
PRED:	They shall follow the Lord , like a lion ; yea , the cry of a lion shall cry out , and the children of Israel shall tremble .
GOLD:	For someday the people will follow me.I , the Lord , will roar like a lion.And when I roar , my people will return trembling from the west .

ID:	4653
INPUT:	Nihitahdóó halne'ii ła' hazdoodzihgo áho'diilyaago éí shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii hahoyííłdzíi' doo ; hach'į' k'ídideeshchiłgo shidine'é Ízrel bits'ą́ąjį' áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	If a prophet comes from among you , I , the Lord , have spoken to you , I will cut off my hand from Israel .
GOLD:	“ ‘ And if a prophet is deceived into giving a message , it is because I , the Lord , have deceived that prophet . I will lift my fist against such prophets and cut them off from the community of Israel .

ID:	4654
INPUT:	Dóola yázhí índa deenásts'aa' bik'ahígíí áádóó bitsee' neesk'ahígíí áádóó bitsą́ siláí bąąh ak'ahígíí , bitsą́ áshk'azhí áádóó azid bíighahgi ak'ahígíí
PRED:	the bull , the fat , the fat , the fat , the kidneys , the kidneys , and the kidneys that is on the liver , and the kidneys that is on the liver ,
GOLD:	Then he took the fat of the bull and the ram — the fat of the broad tail and from around the internal organs — along with the kidneys and the long lobes of the livers .

ID:	4655
INPUT:	Eda'alyaii , doodaii' naashk'aazhgo eda'alyaii t'áadoo ádá ádaoł'íní , doodaii' eda'alyaii adadoohtsihda , doodaii' nihikéyahgi bich'į' yaa áńdaoht'įįh doo biniyé tsé bee e'elyaii doo adadoohtsih da ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	You shall not make an image of idols or idols , nor shall you take it up to the idols of your land , nor shall you bow down to the idols of your land ; I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not make idols or set up carved images , or sacred pillars , or sculptured stones in your land so you may worship them . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	4656
INPUT:	áádóó Társhish kin haal'áii bitsinaa'eeł t'áá át'é áádóó nidaashch'ąą'go da'ílíinii t'áá át'é hak'idiyaa dooleeł .
PRED:	And he shall give thee all the ships of Tyre , and all the vessels thereof shall come upon thee .
GOLD:	He will destroy all the great trading shipsand every magnificent vessel .

ID:	4657
INPUT:	Ha'át'íida nihił yá'át'éehgo t'áadoo nihits'ą́ą́' nichǫ́'ógo ádaahłíiłii baa yáti'í .
PRED:	Do n't stop doing good things , but do n't speak evil .
GOLD:	Then you will not be criticized for doing something you believe is good .

ID:	4658
INPUT:	Áádę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezhgo kéyah yiih nihidoo'ish ; éí kéyah nihaididoo'áałgo danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' .
PRED:	And when he brought you out of the land , he shall bring you into the land which he swore to your fathers .
GOLD:	He brought us out of Egypt so he could give us this land he had sworn to give our ancestors .

ID:	4659
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí nahasdzáán yideelchidgo ałtso diłhį́įhgo áádóó nihokáa'gi kéédahat'íinii t'áá ałtso yínííł danilį́įgo ííł'į́ . Ííjip kéyahdi Náil tooh nílíní góyaa ayóó át'éego tooh wó'ądadziiłhaał áádóó tó yaa ná'nool'ąął nahalingo nihokáá' ákóhodoonííł .
PRED:	The Lord , the God of hosts , has stretched out his hand over the earth , and all the inhabitants of the earth will mourn like the waters of Egypt , like the waters of the river .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , touches the land and it melts , and all its people mourn.The ground rises like the Nile River at floodtime , and then it sinks again .

ID:	4660
INPUT:	Zerábabel t'áá bí díí kin bii' sohodizin bitł'ááh nástł'iní áyiilaa áádóó éí ałdó' t'áá bí ts'ídá ałtso íidoolííł . Ákohgo éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii naa shiníł'a'go nił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	Zerubbabel built the foundation of this temple , and he will do all that he will do . Then you will know that the Lord Almighty sent me .
GOLD:	“ Zerubbabel is the one who laid the foundation of this Temple , and he will complete it . Then you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent me .

ID:	4661
INPUT:	Háálá John éí t'áá aaníí tó yee asį́į́h nít'éé' , nidi kodóó t'áadoo lą'í yiłkaahí Níłch'i Diyinii bee nihidi'doolzįh .
PRED:	For John was baptized with him , but he was not able to be baptized with the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	John baptized with water , but in just a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit . ”

ID:	4662
INPUT:	áko éí nizhdilt'éhígíí ats'íís t'ááłá'í jidooleeł . Áádóó bik'ijį' doo t'áá ał'ąą da , nidi ats'íís t'ááłá'í jileeh .
PRED:	and the body shall be one body ; and it shall not be one body , but one body shall be one .
GOLD:	and the two are united into one . ' Since they are no longer two but one ,

ID:	4663
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman éí tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii áłah áyiilaa , áko t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan dį́įdi neeznádiingo tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó naakits'áadahdi miilgo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii , díí éí bá hasht'edahodít'éego kin hadaas'áágóó niyiiznil , áádóó Jerúsalemgi aláahgo naat'áanii binaashiigóó ła' niinínil .
PRED:	Solomon gathered his chariots and chariots and chariots , and he set them in the cities of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Solomon built up a huge force of chariots and horses . He had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses . He stationed some of them in the chariot cities and some near him in Jerusalem .

ID:	4664
INPUT:	Jórdan tooh nílíní biláahdi wónaaníjí nihik'éí bił kéyah doo ła' nihíí' dooleeł da , háálá t'áá kwe'é Jórdan tooh nílíní ha'a'aahjígo nihikéyah dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	There shall not be any inheritance with you on the other side of the Jordan , for the land of the Jordan was in the east side of the Jordan .
GOLD:	But we do not claim any of the land on the other side of the Jordan . We would rather live here on the east side and accept this as our grant of land . ”

ID:	4665
INPUT:	Da'ooyą́ą' nidi , doo hwiih dadohłeeł da áádóó t'áá dichin danihiiłhée doo áádóó t'áadoo le'é hasht'e'nidasooláa nidi , doo áá dasoohsįįd da doo índa hasht'e'nidasooláhígíí diltłish bee nihighadadoolyééł .
PRED:	But you eat , and you will be filled , and you will be hungry , and you will be hungry , but you will be taken away by the sword .
GOLD:	You will eat but never have enough.Your hunger pangs and emptiness will remain.And though you try to save your money , it will come to nothing in the end.You will save a little , but I will give it to those who conquer you .

ID:	4666
INPUT:	Bee shaa ha'niihii ałtso shąąh néíst'įįd ; bee shéého'dílzinii shaa néidiidlá .
PRED:	He has forgotten my covenant ; He has taken my holy things from me .
GOLD:	He has stripped me of my honorand removed the crown from my head .

ID:	4667
INPUT:	Háálá shinaagóó t'óó hóyé'ígi ádaaníigo t'óó ahayóí ałjeeh nídanilniihgo diits'a' ; shindahagizgo áádóó t'áá nahont'inee shizéé' nideii'áago ahínéikah .
PRED:	For many have heard my words , and they have turned against me , and they have set my mouth in secret place .
GOLD:	I have heard the many rumors about me , and I am surrounded by terror.My enemies conspire against me , plotting to take my life .

ID:	4668
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bidiyingo naal'a'í áhodííniid , Atsį' áádóó díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii nídiiníiłgo díí tsé'éłkáa'gi ninínííł , índa bik'ijį' atoo' yaidííził . Áádóó ákójiilaa .
PRED:	Then the angel of God said to him , “ Take the flesh and unleavened bread , and put it on this rock , and put it on the rock . ”
GOLD:	The angel of God said to him , “ Place the meat and the unleavened bread on this rock , and pour the broth over it. ” And Gideon did as he was told .

ID:	4669
INPUT:	áádóó índa ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́įhii índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii éí hodiyingo haz'ánígi choo'į́į dooleełígíí ádazhdoolííł ; bee nich'į' haasdzí'ígíí t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo ádajit'į́į doo .
PRED:	and the oil , and the anointing oil , and the incense , shall be for the sanctuary , according to all that I have commanded .
GOLD:	the anointing oil ; the fragrant incense for the Holy Place.The craftsmen must make everything as I have commanded you . ”

ID:	4670
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh nínízinii bik'ehgo shiinéé' shá diits'į́į́h ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , bee nihodiyíní'áanii bik'ehgo náshiiłnaah .
PRED:	Listen to me according to thy mercy , O Lord , according to thy statutes , according to thy statutes .
GOLD:	In your faithful love , O Lord , hear my cry ; let me be revived by following your regulations .

ID:	4671
INPUT:	Áádóó niye' nilíinii índa biye' náánídlíinii díí bee bił hólne' doo : Ííjip kéyahgi baa niséyáhígíí índa bee éédahózinii hatahgóó ádaashłaaígíí , áko éí bee shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nił bééhózin doo .
PRED:	“ Speak to your son and your son , and to your son , saying , ‘ I have done in Egypt , and you will know that I am the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	I 've also done it so you can tell your children and grandchildren about how I made a mockery of the Egyptians and about the signs I displayed among them — and so you will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	4672
INPUT:	Ákódzaago hwii' sizíinii hwii' haalyeedgo Benónai joolyée doo , jidííniid , háálá dadziztsą́ , nidi bizhé'é éí Bénjamin yidííniid .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that he called the soul of his soul , because he died , but he said to his father Benjamin .
GOLD:	Rachel was about to die , but with her last breath she named the baby Ben-oni ( which means “ son of my sorrow ” ) . The baby 's father , however , called him Benjamin ( which means “ son of my right hand ” ) .

ID:	4673
INPUT:	Haa léit'éego nidine'é dahayóii ni'jį' abi'diistł'ííd ? Doo bídazníłdzil da , háálá Bóhólníihii naa'ahwiiznil .
PRED:	How do the mighty nation cast down into the ground ? For the Lord is His great .
GOLD:	Why have your warriors fallen ? They can not stand , for the Lord has knocked them down .

ID:	4674
INPUT:	Méíyakah dine'é biye' Ahásbai biye' Iilífalet ałdó' , Gáílodóó dine'é Ahíthofel biye' Iiláíyim ałdó' ,
PRED:	The son of Abishai , son of Jehoiada , the son of Jehoiada , the son of Ahithophel ,
GOLD:	Eliphelet son of Ahasbai from Maacah ; Eliam son of Ahithophel from Giloh ;

ID:	4675
INPUT:	Éí baa hoolzhiizhgo Jesus yit'íní áhodi'doolnííł , éí haa ha'niih índa t'áá hó t'éiyá t'áá ałtsoní biNanit'a'í jílį́ , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii biNanit'a'í jílį́ , índa bídahólníihii bee Bóhólníihii jílį́ .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass at that time , that he is the King of all things , and he is king over all , and he is the Lord .
GOLD:	For , At just the right time Christ will be revealed from heaven by the blessed and only almighty God , the King of all kings and Lord of all lords .

ID:	4676
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' aláahgo naat'áanii éí yikáá'dóó nant'áii ayóó ánóolningo áívori wolyéii yee áyiilaa áádóó éí óola t'áá bízhání yik'íísti' .
PRED:	And the king made a great throne of pure gold , and overlaid it with pure gold .
GOLD:	Then the king made a huge throne , decorated with ivory and overlaid with pure gold .

ID:	4677
INPUT:	Áádóó díí t'áá ałtso bighą́ąhjį' ayóó'áda'ahíínóhní , háálá éí t'áá ałtsoní hadaałt'éego ahíyółtą' .
PRED:	And love one another , because all things are under all things .
GOLD:	Above all , clothe yourselves with love , which binds us all together in perfect harmony .

ID:	4678
INPUT:	Áko óola jaa' bighání'áhí jííkeedígíí éí shékel wolyéhígíí t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idi neeznádiin dah hidiidloh áádóó dah yiitą́ bida'alyaiida áádóó yoo'da índa Mídiyan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bi'éé' tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bóóltą'go áádóó bighą́ą́'ask'idii bizéédaazt'i' nít'é'ígíida .
PRED:	And the gold which he had gold , one thousand seven hundred and seven hundred shekels , and the yoke of the king of Midian , and the camels of Midian , and their camels .
GOLD:	The weight of the gold earrings was forty-three pounds , not including the royal ornaments and pendants , the purple clothing worn by the kings of Midian , or the chains around the necks of their camels .

ID:	4679
INPUT:	Nihitaasháádą́ą́' doo shidziil da nít'éé' , índa shił yée'go shitah hoditłid nít'éé' ,
PRED:	I was not strong in my youth , and the fear of me was afraid .
GOLD:	I came to you in weakness — timid and trembling .

ID:	4680
INPUT:	Bi'anada'ał'íinii t'áá bí bitsiidétáán bitsiits'iin bighá dasínísi' . Nááts'ó'oołdísiitsoh nahalingo tanihiidooghas biniyé shaatįįh náásą́ . T'áá nahont'inee badahojoobá'íii deildeełiigi át'éego bił nidahoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	He has cut off his spear with his spear , and he has cast me into a storm , like a storm , and the poor are glad in the morning .
GOLD:	With his own weapons , you destroyed the chief of thosewho rushed out like a whirlwind , thinking Israel would be easy prey .

ID:	4681
INPUT:	Ádíshnínígíí haleebee deísółts'ą́ą́' , áádóó bee nihił hashne'ígíí dadoohts'a' .
PRED:	Listen to my words , and hear what I say to you .
GOLD:	“ Listen closely to what I am about to say.Hear me out .

ID:	4682
INPUT:	Doodaii' asdzání ła' , béésh łigaii béeso neeznáá neijaahgo , nít'éé' ła' yóó'ayííłne'go , haash doonííł ? Ts'ídá bee hool'iní yididoołtłiłgo nínéidii'ą́ąjį' hazhó'ó nantáago kin góne' t'áá át'é nahodooshoh .
PRED:	Or a woman shall cast down ten silver , and they shall turn away , and shall burn it , and shall burn it in the third house .
GOLD:	“ Or suppose a woman has ten silver coins and loses one . Wo n't she light a lamp and sweep the entire house and search carefully until she finds it ?

ID:	4683
INPUT:	Ła' tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí t'éí yada'ólí , índa ła' éí łį́į́' t'éí yada'ólí , nidi nihí éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bízhi' baa dadzííníidlí .
PRED:	There are only one chariots , and another , but we trust in the name of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Some nations boast of their chariots and horses , but we boast in the name of the Lord our God .

ID:	4684
INPUT:	Áádóó łahjį' Ízrel dine'é áádóó nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é t'ááłá'í nítínígo Júdah kéyahgi t'áá ałtso kin hadaas'áágóó bíí' daazlį́į'gi kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	And the children of Israel , the priests , and the Levites , and all the Levites , dwelt in their cities .
GOLD:	The other priests , Levites , and the rest of the Israelites lived wherever their family inheritance was located in any of the towns of Judah .

ID:	4685
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é áłah nádleehii éí bidine'é doo nídanilyéesii naakits'áadahdi míilgo ákǫ́ǫ́ yida'iisnii'go yich'į' yee hadaasdzíi'go ádeidííniid , Nihílááh , Jéíbesh-gíliyadgi kéédahat'íinii , asdzání índa ba'áłchíní t'áá daabił diltłish bee nidaałtseed .
PRED:	And the children of Israel sent twelve thousand men of Israel , and said unto them , Go , and kill them with the sword , and with the sword .
GOLD:	So the assembly sent 12,000 of their best warriors to Jabesh-gilead with orders to kill everyone there , including women and children .

ID:	4686
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso t'áá aaníigo yaa halne'ígíí ání , T'áá aaníí tsį́įłgo nishááh ! T'áá ákót'ée doo . Lą́'ąą Bóhólníihii Jesus nínááh !
PRED:	All these things the truth said to the prophet , “ Amen ! Amen , Lord Jesus ! ”
GOLD:	He who is the faithful witness to all these things says , “ Yes , I am coming soon ! ” Amen ! Come , Lord Jesus !

ID:	4687
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaadóó biiskání Diyin God éí níłch'i doo yá'áshóonii Saul yik'ijį' yi'níłnii' ; Saul hakin góne' hak'i nááhoodle'go t'áá ádzaagóó yájíłti'go áhoolaa , áádóó David t'áá há niná'neeh yę́ęgi át'éego há nináánás'ne' . Saul éí bitsiidétáán anáhálghą́hígíí dah yootį́į́ł ,
PRED:	And it came to pass , on the next day , that the evil spirit of God came upon Saul , that he would put his hand on his house , and he put it on him ; and the spear of Saul was in his hand .
GOLD:	The very next day a tormenting spirit from God overwhelmed Saul , and he began to rave in his house like a madman . David was playing the harp , as he did each day . But Saul had a spear in his hand ,

ID:	4688
INPUT:	Bíká adoolwołígíí yíká dadilwosh nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo yisdábóníłí da ; Bóhólníihii yich'į' dadilwosh nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo bich'į' ééhoosįįd da .
PRED:	They cried out for help , but he did not save them ; they cried out to the Lord , but he did not answer them .
GOLD:	They called for help , but no one came to their rescue.They even cried to the Lord , but he refused to answer .

ID:	4689
INPUT:	Háishą' Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God wót'áahdi hólónígíí bił ahijíłt'é ?
PRED:	Who is the Lord your God who is in the sky ?
GOLD:	Who can be compared with the Lord our God , who is enthroned on high ?

ID:	4690
INPUT:	Kót'éego Abímelek doo yá'áshónígi ájíít'įįdígíí Diyin God k'ééhodiidlaa ; jó , hazhé'é bits'ą́ą́' hak'is tsosts'idiingo nidzistseedgo bąą ákóhoolaa .
PRED:	So Abimelech did what was evil , and God did to his father , because he had killed seven hundred brothers .
GOLD:	In this way , God punished Abimelech for the evil he had done against his father by murdering his seventy brothers .

ID:	4691
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Éíbraham yich'į' haadzíí' yę́ędą́ą́' náánáła' yiláahdi át'éii biniit'aa ádee hadidoodzihígíí t'áá ádingo biniinaa t'áá bí ádee hadoodzíí' ,
PRED:	God swore to Abraham , because he had made an oath to Abraham ,
GOLD:	For example , there was God 's promise to Abraham . Since there was no one greater to swear by , God took an oath in his own name , saying :

ID:	4692
INPUT:	Haa'íshą' nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo áádóó t'áá íiyisí nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo baa dahwii'niih doo ! Háálá Dibé Yázhí nilíinii adooyehjį' ahoolzhiizh , índa yá'dooyehii hasht'e'í'diilyaa .
PRED:	Let us rejoice and rejoice , and be glad ! For the Lamb is near , and the hour has come .
GOLD:	Let us be glad and rejoice , and let us give honor to him.For the time has come for the wedding feast of the Lamb , and his bride has prepared herself .

ID:	4693
INPUT:	Doo da'oodlání binááł dahonohsą́ągo dahinohnáago Christ bá ádaaht'į́įgo nihá ashja'ósinígíí ts'ídá hazhó'ó chodaoł'į́ .
PRED:	If you do not want to live in the sight of the church , you are not able to live in the sight of Christ .
GOLD:	Live wisely among those who are not believers , and make the most of every opportunity .

ID:	4694
INPUT:	Mary jichago áádóó Jew dine'é hoł yíkaígíí ałdó' daachago , Jesus yiyiiłtsą́ągo bii' sizíinii t'áá íiyisí bidiisnáa'go nitseeltłah ,
PRED:	When Mary and the Jews who were with him saw Jesus , he was very sad .
GOLD:	When Jesus saw her weeping and saw the other people wailing with her , a deep anger welled up within him , and he was deeply troubled .

ID:	4695
INPUT:	áádóó ábididííniił , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Ásaa' ííł'íní éí tó bee naat'áhí hashtł'ish yee áyiilaii ła'da yists'ilgo doo hasht'enáólne'ígi át'éego t'áá ákót'éego díí dine'é áádóó díí kin haal'áhígíí dideeshtah índa Tófetgi yóó'áda'alne' doo , háálá łahgóó doo nááhást'ą́ą da .
PRED:	and say unto them , Thus saith the Lord of hosts , As a potter that hath made a potter of clay , so shall it not be poured out like a potter of clay , and as a potter , for there shall be no more in the city .
GOLD:	Then say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : As this jar lies shattered , so I will shatter the people of Judah and Jerusalem beyond all hope of repair . They will bury the bodies here in Topheth , the garbage dump , until there is no more room for them .

ID:	4696
INPUT:	Ákohgo nihizhé'é yę́ę Éíbraham tooh wónaanídi náhodiiłtį́įgo Kéínan kéyah biyi' t'áá át'é hoł tádíí'áázh , áádóó ha'áłchíní k'ee'ąą noot'į́įłgo áshłaa . Áko <unk> zak haye' dooleełgo haa níłtį́ ,
PRED:	Then Abraham took him away from the river , and brought him to all the land of Canaan ; and I gave him his son Isaac .
GOLD:	But I took your ancestor Abraham from the land beyond the Euphrates and led him into the land of Canaan . I gave him many descendants through his son Isaac .

ID:	4697
INPUT:	Wót'ááhdę́ę́' bee da'dinídíinii doo nihik'i da'diiłdííngóó ádeeshłííł , áko nihikéyahgi chahałheełgo ádeeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	I will make you light from heaven , and I will make darkness in your land , ” says the Lord God .
GOLD:	I will darken the bright stars overheadand cover your land in darkness.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	4698
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí nihoyíníihgoínda yáníłti'go nił nihoozhǫǫhgo áńdoolííł .
PRED:	He will make you glad , and you will make you glad .
GOLD:	He will once again fill your mouth with laughterand your lips with shouts of joy .

ID:	4699
INPUT:	Jó , díí bik'eh ó'oo'níił ii díí jį́ nihich'į' bee haasdziihígíí éí doo nihá nantł'a da , doodaii' doo nihits'ą́ądi nízaadi hólǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For this day I speak to you today , and not far from you , nor far from you .
GOLD:	“ This command I am giving you today is not too difficult for you , and it is not beyond your reach .

ID:	4700
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizindóó tł'óo'di naakigo haz'ánígíí bii' yádiłhił bii' dahiníláii t'áá ałtso bikáá' nááda'iiniihí yá ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And they built altars in the house of the Lord , in the midst of the house of the Lord , in the midst of the heavens .
GOLD:	He built these altars for all the powers of the heavens in both courtyards of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	4701
INPUT:	ShiDiyin God t'áá ákogi é'ét'é shá nílíinii , nánooshkąąhgo shich'į' ééhonísįįh ! Tsístł'asíyá yę́ędą́ą́' hááshííníłtį́ . Shaa jiiníbaahgo shisodizin diits'į́į́h .
PRED:	O my God , my God , I call upon thee , and thou hast delivered me in the day of my distress ; hear my prayer .
GOLD:	Answer me when I call to you , O God who declares me innocent.Free me from my troubles.Have mercy on me and hear my prayer .

ID:	4702
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é bikéyah doo bits'ą́ąjį' kónááhodeeshdlíił da ; éí danizhé'é yę́ę bee bá nihoní'ą́ ; bee haz'áanii t'áá át'é áádóó bee nihoyí'áanii índa bik'eh hoogáałii bik'ehgo Mózes binahjį' hach'į' bee haasdzíi'ii t'áá át'é hazhó'ó baa dahojíyą́ągo dahojíł'į́į́ ládą́ą́' .
PRED:	And I will not turn away from the land of Israel , which I have given to your fathers , and to keep all his statutes , and to keep all his statutes , and to keep all that I commanded Moses .
GOLD:	If the Israelites will be careful to obey my commands — all the laws , decrees , and regulations given through Moses — I will not send them into exile from this land that I set aside for your ancestors . ”

ID:	4703
INPUT:	Kéyah Sháínar biyi' kin hadaas'áhígíí Béíbel áádóó <unk> áádóó Ákad índa Kálneh dahoolyéegi bee hóhólníihgo hahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	He put his hands on the cities of Babylon , and his kingdom was at the end of his kingdom .
GOLD:	He built his kingdom in the land of Babylonia , with the cities of Babylon , Erech , Akkad , and Calneh .

ID:	4704
INPUT:	Nidi t'ą́ą́' anídoolchidgo , jó'akon , bínaaí háátłizh , áko ázhdííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' háínítłizh ! Díí íinidzaaígíí nik'ijį' nídoodleeł ; éí Píírez dzoosye' .
PRED:	But he stretched out his hand , and behold , his brother was troubled ; and he said , Why are you troubled ? This is what I have done to you , that is , the son of Jebusites .
GOLD:	But then he pulled back his hand , and out came his brother ! “ What ! ” the midwife exclaimed . “ How did you break out first ? ” So he was named Perez .

ID:	4705
INPUT:	doodaii' naa'ahóóhai biyęęzhii bíyííkeedgo , da' séígo'ísh yéídoołtééł ?
PRED:	Or shall he put on his skin , or shall he put him on his head ?
GOLD:	Or if they ask for an egg , do you give them a scorpion ? Of course not !

ID:	4706
INPUT:	Asht'e'ádílnéehgo nimá bizhé'é Biithúwel bighangóó Péídan-éíram hoolyéejį' dínááh ; áadi nimá bínaaí Léíban bitsi'ké ła' ne'asdzą́ą́ ádíílííł .
PRED:	Arise , and go to his father 's house , to his father 's house , where you shall take a wife from Laban his mother 's daughters .
GOLD:	Instead , go at once to Paddan-aram , to the house of your grandfather Bethuel , and marry one of your uncle Laban 's daughters .

ID:	4707
INPUT:	Ádaa áhólyą́ ; doo ákwii ánáánáo'nééh lágo ; jó , ach'į' nahwii'ná bitsásk'ehgi doo ákwii át'éii nidííní'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Be careful to do what is wrong , for you have done evil in trouble .
GOLD:	Be on guard ! Turn back from evil , for God sent this sufferingto keep you from a life of evil .

ID:	4708
INPUT:	Silíshiya kéyahdi Társas kin haal'áagi shi'dizhchį́įgo Jew dine'é nishłį́ , nidi kwe'é Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi shidi'neeszą́ , danihizhé'é yę́ę bibee haz'áanii t'áá yíní át'éegi Gaméíliyel bidááhdóó nibéhéstsaadgo yínashineestą́ą́' , áko t'áá ánółtso díí jį́ ádanoht'éhígi át'éego Diyin God t'áá íiyisí bídin nishłį́įgo bá hinishná .
PRED:	I was a Jew in Asia in Asia , but I was a Jew in Jerusalem . I was a Jew in front of my ancestors in Jerusalem , and I have been able to stand before me in front of all the law of my God .
GOLD:	Then Paul said , “ I am a Jew , born in Tarsus , a city in Cilicia , and I was brought up and educated here in Jerusalem under Gamaliel . As his student , I was carefully trained in our Jewish laws and customs . I became very zealous to honor God in everything I did , just like all of you today .

ID:	4709
INPUT:	Chánahgo nich'į' sodiszin ; yisdáshíłteeh , áko bee hahíínídzíi'ii bik'eh honish'į́į doo .
PRED:	Be strong , and save me ; and I will obey your commandments .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	4710
INPUT:	Áko ts'ídá ákwii oo'áałgo Jesus , Niye' náádiidzá , hodííniidí góne' yá'át'ééh nídzísdlį́'ígíí hazhé'é yénáálnii' , áko hó áádóó haghandóó t'áá ałtso da'oosdląąd .
PRED:	And he went there , and remembered the good things that he had said to him , Thy father remembered that he had said , and all his house believed .
GOLD:	Then the father realized that that was the very time Jesus had told him , “ Your son will live. ” And he and his entire household believed in Jesus .

ID:	4711
INPUT:	Riihobówam éí Shííkemgóó ííyá , háálá Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii adahodoolííł biniyé Shííkemgi neheeskai .
PRED:	Rehoboam went to Shechem because all Israel had come to Shechem .
GOLD:	Rehoboam went to Shechem , where all Israel had gathered to make him king .

ID:	4712
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Ízrel dine'é kóbididííniił , Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ , áko Ííjip dine'é naanish yídanihiniłkadgo atídanihił'į́į́dóó ch'ínihideesh'ish , áádóó binaalte' danohłínídóó dah nihidideesh'ishgo ts'ídá bidziilgo índa ayóó át'éego baa nídéesht'įįłii bee nihik'é niná'deeshdlééł .
PRED:	Therefore thou shalt say unto the children of Israel , I am the Lord ; and I will bring thee out of the Egyptians , and I will bring thee out of the house of Egypt , and I will give thee a great reward .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , say to the people of Israel : ‘ I am the Lord . I will free you from your oppression and will rescue you from your slavery in Egypt . I will redeem you with a powerful arm and great acts of judgment .

ID:	4713
INPUT:	éí tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' t'ááłá'í nítínígo nidadool'aał biniyé yah ahekáhígíí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii yindaalnishii
PRED:	and from twenty years old and twenty years old , every one that went in to the tent of meeting , to work in the tabernacle of meeting .
GOLD:	The list included all the men between thirty and fifty years of age who were eligible for service in the Tabernacle ,

ID:	4714
INPUT:	Áko Ámalek dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Éígag t'áá hináago nízhdiiłtį́ , nidi diltłish bee diné ałtso nidadzistseed .
PRED:	And the king of the Amalekites took Sheba , and killed all the people with the sword .
GOLD:	He captured Agag , the Amalekite king , but completely destroyed everyone else .

ID:	4715
INPUT:	Diné haisíidii nílíinii , ádił asésiihgo haash nishłééh ? Ha'át'íísh biniyé shííníłt'óoh dooleełgo áshiinilaa , áko t'áá shí ádá hééł nísísdlį́į́' ?
PRED:	“ Son of man , why have you sinned against me ? Why have you put me on your neck ? Why have you put me on your neck ? ”
GOLD:	If I have sinned , what have I done to you , O watcher of all humanity ? Why make me your target ? Am I a burden to you ?

ID:	4716
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá háiida ha'át'íhída yá'át'éehgo ádoolníłígíí hoł bééhózin nidi doo ájoonííłgóó éí bee ádił ni'dziilzííh .
PRED:	Therefore whoever does good will do good , but he who does not do evil .
GOLD:	Remember , it is sin to know what you ought to do and then not do it .

ID:	4717
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné léi' níłch'i bi'iiníziinii bii' hólǫ́ǫgo doo yáłti'góó índa doo oo'į́į́góó yił haa daaskai , áádóó hadaałt'é áńjiidlaa , áko diné doo yáłti' da yę́ę yáłti' áádóó oo'į́ silį́į́' .
PRED:	And there was a man who had an evil spirit , and led him to see , and he healed them , and he healed the man who had not spoken , and he became blind .
GOLD:	Then a demon-possessed man , who was blind and could n't speak , was brought to Jesus . He healed the man so that he could both speak and see .

ID:	4718
INPUT:	T'ah nááyówehgo jį́honaa'éí t'áadoo nidi jiiłtsą́ą da , áádóó t'áadoo hoł bééhooziní da . Díí ła'ígíí yiláahgo hanályį́į́h .
PRED:	He did not see the sun , but he did not know it , and the other more than the other .
GOLD:	and he would never have seen the sun or known of its existence . Yet he would have had more peace than in growing up to be an unhappy man .

ID:	4719
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii bínda'nołtinii índa Férisii danohłíinii , t'óó ádahodoł'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Háálá t'ááłá'í nidi ła'da t'áá nihí nidahohłáhígi át'éego nahałá ádadoohłííł biniyé tónteel bikáá'góó índa ni' bikáá'góó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' nídadohkah , áko ła'da éigi át'éego nahałá ádaał'įįhgo naakidi nihiláahdi ánát'éego hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'áanii yą́ą́h nilį́įgo ádaał'įįh .
PRED:	Woe to you , Pharisees and Pharisees ! For there is no one like one of you , that you may worship him as one of you , so that you may serve him as one of the sea and the whole earth .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you cross land and sea to make one convert , and then you turn that person into twice the child of hell you yourselves are !

ID:	4720
INPUT:	Paul éí James yaa níyá
PRED:	Paul and James
GOLD:	Paul Arrives at Jerusalem

ID:	4721
INPUT:	Áko Férisii danilíinii áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii ła' Jerúsalemdę́ę́' neheeskaígíí Jesus yaa áłah silį́į'go ,
PRED:	Some Pharisees and the teachers of the Law came to Jesus from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	One day some Pharisees and teachers of religious law arrived from Jerusalem to see Jesus .

ID:	4722
INPUT:	áko éí binaagi łeets'aa' chodayooł'ínígíí t'áá át'é éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee naakáhí , atsį' bee haha'níłí , łeeshch'iih bee hahakaahí , bii' tá'ádígisí índa náá'iiniihgi łeets'aa' chodao'íinii t'áá át'é éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí biyi' góyaa anídei'nił índa nahashch'id bikágí bik'ínáltihgo tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bąąh hadaazhahí bii' nídítsih doo .
PRED:	And all the vessels of the vessels , and the flesh , and the meat , and the vessels , and all the vessels , and all the vessels thereof , and all the vessels of the altar , and the vessels of the altar , and put them on the altar .
GOLD:	All the altar utensils — the firepans , meat forks , shovels , basins , and all the containers — must be placed on the cloth , and a covering of fine goatskin leather must be spread over them . Finally , they must put the carrying poles in place .

ID:	4723
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i Diyinii bik'i hwiidooleełgo níłch'i bee hódzáanii áádóó bee ak'idi'iitįįhii , níłch'i kót'ée doo níinii áádóó bidziilii , níłch'i bee ééhózinii áádóó Bóhólníihii dílzin bił hólǫ́ǫ doo ;
PRED:	And the Spirit of the Lord shall come upon him , and the Spirit of wisdom , and understanding , and understanding , and a sign , and a sign , and a sign .
GOLD:	And the Spirit of the Lord will rest on him — the Spirit of wisdom and understanding , the Spirit of counsel and might , the Spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord .

ID:	4724
INPUT:	T'ah doo naa nishááhdą́ą́' nilį́į́' áłch'į́į́dí yee' nít'éé' , áko k'ad t'óó ahayóí silį́į́' ; naa níyáádóó índa Bóhólníihii nik'ijidlíigo hodideeshzhiizh , ákohgo hahgoshą' sha'áłchíní daabí dooleełígíí nabik'ítsískees doo ? jidííniid .
PRED:	But now you were little , and now you have become a little , and now you have become a long time , and the Lord will bless you , and how can I find the house of my children ?
GOLD:	You had little indeed before I came , but your wealth has increased enormously . The Lord has blessed you through everything I 've done . But now , what about me ? When can I start providing for my own family ? ”

ID:	4725
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii baa hidit'aahígíí áádóó bindaanishígíí
PRED:	The priests and the People
GOLD:	Instructions for Priestly Conduct

ID:	4726
INPUT:	Áádóó díí yiiłtsą́ągo shił ádzaaígíí nísh'į́į́ nít'éé' , shoo , naaldlooshii dį́į́' góne'ígíí ts'ídá t'óó báhádzidgo áádóó t'óó bik'e'íyée'go índa ts' ídá ayóó ábóodziilgo béésh nitł'izii ayóó ádaníłtsoii biwoo' . Éí yee aldeeł áádóó adiséí índa yidziihígíí yik'i naayá . Nidaaldlooshii bilą́ąjį'ígíí éí doo yił ahedaałt'ée da ; bidee' éí neeznáá yadaa'á .
PRED:	And when I saw these things , behold , I saw the fourth beast , and the fourth beast , and the great destruction , and the teeth , and the teeth of the beast , and the rest of the beast , and the princes of the beast were not of the beast .
GOLD:	Then in my vision that night , I saw a fourth beast — terrifying , dreadful , and very strong . It devoured and crushed its victims with huge iron teeth and trampled their remains beneath its feet . It was different from any of the other beasts , and it had ten horns .

ID:	4727
INPUT:	Shoo , nahjí kin haal'áii bich'į' nízhdoolyeedígi át'é , éí áhání índa kin áłch'į́dí sinil . Éísh doo kin áłch'į́dí da ? Háni'dii áajį' yis<unk> yeed .
PRED:	Behold , the city is like a city , and the little ones are together ; let them not be able to help them .
GOLD:	See , there is a small village nearby . Please let me go there instead ; do n't you see how small it is ? Then my life will be saved . ”

ID:	4728
INPUT:	Éí bąą dayílá t'áá át'é ałtso doo dahiidoonaał da , áádóó diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo dabijéí tsidadooltłił ,
PRED:	All of you will not stand , and every man will turn away from his heart .
GOLD:	Every arm is paralyzed with fear.Every heart melts ,

ID:	4729
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , T'áá háiida díí a'ohgo ádaat'éii ła' shíhooł'aahii nilínígíí bąą tó sik'azii yidoodlį́į́ł biniyé baazhníką́ągo , éí haa doolyéłígíí ts'ídá t'áá aaníí haa doolyééł .
PRED:	I say to you , whoever does this least of these little ones will drink the water that comes to drink . He will surely be put to death .
GOLD:	And if you give even a cup of cold water to one of the least of my followers , you will surely be rewarded . ”

ID:	4730
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí ba'áłchíní t'áá hashkée neinitin
PRED:	The Lord 's People
GOLD:	God 's Discipline Proves His Love

ID:	4731
INPUT:	áádóó shí ałdó' t'óó hodíína'go aadi deesháłígíí Bóhólníihii bee baa dzííníshłí .
PRED:	I also trust in the Lord , but I trust in the truth .
GOLD:	And I have confidence from the Lord that I myself will come to see you soon .

ID:	4732
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mídiyan hoolyéedi Mózes áyidííniid , Ííjip kéyahgóó nihéénídááh , háálá diné nida'niiłhį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę ałtso daneezná .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses in Midian , “ Go back to Egypt , for they have killed the men who had killed him . ”
GOLD:	Before Moses left Midian , the Lord said to him , “ Return to Egypt , for all those who wanted to kill you have died . ”

ID:	4733
INPUT:	Náás áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii dajílíinii t'áadoo biniyéhígóó dahojilne' , índa Diyin God bizaad hwii' ádaadin , áko éí t'áá hó ákónídahodidoolnííł .
PRED:	And the prophets declare nothing , and the word of God is not in them ; and they shall be done .
GOLD:	God 's prophets are all windbagswho do n't really speak for him.Let their predictions of disaster fall on themselves ! ' ”

ID:	4734
INPUT:	Háálá Christ daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náábi'diilzáago ts'ídá doo danáádootsaał dago nihił béédahózin , áko aniné éí náásgóó doo hwee ádínááhólníih da .
PRED:	For you know that Christ is raised from the dead , that he will die , and he will not be able to rule over him .
GOLD:	We are sure of this because Christ was raised from the dead , and he will never die again . Death no longer has any power over him .

ID:	4735
INPUT:	Dooládó' honoojíidi t'áá ahą́ą́h hach'į' nidaalteeh da nít'éé' áádóó halgaidi háni' nídayiił'aah nít'éé' !
PRED:	How much more they rebelled against him in the wilderness , and let them return in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Oh , how often they rebelled against him in the wildernessand grieved his heart in that dry wasteland .

ID:	4736
INPUT:	Ákoshą' Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í dabidohnínígíí haa deeshłííł ? hałníigo Páílat hach'į' hanáánáádzíí' .
PRED:	What shall I do to the king of the Jews ? Pilate answered him ,
GOLD:	Pilate asked them , “ Then what should I do with this man you call the king of the Jews ? ”

ID:	4737
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá háiida bikáá' náá'iiniihí bee ádee hadziidziihígíí , éí t'áadoo át'éhí da , nidi t'áá háiida bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi nehelyéhígíí bee ádee hadziidziihígíí , éí bá nijitłizh , dadohní .
PRED:	If you swear by the altar , you will say , ‘ It is no one who lives on the altar . '
GOLD:	And you say that to swear ‘ by the altar ' is not binding , but to swear ‘ by the gifts on the altar ' is binding .

ID:	4738
INPUT:	nidi nihibąąhági ádaat'éii éí nihí áádóó nihiDiyin God yił ałts'ánihinínil , índa ádił nida'iyohsíhígíí biniinaa nihits'ąą nídeest'į́į'go doo nihididoots'į́įł da .
PRED:	But he has taken away the sins of your God , and has delivered you from your sins , and will not listen to your sins .
GOLD:	It 's your sins that have cut you off from God.Because of your sins , he has turned awayand will not listen anymore .

ID:	4739
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya dine'é bidziilgo naaldeehdą́ą́' Sámson éí Ízrel dine'é bá nihozhdiyii'aahgo naadiin nááhai .
PRED:	And Samson was strong in the battle of the Philistines , and Samson judged Israel for twenty years .
GOLD:	Samson judged Israel for twenty years during the period when the Philistines dominated the land .

ID:	4740
INPUT:	Bisiláo dah deínéehii t'áá bizááká hodílzingo bidziilgo bił haz'áanii deidoołchǫǫł áádóó t'áá áłahíjį' didlidgo nááhániihii nahgóó adeidiyoołtł'ił . Áko doo yildingóó ni'iiłchǫǫhii deidoosįįł .
PRED:	He will destroy the army of his army , and cut down the burnt offering and burn incense . And the priest will destroy them .
GOLD:	“ His army will take over the Temple fortress , pollute the sanctuary , put a stop to the daily sacrifices , and set up the sacrilegious object that causes desecration .

ID:	4741
INPUT:	T'áá bí t'éí naa níyáago t'áá bí t'éí dah nídidoodááł , nidi be'asdzą́ą́ hólǫ́ǫgo yił naa ní'áazhgo éí be'asdzą́ą́ yił dah nídidoot'ash .
PRED:	If he comes to her , he shall return to her , but her wife is with her , and her wife shall go with her .
GOLD:	If he was single when he became your slave , he shall leave single . But if he was married before he became a slave , then his wife must be freed with him .

ID:	4742
INPUT:	Atis'adeesdzá bééhániihgo néit'aahdóó tsosts'idi damį́įgo ná'ádleeh biiłkáhí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' hodílzingo áłah náhdleehgo nályééh , éí t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo nááhániihii át'éego ałdó' bich'į' náádahołniih doo ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'ijisdli'ígi át'éego ádeínóhsin .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the Passover , on the seventh day of the feast of the Lord your God , you shall offer an offering to the Lord your God , as the Lord your God has blessed you .
GOLD:	Then celebrate the Festival of Harvest to honor the Lord your God . Bring him a voluntary offering in proportion to the blessings you have received from him .

ID:	4743
INPUT:	Ła' kin haal'áagi kéédahat'į́į dooleełgi ch'ééh hadeintáago honoojíidi doo naagháhídi tádadookai .
PRED:	And some of them shall dwell in the wilderness , and seek them in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Some wandered in the wilderness , lost and homeless .

ID:	4744
INPUT:	Nimá bahastiin índa ba'áłchíní doo yił ni'íłdįįhii éí bich'é'é nílį́ ; nádí áádóó nideezhí badahastiin índa bada'áłchíní doo yił nida'íłdįįhii éí t'áá ła' bił háíníjéé' ; nimá Het dine'é nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; nizhé'é éí Ámor dine'é nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ You are the daughter of your mother and your children , your sister , and your children , and your children , and your children ; your mother was the Hittite .
GOLD:	For your mother loathed her husband and her children , and so do you . And you are exactly like your sisters , for they despised their husbands and their children . Truly your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite .

ID:	4745
INPUT:	éí yoołkáałdi yisdááyáii naa doolwołgo hane' neidoo'ááł .
PRED:	In those days he will flee , and he will send his word to you .
GOLD:	And on that day a survivor from Jerusalem will come to you in Babylon and tell you what has happened .

ID:	4746
INPUT:	Haa'íyee' t'áá ákwii áhát'į́ nidadidiit'ááł , índa nihitahgóó yá'át'éehii hólónígíí nihił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	Let 's make us sin , and let us know what is good among us .
GOLD:	So let us discern for ourselves what is right ; let us learn together what is good .

ID:	4747
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Gíliyad kéyahgóó Rúben dine'é áádóó Géed dine'é índa Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí bich'į' náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízar biye' Fíniyas adeis'a' ,
PRED:	And the children of Israel sent unto Eleazar the son of Eleazar the priest , and to the children of Reuben , and to the tribe of Manasseh , and to the children of Manasseh , the son of Eleazar the priest ,
GOLD:	First , however , they sent a delegation led by Phinehas son of Eleazar , the priest , to talk with the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4748
INPUT:	Diyin God , t'áá ałk'idą́ą́' hoo'áałii shididoots'į́įłgo atíhodoolííł . Síilah . Háálá doo łahgo ádajinéhígíí bąą Diyin God doo dazhdísin da .
PRED:	God will hear my words , and he will punish me in the beginning ; for they will not fear God because they do not fear God . Selah
GOLD:	God , who has ruled forever , will hear me and humble them.InterludeFor my enemies refuse to change their ways ; they do not fear God .

ID:	4749
INPUT:	Lk . 3 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Many People

ID:	4750
INPUT:	Asdzání áádóó áłchíní t'áadoo wólta'í dinéhígíí t'áá bízhánígo ashdladi mííl daats'í da'ííyą́ą́' lá .
PRED:	The women and women were not able to eat about five thousand .
GOLD:	About 5,000 men were fed that day , in addition to all the women and children !

ID:	4751
INPUT:	Nidi Sádam dine'é t'áá íiyisí doo yá'ádaash<unk> da ; Bóhólníihii yich'į' t'áá íiyisí ádił da'ílzííh .
PRED:	But the people of Sodom was very bad , and they sinned against the Lord .
GOLD:	But the people of this area were extremely wicked and constantly sinned against the Lord .

ID:	4752
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God béédahodzísingo éí hoł danilį́į doo nít'éé' , nidi doo hoł danilį́į da , doo nidi t'áá k'ad hach'į' ahééh daniizį́į' da . Áko t'áadoo biniyéhígóó t'áá ádzaagóó nitsídaakees daazlį́į́' , áádóó doo ádahalyą́ą́góó bíni' bił daatł'éé' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	For they would know God , but they would not be ashamed of him , but they did not give thanks to him , but they did not give thanks to him . And they became fools and fools .
GOLD:	Yes , they knew God , but they would n't worship him as God or even give him thanks . And they began to think up foolish ideas of what God was like . As a result , their minds became dark and confused .

ID:	4753
INPUT:	Ákohgo Saul éí habee na'abaahí David bee hazhdiilaa áádóó béésh łitsoii ch'ah bik'izhdíí'ą́ índa béésh éé' bee na'abaahii biih jííłtį́ .
PRED:	Then Saul put a robe on David , and put it on his head , and put on his robe .
GOLD:	Then Saul gave David his own armor — a bronze helmet and a coat of mail .

ID:	4754
INPUT:	Áádóó kǫ' bii' ti'dahojooníihgo hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áágóó łid hahagháah doo . Índa naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii áádóó be'elyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáii , áádóó t'áá háiida éí bízhi' bee hóda'diidlidii , ts'ídá t'áadoo háádajilyį́hí i'ii'aah áádóó niyiiłkaah .
PRED:	And fire shall burn them forever and ever ; and the beast and the image , and the image of the beast , and the name of the beast , and those that are called by name , and the night .
GOLD:	The smoke of their torment will rise forever and ever , and they will have no relief day or night , for they have worshiped the beast and his statue and have accepted the mark of his name . ”

ID:	4755
INPUT:	Áko Biinéíyah éí Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzindi jiníyáago Jó'ab ábijiní , Aláahgo naat'áanii kóní , Wóshdę́ę́' ch'ínínááh . Áko ání , Dooda , t'áá kwe'é yee' dadeestsaał . Áádóó Biinéíyah éí aláahgo naat'áanii díí saadígíí yił náhoolne'go ání , Jó'ab kóníigo shich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	Then Benaiah came to the tent of the Lord , and said to Joab , “ The king says , ‘ Come out ! ' And he said , “ No , I will die ! ” And the king answered , “ No , I will die . ”
GOLD:	Benaiah went to the sacred tent of the Lord and said to Joab , “ The king orders you to come out ! ” But Joab answered , “ No , I will die here. ” So Benaiah returned to the king and told him what Joab had said .

ID:	4756
INPUT:	Éí ádadoodįįł , nidi ni t'éí honílǫ́ ; éí t'áá ałtso éé' nahalingo hadadootih . Éé' nahalingo ałnáá<unk> nił , áko łahgo át'éego ádadoolnííł ,
PRED:	They will be destroyed , but you are only . They will be like a garment . They will be like a garment , and there will be no more .
GOLD:	They will perish , but you remain forever ; they will wear out like old clothing.You will change them like a garmentand discard them .

ID:	4757
INPUT:	Ákohgo hwe'azis dadziz<unk> go diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo habéeso bik'ída'deesdizígíí hweda'azis biyi' naastsooz lá . Áko hó áádóó hazhé'é éí habéeso bik'ída'deesdizígíí dadziiłtsą́ągo t'óó nídadzisdzííd .
PRED:	And when they saw him , each man put his money in his hand , because he and his father 's money was found , they were afraid .
GOLD:	As they emptied out their sacks , there in each man 's sack was the bag of money he had paid for the grain ! The brothers and their father were terrified when they saw the bags of money .

ID:	4758
INPUT:	Siláo aa ádahalyáanii átséhígíí índa náá'ákéé' góne'ígíí bíighah ch'ínáájít'áazhgo , kintahjį' ch'é'étiingo béésh dáádílkałígíí baazhní'áázh . Nít'éé' t'áá bíni'ídi há ąą ádzaa , áko ch'ízhní'áazhgo ła' kin bita'atiin góne' ajíí'áazhgo , t'áá áko diyingo naal'a'í hats'ą́ą́' dah diiyá .
PRED:	And the captain of the guard went out , and went out to the gate , and came to the door of the gate ; and he opened the door ; and when he opened , he opened the door , and the angel departed from them .
GOLD:	They passed the first and second guard posts and came to the iron gate leading to the city , and this opened for them all by itself . So they passed through and started walking down the street , and then the angel suddenly left him .

ID:	4759
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , T'áá ádzaagóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii t'óó ádahodil'íinii shízhi' binahjį' dabiyooch'íidgo dahalne' . Éí doo dahóół'aad da áádóó t'áadoo hach'į' haasdzíi' da índa t'áadoo nidi hach'į' yéíłti' da . T'áadoo bił ádaadzaii áádóó t'áadoo yídadínéeshyęęzhii , índa t'áadoo nídoodleełii áádóó na'adlo' yaa nitsídaazkéezii yee nihił dahalne' .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ The prophets have spoken lies in my name , and I have not spoken to you , but I have not spoken to you , nor have I spoken to you , nor have I spoken to you , nor speak lies . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ These prophets are telling lies in my name . I did not send them or tell them to speak . I did not give them any messages . They prophesy of visions and revelations they have never seen or heard . They speak foolishness made up in their own lying hearts .

ID:	4760
INPUT:	Áádóó dé'éyóní ła' nihitahgi kééhat'į́įgo , doodaii' náás da'ahíínółchíihii nihitahgi łahdę́ę́' nilíinii éí didlidgo náá'iiniih ádeeshłííł nízingo łikání halchingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' nááda'ayołniihígi át'éego bí ałdó' ákódaat'į́į doo .
PRED:	And I will make a stranger among you , or among your generations , as a burnt offering unto the Lord .
GOLD:	And if any foreigners visit you or live among you and want to present a special gift as a pleasing aroma to the Lord , they must follow these same procedures .

ID:	4761
INPUT:	Dooládó' kin haal'áago baa shił hózhónígíí éí t'áadoo bik'i honoodzood da .
PRED:	How beautiful is my joy in the city , and they are not gone away .
GOLD:	That famous city , a city of joy , will be forsaken !

ID:	4762
INPUT:	Diné ła' hadá'í , doodaii' hazhé'é yázhí be'asdzą́ą́ bił jineezhtéezhgo éí hadá'í , doodaii' hazhé'é yázhí t'áá łichí'ígo ájiilaago át'é ; ádił adzisiihígíí bee hohodiit'i'go niji'aash doo , índa ha'áłchíní doo hodooleełgóó áhodi'doolníiłgo jidínóonééł .
PRED:	If a man lies with his father or his wife , he shall bear the nakedness of his father 's sister , or the sister of his father , he shall be guilty , and his children shall die .
GOLD:	“ If a man has sex with his uncle 's wife , he has violated his uncle . Both the man and woman will be punished for their sin , and they will die childless .

ID:	4763
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá aaníinii nihił béédahoozindóó bik'ijį' t'áá ákódeii'néehgo ádił ninááda'ayiilzíihgo , ádił nida'ayeelzí'ígíí biniyé nááhidoonihii doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For we know that we have sinned against the truth , and have sinned against us , and there is no other like us .
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we deliberately continue sinning after we have received knowledge of the truth , there is no longer any sacrifice that will cover these sins .

ID:	4764
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Kúshai dine'é nilíinii áyidííniid , Da' diné ániid naagháii Ábsalam t'áadoósh ádzaaí da ? Áko Kúshai dine'é hanáánáádzíi'go ádííniid , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bi'ana'í danilíinii áádóó diné t'áá ałtso adadidoonih biniyé bik'ijį' danilínígíí éí diné ániid naagháii ábi'diilyaa yę́ęgi ádabi'dólne' .
PRED:	The king said to the young man , “ Is not Absalom the young man Absalom ? ” The king answered , “ I , the Lord , have spoken to all the people and to the people . ”
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” And the Ethiopian replied , “ May all of your enemies , my lord the king , both now and in the future , share the fate of that young man ! ”

ID:	4765
INPUT:	áádóó tágí jį́į́ góne' tsinaa'eeł bee bina'anish nidi t'áá bí hadadayiistł'ííd .
PRED:	And on the third day they cast down the ark , but they cast them down .
GOLD:	The following day they even took some of the ship 's gear and threw it overboard .

ID:	4766
INPUT:	Jesus hach'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áhodííniid , Ízrel dine'é nanítin , da' ákoósh díí doo bik'i'diitįįh da ?
PRED:	Jesus answered and said to them , “ Tell Israel , do n't you understand this ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ You are a respected Jewish teacher , and yet you do n't understand these things ?

ID:	4767
INPUT:	Aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah éí naaltsoos ííł'íní Shéífan ííłní , Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' bee haz'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí bik'íníyá . Áko Hilkáíyah éí naaltsoos Shéífan yeiní'ą́ągo yiyííłta' .
PRED:	Hilkiah the priest said to Hilkiah , “ I have found the book of the Lord in the book of the law of the Lord . ” So Shaphan read it to Shaphan .
GOLD:	Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the court secretary , “ I have found the Book of the Law in the Lord 's Temple ! ” Then Hilkiah gave the scroll to Shaphan , and he read it .

ID:	4768
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , nikéyah baa jiiníba' nít'éé' ; Jéíkab bíí' nilíinii daasnáanii bá shónéisíníłt'e' .
PRED:	The Lord has mercy on your land , and you have given Jacob his inheritance .
GOLD:	Lord , you poured out blessings on your land ! You restored the fortunes of Israel .

ID:	4769
INPUT:	Níyáajį' Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii diné bich'į' yíníłta' , áádóó bee bich'į' yáníłti' índa bee na'nítingo ádíínílzin .
PRED:	And when he came to the people , write to the people , and teach them the words of the Scriptures .
GOLD:	Until I get there , focus on reading the Scriptures to the church , encouraging the believers , and teaching them .

ID:	4770
INPUT:	Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bik'ésti'ii , dadine'é t'áá ałtso dabinii' bik'ésti'ii éí díí dził si'ą́ągi nahjį' kwíidoolííł .
PRED:	And all the nations shall wash the face of all the nations , which shall be cut off from this mountain .
GOLD:	There he will remove the cloud of gloom , the shadow of death that hangs over the earth .

ID:	4771
INPUT:	Tsin neheeshjíí' neelkáalii t'ááłá'ígo biyaadóó naaznilígíí naaki bąąh ha'íí'áago ádadoohłííł ; kót'éego níbaal bii' hodílzinii bá tsin neheeshjíí' t'áá ałtso ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt make two boards of acacia wood , and thou shalt make two boards for the tabernacle .
GOLD:	with two pegs under each frame . Make all the frames identical .

ID:	4772
INPUT:	Áko díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh k'adę́ę baa hoolzhíísh , éí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii yolyé .
PRED:	And the feast of unleavened bread was near , and the Passover was near .
GOLD:	The Festival of Unleavened Bread , which is also called Passover , was approaching .

ID:	4773
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nik'ehgo áhoot'éii bínashiníłtin ; shi'ana'í biniinaa k'íhoneezláágóó shiyííłááł .
PRED:	O Lord , teach me thy ways , and he hath covered me for thy enemies .
GOLD:	Teach me how to live , O Lord.Lead me along the right path , for my enemies are waiting for me .

ID:	4774
INPUT:	Áko Éíbram hwe'asdzą́ą́ Sérai doo ałchíi da ; éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' asdzání ła' Héígar wolyéego há naal'a'í nilį́ .
PRED:	Abram 's wife was not Abram 's wife , who was a woman from Egypt .
GOLD:	Now Sarai , Abram 's wife , had not been able to bear children for him . But she had an Egyptian servant named Hagar .

ID:	4775
INPUT:	Béésh łitsoii bitsásk'ehgi óola deeshjih , áádóó béésh <unk> izii bitsásk'ehgi béésh łigaii deeshjih , índa béésh łitsoii éí tsin bitsásk'ehgi áádóó béésh nitł'izii tsé bitsásk'ehgi deeshjih ; asht'ehodít'é áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii ninanit'a'ígo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will bring gold in his place , and I will put them in his place of silver , iron , iron , iron , iron , iron , and iron . I will make the ruler of righteousness .
GOLD:	I will exchange your bronze for gold , your iron for silver , your wood for bronze , and your stones for iron.I will make peace your leaderand righteousness your ruler .

ID:	4776
INPUT:	Áadi índída Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yisdádookah , t'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ánínígi át'éego : Yisdá'iiníiłii Záiyandę́ę́' doogááł , doo dahozdísin nít'éé' yę́ę Jéíkab bits'ą́ą́dóó da'ahílchíihii yits'éidoonił .
PRED:	And there all Israel shall be saved , as it is written in the book of the Scriptures , as it is written in the book of Zion , so shall the house of Jacob be removed from his house .
GOLD:	And so all Israel will be saved . As the Scriptures say , “ The one who rescues will come from Jerusalem , and he will turn Israel away from ungodliness .

ID:	4777
INPUT:	Áko hastiin sání , kin yee bóhólníihii nilíinii , diné yich'į' ch'íníyáago áyidííniid , Dooda , shik' isóó danohłíinii , t'áadoo doo yá'áshónígi ádaaht'íní . Díí diné shighan góne' yah ííyáhígíí t'áadoo doo aa nínígi ádaoł'íní .
PRED:	The husband said , “ No , my lord , the house of the house , come out to the people and said to them , ‘ No , do n't do evil . Do n't do anything wrong in my house . '
GOLD:	The old man stepped outside to talk to them . “ No , my brothers , do n't do such an evil thing . For this man is a guest in my house , and such a thing would be shameful .

ID:	4778
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bikéyah biyi' éí Éínak dine'é t'áadoo ła' yidzíi' da , t'áá hazhó'ó Géíza kin haal'áagi áádóó Gath kin haal'áagi índa Áshdad kin haal'áagi t'éiyá ła' t'áá daadzíí' .
PRED:	There was no one left in the land of Israel except Ekron , Ekron , Ekron , and Ekron .
GOLD:	None of the descendants of Anak were left in all the land of Israel , though some still remained in Gaza , Gath , and Ashdod .

ID:	4779
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é éí David yaa ayadahooliih
PRED:	The Philistines and David
GOLD:	The Philistines Reject David

ID:	4780
INPUT:	Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' ! K'éé'dídléehii léi' álástsii' k'iididoolééłgóó ch'íníyá .
PRED:	Listen to what I have done . I have done to the seed of the field .
GOLD:	“ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seed .

ID:	4781
INPUT:	Áko Gáliliidę́ę́' asdzání hoł yíkaígíí akéé' yíkaigo tséní'ootséél deinééł'į́į́' , áádóó hats'íís niiltínígíí ts'ídá át'éegi bił béédahoozin ,
PRED:	And the women who were with him went after him from Galilee , and saw that his body was in the tomb .
GOLD:	As his body was taken away , the women from Galilee followed and saw the tomb where his body was placed .

ID:	4782
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Jórdan tooh nílíní ha' naa ninoonáago Kéínan kéyah biih doohnéełgo
PRED:	Speak to the children of Israel , saying , “ If you go over the Jordan , go into the land of Canaan ,
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan ,

ID:	4783
INPUT:	Féro bitsi' éí David bikin haal'áádę́ę́' níyáago Sálaman kin há áyiilaii biih jíínáádóó bik'ijį' índa Míllo hoolyéii áyiilaa .
PRED:	After the daughter of Pharaoh came out of the city of David , he built the house of Solomon , which he built for him .
GOLD:	Solomon moved his wife , Pharaoh 's daughter , from the City of David to the new palace he had built for her . Then he constructed the supporting terraces .

ID:	4784
INPUT:	áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii át'éego dóola yázhí áádóó deenásts'aa' índa dibé yázhí ánéelt'e'ígíí áádóó áda'ał'ínígíí bik'ehgo bił náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	and their grain offering , and their drink offering , for the bulls , and for the lambs , according to their number , according to their number .
GOLD:	Each of these offerings of bulls , rams , and lambs must be accompanied by its prescribed grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	4785
INPUT:	Háálá ádííniid , Aa a'ááh hasin hool'áágóó hasht'edoolnííł ; yót'áahdi hiníláii daniłdzilígi át'éego na'ahódlíii hasht'edíílííł .
PRED:	For he said , Be ready for ever , and make peace for ever ; make the heavens like the heavens .
GOLD:	Your unfailing love will last forever.Your faithfulness is as enduring as the heavens .

ID:	4786
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é ha'át'íidashą' dadidooniił ? Doo yá'át'ééhgóó honahaz'ą́ągo dziłghą́ą'di nahodoołtsiłgo nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' áhodoołdįįł biniyé ch'íhoní'eezh lá . T'óó báhádzidgo hashké ninidzį́'ígíí bits'ą́ąjį' ánání'nééh , áádóó nidine'é doo yá'át'éehii bee bich'į' nitsíníkeesígíí łahgo át'éego bąąh tsíńdíkees .
PRED:	What shall the Egyptians say ? Because I brought you out of the mountain to destroy them , to destroy them on the mountains , to destroy them , and turn away from your wrath , and turn away from your people .
GOLD:	Why let the Egyptians say , ‘ Their God rescued them with the evil intention of slaughtering them in the mountains and wiping them from the face of the earth ' ? Turn away from your fierce anger . Change your mind about this terrible disaster you have threatened against your people !

ID:	4787
INPUT:	Áádóó łóód bee bąąh dah haz'áanii éí bi'éé' bik'i nehees<unk> doo áádóó bitsiits'iin nidi doo bik'é'ésti' da doo , índa bidaa' bik'é'ésti'go , Doo shi'díídee' da , doo shi'díídee' da , níigo háádílwosh doo .
PRED:	And the leprosy shall be cut off , and the head of his head shall not be covered with his head , nor put on his head , neither shall I be broken , for I am clean .
GOLD:	“ Those who suffer from a serious skin disease must tear their clothing and leave their hair uncombed . They must cover their mouth and call out , ‘ Unclean ! Unclean ! '

ID:	4788
INPUT:	Shoo , shoo , náhookǫsjí kéyahígíí bits'ą́ąjį' yóó'ohjeeh , ní Bóhólníihii . Jó , t'áá dį́į́'dę́ę́' hanáyołígi át'éego tanihinííłkaad , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Behold , behold , the north is cast away from the north side of the north , saith the Lord : Behold , I will scatter you as the four corners of the four corners .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Come away ! Flee from Babylon in the land of the north , for I have scattered you to the four winds .

ID:	4789
INPUT:	Łeeh hwii'nííłgóó sélį́į'go t'áásh shił chohoo'į́įgoákǫ́ǫ́ hanáshyį́įh doo .
PRED:	I will dwell in the pit , and I will dwell in the pit .
GOLD:	No , my hope will go down with me to the grave.We will rest together in the dust ! ”

ID:	4790
INPUT:	Áko ádííniid , Nihił dahózhǫ́ ; t'áadoo nídaałdzidí ; nihiDiyin God índa nihizhé'é biDiyin God éí béeso nihe'azis yiih yiyíínil ; shí nihibéeso nídiinil nít'éé' . Áko Símiyan haa néiníłtį́ .
PRED:	He said , “ Be glad ! Do n't be afraid ! The God of our father and our father put in the money he gave you . ” So Simeon gave him Simeon .
GOLD:	“ Relax . Do n't be afraid , ” the household manager told them . “ Your God , the God of your father , must have put this treasure into your sacks . I know I received your payment. ” Then he released Simeon and brought him out to them .

ID:	4791
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasin áádóó áká i'doolwoł bíká sohodizin
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	's Enemies

ID:	4792
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóidiísh nániidookąął ? <unk> nidilchíigoósh nich'į' yáłti' doo ?
PRED:	Will he speak to you many ? Will he speak to you ?
GOLD:	Will it beg you for mercyor implore you for pity ?

ID:	4793
INPUT:	Daráíyas aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naaki náhááh góne' hastą́ą́h nídízííd binih ts'ídá átsé hayííłkání góne' Hágeiyai éí Diyin God yá halne'ii jílį́įgo Bóhólníihii bizaad baa hojilne'go Shiyáltiyel biye' Zerábabel éí Júdah kéyahgi naat'áanii nilíinii índa Jásedek biye' Jéshuwa alą́ąjį' náá'iiłniihii bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	In the second year of Darius , in the second month , in the second month of the month of Darius the prophet , the word of the Lord came to Zerubbabel , the son of Zerubbabel , the priest , and to Joshua the priest .
GOLD:	On August 29 of the second year of King Darius 's reign , the Lord gave a message through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , governor of Judah , and to Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the high priest .

ID:	4794
INPUT:	Bił kééhót'íinii bikéyah bikáa'gi tsé adeiztsih yę́ę doo łahgo anáádahidoohtsih da ; éí náshiinídą́'ídi danihizhé'é yę́ę kéyah bee bééhózin doo biniyé tsé yee dahodeezo nít'éé' . Jó , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii kéyah nihíí' dooleełgo nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	You shall not set up a stone on your neighbor 's neighbor 's land , and you shall give it to your fathers , for the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	“ When you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you as your special possession , you must never steal anyone 's land by moving the boundary markers your ancestors set up to mark their property .

ID:	4795
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine' é t'áá ałtso shináshzhiizh , nidi Bóhólníihii bízhi' baa jííníshłíigo áhodeeshdįįł !
PRED:	All the nations have come to me , but I will trust in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Though hostile nations surrounded me , I destroyed them all with the authority of the Lord .

ID:	4796
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God biYe' t'ááłá'í bá yizhchínígíí bee dahinii'náa doo biniyé nihokáá' dine'é yitahjį' yiníł'a' . Díí bee Diyin God ayóó'ánihó'nínígíí nihił béédahoozin .
PRED:	For we know that the Son of God has sent him into the world to live . This is what God loved us .
GOLD:	God showed how much he loved us by sending his one and only Son into the world so that we might have eternal life through him .

ID:	4797
INPUT:	Ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' bahastiin yaa jooba' , áádóó yich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ááníił da dooleełígíí éí dooda .
PRED:	She is merciful to her husband , and her husband will not go down to the ground .
GOLD:	She brings him good , not harm , all the days of her life .

ID:	4798
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Ízrel dine'é shízhi' bee dabi'dójíigo ádeidoolííł , áádóó bik'ijishdlíi doo .
PRED:	And so shall the house of Israel be called in my name , and I will bless them .
GOLD:	Whenever Aaron and his sons bless the people of Israel in my name , I myself will bless them . ”

ID:	4799
INPUT:	Tónteel Łichíí' wolyéego siyínígíí yideeztehgo nááltsei . Áádóó halgaigóó hojoo'ish nahalingo <unk> k'eh ha'naa nihoní'eezh .
PRED:	The Red Sea has covered the Red Sea , and you have led them out like a desert .
GOLD:	He commanded the Red Sea to dry up.He led Israel across the sea as if it were a desert .

ID:	4800
INPUT:	Bee ída'diiljeehí naaltsoos bee bidáda'deeshjée'ii hastą́ą́h góne'ígíí ąą yidinízǫ́ǫzgo déé'į́į́' , nít'éé' ayóó át'éego ni' nahaasnáá' , áádóó jį́honaa'éí éí aghaashzhiin yistł'ónígíí nahalingo łizhin silį́į́' , áádóó tł'éhonaa'éí dił nahalingo łichíí' silį́į́' ,
PRED:	And when he opened the sixth seal , he looked , and there was a great voice , and the sun was white , and the moon became white as the sun .
GOLD:	I watched as the Lamb broke the sixth seal , and there was a great earthquake . The sun became as dark as black cloth , and the moon became as red as blood .

ID:	4801
INPUT:	Díí kósdzaaígíí bee Bóhólníihii éí ná naal'a'í yaa jooba' le' , jó , shinanit'a'í bidiyin Ríman yich'į' nahodoołaał biniyé bikin góne' shigaan yótą'go bił yah anásht'ashgo áádóó Ríman bikin góne' yaa ánásht'įįhgo díí kósdzaaígíí Bóhólníihii ná naal'a'í yá yóó'anéididoo'ááł .
PRED:	May the Lord be kind to your servant , because I will go in to worship my master 's house to worship the Lord , the Lord will forgive these things . ”
GOLD:	However , may the Lord pardon me in this one thing : When my master the king goes into the temple of the god Rimmon to worship there and leans on my arm , may the Lord pardon me when I bow , too . ”

ID:	4802
INPUT:	Jó , kin t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo diné ła' ádayiilaa , nidi Diyin God éí t'áá ałtsoní áyiilaa .
PRED:	For they have built one house , but God created all things .
GOLD:	For every house has a builder , but the one who built everything is God .

ID:	4803
INPUT:	Nahachagiitsoh bee atí'ályaaígíí
PRED:	The People of Egypt
GOLD:	A Plague of Locusts

ID:	4804
INPUT:	Áko hach'ą́ą́h dáázhdeel'áago doo hach'į' ajókááh át'éégóó biniinaa Jesus éí kin biyi' góne' sidáagi bighą́ą́'dę́ę́' ąą dazdeeznilgo diné bitah doo nahwii'náa daígíí bik'i antéhí t'áá bee Jesus bidáahjį' hadah adahodzizlo' .
PRED:	And when they had not gone to the gate , Jesus sat down on the roof of the house , and they put him on the roof of the sick man who was sick in front of Jesus .
GOLD:	They could n't bring him to Jesus because of the crowd , so they dug a hole through the roof above his head . Then they lowered the man on his mat , right down in front of Jesus .

ID:	4805
INPUT:	Ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí bá tł'óół ałk'ésgizígi át'éego óola t'áá bízhání da'ahólzha'ígíí ałk'ésgizgo ádayiilaa ;
PRED:	They made the rings of pure gold . They made them of pure gold .
GOLD:	To attach the chestpiece to the ephod , they made braided cords of pure gold thread .

ID:	4806
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá abíní bik'eh diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'áá da'jiyánígíí bik'ehgo nínádajiidlah , áko náhoniigahgo bi'oh nínáda'jiidlahígíí éí nídadiłhįh .
PRED:	And all the people gathered together in the morning , each man according to his ways ; and the sun shall be filled with the sun .
GOLD:	After this the people gathered the food morning by morning , each family according to its need . And as the sun became hot , the flakes they had not picked up melted and disappeared .

ID:	4807
INPUT:	Diné aláahgo bídahólníihii éí díí : Péírash , Péíhath-mó'ab , Íílam , Zátu , Béínai ,
PRED:	These are the princes of the people : Balak , Balak , Balak ,
GOLD:	The following leaders : Parosh , Pahath-moab , Elam , Zattu , Bani ,

ID:	4808
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , yá'át'éehii nich'į' yit'íní ályaa , áko Bóhólníihii éí haa nít'ée doo , nó'ní : Éí t'áá ákogi ááníił doo áádóó ajooba' ayóó'ííní'níi doo índa a' ohgo ánít'éego niDiyin God bił yí'ash doo .
PRED:	“ Son of man , the good news is revealed to you , and the Lord said to you , ‘ The righteous will be with you , and love your God . ' ”
GOLD:	No , O people , the Lord has told you what is good , and this is what he requires of you : to do what is right , to love mercy , and to walk humbly with your God .

ID:	4809
INPUT:	Naat'áanii nich'į' báhóóchįįdgo doo dah didíínáał da , háálá ayóó át'é bąąhági áhóót'įįd nidi , doo íits'a'ígóó dzizdáhígíí bee k'éédahodoodǫǫł .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from the prince 's anger , because he has done great things , but he will make atonement for his life .
GOLD:	If your boss is angry at you , do n't quit ! A quiet spirit can overcome even great mistakes .

ID:	4810
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké índa Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bich'į' handziihgo kóbidiní , Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó ła' , doodaii' dé'éyóní éí Ízrel kéyahgi kéédahat'íinii ła' náádi'yoołnihgo éí yee ádee haadzíi'ii t'áá át'é índa t'áá bí íinízingo nááyiiłniihii t'áá át'é éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náádayiiłnihgo
PRED:	“ Speak to Aaron and his sons , and to all Israel , saying , ‘ From among the children of Israel , or from among all the foreigners who live in the land , a burnt offering made by fire to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living among you. “ If you present a gift as a burnt offering to the Lord , whether it is to fulfill a vow or is a voluntary offering ,

ID:	4811
INPUT:	Bénjamin dine'é nilíinii bidine'é náás ahoolchíiłii éí ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí dabizhé'é yę́ę yada'áłchíní danilį́įgo éí dabi'déélta'ii dabízhi' bik'ehgo diné naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso ana<unk> į́ yídaneel'áanii
PRED:	Of the tribe of Benjamin , by their families , by their families , by their fathers ' houses , by their fathers ' houses , by their fathers ' houses , from twenty years old and twenty years old and upward ,
GOLD:	Benjamin35,400

ID:	4812
INPUT:	Éí hoolzhishdi díí dine'é índa Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'íinii bee bich'į' ha'doodzih , Doo bee ąąh doolch'ih da índa chin doo ąąh dooldah da biniyé honoojítahgi wódahgo nahaz'ánígóó shidine'é bitsi' bich'į' t'áá íiyisí hadoh bił dooyoł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass at that time , that my people shall speak unto the people of Jerusalem , and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem , that there shall be no breath in the wilderness ; and I will bring my daughter upon the high places .
GOLD:	The time is coming when the Lord will sayto the people of Jerusalem , “ My dear people , a burning wind is blowing in from the desert , and it 's not a gentle breeze useful for winnowing grain .

ID:	4813
INPUT:	áko Áman dine'é ábidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God bizaad deísółts'ą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shikin bii' sohodizin doo ílį́į́góó áál'įįd yę́ędą́ą́' , índa Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi doo yiila'í yę́ędą́ą́' , áádóó Júdah dine'é yisnááhgóó abi'doojaa' yę́ędą́ą́' , Ts'íigo lą́ą , dadooniidígíí biniinaa ,
PRED:	and say to the children of Ammon , “ Listen to the word of the Lord God , ‘ This is what the Lord God says : ‘ Because it was not done in my sanctuary , and in the days of the house of Israel , and in the land of Judah ,
GOLD:	Give the Ammonites this message from the Sovereign Lord : Hear the word of the Sovereign Lord ! Because you cheered when my Temple was defiled , mocked Israel in her desolation , and laughed at Judah as she went away into exile ,

ID:	4814
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro biyoostsah haidiit'ą́ągo Jóseph bíla' yąąh niiní'ą́ , índa áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí daalgaii dits'idgo ádaalyaii éé' yee hahodiilaa , índa óola da'ahól<unk> go yoo'ígíí hazénéíst'i' ,
PRED:	And Pharaoh took his hand , and put it on his hand , and put it on his hand , and put it in linen , and sent it to pass ,
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh removed his signet ring from his hand and placed it on Joseph 's finger . He dressed him in fine linen clothing and hung a gold chain around his neck .

ID:	4815
INPUT:	Áádóó i'íí'ą́ągo tsinaa'eeł tá'ałníí'góó yi'oł , nidi hó t'éí t'áá sáhí t'áá áadi nijighá .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the evening , that the boat was alone alone alone .
GOLD:	Late that night , the disciples were in their boat in the middle of the lake , and Jesus was alone on land .

ID:	4816
INPUT:	Áko Béílam éí Béílak ííłní , Didlidgo nááhíłniihígíí bíighahgi sínízį́ ; shí níláhgóó deeshááł , Bóhólníihii daats'í shaa hodooleeł ; t'áá shił ííshją́ą́ áyiilaaígíí bee nił náhodeeshnih . Áko yílk'id góde haayá .
PRED:	Balaam said to Balak , “ stood near the burnt offering , and I will go with you . I will tell you what the Lord has told me . ” So he went up to the mountain .
GOLD:	Then Balaam said to Balak , “ Stand here by your burnt offerings , and I will go to see if the Lord will respond to me . Then I will tell you whatever he reveals to me. ” So Balaam went alone to the top of a bare hill ,

ID:	4817
INPUT:	Ata'naníbaalídóó tł'óó' bich'ijígo bikáá' adání nidadooh'ááł , índa bee hool'iní éí níbaal bii' hodílzinii bii' bikáá' adání si'ánígíí binaashiijí shádi'ááhjígo nidadooh'ááł ; bikáá' adání éí náhookǫsjí si'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	And you shall put a table at the right side of the tabernacle , and the lamp shall be on the south side of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	Place the table outside the inner curtain on the north side of the Tabernacle , and place the lampstand across the room on the south side .

ID:	4818
INPUT:	Doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájooníiłii háni'dii doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájooníił da doo , áádóó haa'ihii háni'dii haa'ih doo , áádóó ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'éii háni'dii ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájooníił doo , índa jidiyinii éí háni'dii jidiyin doo .
PRED:	Let the wicked do wrong , and let him do what is right , and let him do what is right , and let him be holy .
GOLD:	Let the one who is doing harm continue to do harm ; let the one who is vile continue to be vile ; let the one who is righteous continue to live righteously ; let the one who is holy continue to be holy . ”

ID:	4819
INPUT:	Índa tsék'ih na'azólii áádóó na'ashǫ́'iiłbáhí łahgo aní'doolníiłii , na'ashǫ́'iiłbáhítsoh , na'ashǫ́'iiłbáhí łitsoii , na'ashǫ́'ii dootł'izhii táyi' dahólóonii .
PRED:	And they shall bow down upon the sea , and upon the dragon , saying , The dragon , the dragon , the dragon , and the dragon .
GOLD:	the gecko , the monitor lizard , the common lizard , the sand lizard , and the chameleon .

ID:	4820
INPUT:	T'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'éł'íinii t'áá ałtso nahjį' nidííní'ą́ ; t'áá íiyisí náhóóchįįdígíí bits'ą́ąjį' ánéinidzaa .
PRED:	Thou hast taken away all thy wrath , and hast cast them out of thy wrath .
GOLD:	You held back your fury.You kept back your blazing anger .

ID:	4821
INPUT:	Azhą́ diné doo hóyáanii nidi , doo yáłti'góó hóyą́ągo baa nitsáhákees , doo yádíłtihgóó diné ak'i'diitą́ą́ lá bidi'niih .
PRED:	But if a fool is wise , he is not wise , but he who does not know what he is old .
GOLD:	Even fools are thought wise when they keep silent ; with their mouths shut , they seem intelligent .

ID:	4822
INPUT:	Áko Kapérniyamgi jíkai , áádóó t'áá áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́į'go kin bii' áłah ná'ádleehí biyi' góne' yah ajííyáago naz'neeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	And when they came to Capernaum , he went into the synagogue on the Sabbath , and taught them .
GOLD:	Jesus and his companions went to the town of Capernaum . When the Sabbath day came , he went into the synagogue and began to teach .

ID:	4823
INPUT:	Hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh góne' naat'áanii éí diné áłah nádleehígíí awáalyaaí t'ááłá'ígo t'áá deinízinígíí yá ch'ééyiiłt'e' łeh .
PRED:	And the king came out of the synagogue , and put him in charge of the synagogue .
GOLD:	Now it was the governor 's custom each year during the Passover celebration to release one prisoner to the crowd — anyone they wanted .

ID:	4824
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Éran ábididííniił , Ííjip haz'ą́ągi tó dadeezlínígíí áádóó tooh danílínígíí áádóó be'ak'id dah naazyínígíí índa tó naazyínígíí dił dadooleeł biniyé bikáá'góó nigish bił dah didiilnííh , áko Ííjip kéyahgi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' dił hólǫ́ǫ doo ; azhą́ tsin łeets'aa' índa tsé łeets'aa' tó dabiyi'ígíí t'áá át'é dił dadooleeł .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Tell Aaron , ‘ I will put your staff on the rivers of Egypt , the rivers , the rivers , the rivers , the water , the water , and the water , and the water in all the land of Egypt . ' ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses : “ Tell Aaron , ‘ Take your staff and raise your hand over the waters of Egypt — all its rivers , canals , ponds , and all the reservoirs . Turn all the water to blood . Everywhere in Egypt the water will turn to blood , even the water stored in wooden bowls and stone pots . ' ”

ID:	4825
INPUT:	Nidi ts'ídá átséedi Sháíloh kin haal'áadi shá haz'ą́ągo shízhi' bee ho'dójíigo áshłaa yę́ęgóó dínááh , áko áadi shidine'é doo yá'áshónígi ádaat'ínígíí biniinaa atéshłaaígíí níníł'į́ .
PRED:	But as for me in Shiloh in Shiloh , I have set my name in Shiloh , and I have seen the evil of my people .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Go now to the place at Shiloh where I once put the Tabernacle that bore my name . See what I did there because of all the wickedness of my people , the Israelites .

ID:	4826
INPUT:	Jéíkab dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó bóhólníih dooleełii hahodooleeł ; kin haal'áagi dadzidziihígíí áhodi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	The kingdom of Jacob will rule over the house of Jacob ; the remnant of the city will be cut off .
GOLD:	A ruler will rise in Jacobwho will destroy the survivors of Ir . ”

ID:	4827
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí hóyée'go á hada'iidziihii áádóó bił ałtaa hół'aahii índa aditeh nihik'ijį' kwíidoolííł ; éí bíndadoołnishígíí t'áá át'é baa nídoohkaigo hóyée'go bá hada'iidziih doo ; ałtso ádoohdįįłjį' índa t'áadoo hodina'í ałtso ásoohdįįdjį' nihik'ijį' kwíidoolííł , háálá Bóhólníihii éí doo yá'ádaashóonii baa nidaahkaigo t'óó yóó'adashisidoo'ą́ .
PRED:	And the Lord will rebuke you with the curse , and with the curse , and with the curse , and with all that you have done ; and you shall be cursed , until you have destroyed all your enemies , until you have destroyed the evil which the Lord has done to you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord himself will send on you curses , confusion , and frustration in everything you do , until at last you are completely destroyed for doing evil and abandoning me .

ID:	4828
INPUT:	Diné naalnishii bich'į' nahalyéii doo t'óó bee baa hojoosba'ii át'éego yaa nitsíkees da , nidi yik'é naalnishii át'é .
PRED:	He does not think about the work of a man , but he who does not receive it .
GOLD:	When people work , their wages are not a gift , but something they have earned .

ID:	4829
INPUT:	Éí t'áadoo bik'ee nił yé'í , háálá Bóhólníihii niDiyin God ná naabaah doo .
PRED:	Do not be afraid of them because the Lord your God will be with you .
GOLD:	Do not be afraid of the nations there , for the Lord your God will fight for you . '

ID:	4830
INPUT:	Diyin God yee nihaa joozba'ii bits'ą́ąjį' kódaahne' lágo
PRED:	The Good News of God
GOLD:	A Call to Listen to God

ID:	4831
INPUT:	Áádóó Sámuel ání , Da' Bóhólníihii éí didlidgo náádahaniihii áádóó náádahidoonihii Bóhólníihii bizaad bik'eh hól'ínígíísh biláahgo ayóó át'éego yaa bił hózhǫ́ ? Jó , ak'eh hól'ínígíí éí nááhániihii biláahgo yá'át'ééh , índa adzíists'ą́ą'go éí deenásts'aa' bik'ah nááhániihii biláahgo yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	And Samuel said , Is it better than the burnt offering and the burnt offering of the Lord , than the commandment of the Lord ? For the Lord is better than the ram .
GOLD:	But Samuel replied , “ What is more pleasing to the Lord : your burnt offerings and sacrificesor your obedience to his voice ? Listen ! Obedience is better than sacrifice , and submission is better than offering the fat of rams .

ID:	4832
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bidine'é daadziihígíí bá naat'á ch'ah ayóó át'éii áádóó ayóó ánóolninii nilį́į doo ;
PRED:	In those days the Lord of hosts will be the crown of his people , and the glory of his people .
GOLD:	Then at last the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill himself be Israel 's glorious crown.He will be the pride and joyof the remnant of his people .

ID:	4833
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Héshban kin haal'áii binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił , áádóó Aró'er kin haal'áii binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił , índa Árnan tooh nílíní bibąąhgóó kin hadaas'áhígóó t'áá át'é kéédahat'į́įgo táadi neeznádiin nááhai . Ha'át'éegoshą' t'áadoo bighanídasidooht'ą́ą da ?
PRED:	And the children of Israel dwelt in Heshbon , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and all the cities of the Arnon , and all the cities of the Arnon , and all the cities of the Arnon , and the cities of the Arnon , are ye not able to escape ?
GOLD:	“ Israel has been living here for 300 years , inhabiting Heshbon and its surrounding settlements , all the way to Aroer and its settlements , and in all the towns along the Arnon River . Why have you made no effort to recover it before now ?

ID:	4834
INPUT:	Yee nida'ach'ąąhii yee eda'alyaii ádayiilaago t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee ádaa dahas'nihgo doo daaldinii índa dajoodláii ádá ádayiilaa ; éí bąą t'óó baa'ihgo baa nitsídadzikeesgo áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	They have made idols of idols , and they have made idols and proud . Therefore I will make them ashamed .
GOLD:	They were proud of their beautiful jewelryand used it to make detestable idols and vile images.Therefore , I will make all their wealthdisgusting to them .

ID:	4835
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' nihi'ana'í t'áá ałtso díí yaa dahodiizts'ą́ą'go áádóó ał'ąą dine'é nihinaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí díí dayiiłtsą́ągo bąąh nidahazkaadgo yik'ee nitsidaaskai , háálá nihiDiyin God éí ła'yiyiilaago yaa ákódaniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when all your enemies heard this , that all the nations that dwell among you saw it , that they were in the midst of the nations that dwelt among us , because God had done this to us .
GOLD:	When our enemies and the surrounding nations heard about it , they were frightened and humiliated . They realized this work had been done with the help of our God .

ID:	4836
INPUT:	Áko hoł nooyéłígíí ádadííniid , Díí Jesus , Diyin God yá halne'ii , Gáliliidi Názareth hoolyéédóó át'į́ .
PRED:	They said to him , “ This is Jesus , a prophet from Galilee . ”
GOLD:	And the crowds replied , “ It 's Jesus , the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee . ”

ID:	4837
INPUT:	Da'oodlání baa ádahojilyáanii t'ááłá'í hwe'asdzą́ą doo , ha'áłchíní índa haghan haz'ą́ągi yá'át'éehgo dah da'jí'éesh doo .
PRED:	And they shall take one of them , and they shall take their children , and their houses .
GOLD:	A deacon must be faithful to his wife , and he must manage his children and household well .

ID:	4838
INPUT:	Kót'éego Jóseph ba'áłchíní éí Manáseh dine'é áádóó Íífreiyim dine'é kéyah bíí' dooleełii nídahodii'ą́ .
PRED:	So the sons of Joseph gave the inheritance of Manasseh and Ephraim .
GOLD:	This was the homeland allocated to the families of Joseph 's sons , Manasseh and Ephraim .

ID:	4839
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí ayaadi éé' nineezígíí Éran biih jííłtį́įgo sis bee áká bijiszas áádóó éé' agod ta'jį' nineel'ánígíí biih náájííłtį́ ; éí bikáa'gi íífad wolyéii éí ajéíts'iin bąąh nináltsosígíí yąąh niiníłtsoozgo íífad biniyé sis naashch'ąą'go yistł'ónígíí yee ye'aztł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	And Moses put on the robe , and put it on Aaron 's robe , and put it on the robe , and put it on it ; and he put the ephod upon it , and put it on it .
GOLD:	He put the official tunic on Aaron and tied the sash around his waist . He dressed him in the robe , placed the ephod on him , and attached the ephod securely with its decorative sash .

ID:	4840
INPUT:	Kédaayah béeso bik'é a<unk> níiłgo nináádahaniih doo . Da'oo'íinii binááł kéyah nidahaniihgo bee bééhózinii éí hanáádadilne'go dánááda'diljeeh doo . Bénjamin bikéyahgi , Jerúsalem kin haal'á bik'i dinaago nahós'a'gi ákwe'é ákót'ée doo . Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó dayílk'idgóó kin hadaas'áhígóó ákódaat'ée doo . Honíteelgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó shádi'áahjigo kin hadaas'áágóó ałdó' , háálá yisnááh dajílíinii nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo daahwíí' yę́ę hwíí' nídadoodleełgo ádeeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And they shall offer money in the land , and they shall offer it before the eyes of the blind ; and they shall be in the land of Benjamin , and in the cities of Judah , and in the cities of the cities of Judah .
GOLD:	Yes , fields will once again be bought and sold — deeds signed and sealed and witnessed — in the land of Benjamin and here in Jerusalem , in the towns of Judah and in the hill country , in the foothills of Judah and in the Negev , too . For someday I will restore prosperity to them . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	4841
INPUT:	Shí Paul , Diyin God yá naal'a'í índa Jesus Christ yá yil'aadii nishłį́ . Diyin God náyiizláa'ii bida'oodlą' yee aa dadzólíii náás yit'ih doogo índa Diyin God k'ehgo iiná bik'ehgo t'áá aaníinii yaa ákodahiniizįįh doo biniyé shi'dool'aad .
PRED:	I am Paul , a servant of God and Jesus . I am sent to be a servant of God , that those who believe in the truth may come to the truth of God .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ . I have been sent to proclaim faith to those God has chosen and to teach them to know the truth that shows them how to live godly lives .

ID:	4842
INPUT:	Áko Aizéíyah kóníigo haa hoolne'ígíí t'áá aaníí silį́į́' : T'áá aaníí dadoohts'a' dooleeł nidi , ts'ídá doo bik'idadi'doohtį́įł da , áádóó t'áá aaníí daah'į́į dooleeł nidi , ts'ídá doo deidoołtséeł da .
PRED:	Then Isaiah said , “ As surely as you hear , you will not understand , but you will not understand , but you will not see .
GOLD:	This fulfills the prophecy of Isaiah that says , ‘ When you hear what I say , you will not understand.When you see what I do , you will not comprehend .

ID:	4843
INPUT:	Nidi diné yich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįdígíí doo hináágóó áádóó bik'éí doo hólǫ́ǫ́góó t'áadoo yich'į' niná'ódlé łígóó éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįdígíí niná'doodléełgo Bóhólníihii bá náá'iiłniihii baa didoot'áałgo deenásts'aa' bee á k'ééhoodǫǫłii óóltą'go há k'ééhozhdoołdǫǫłii nááhizhdoołnih .
PRED:	But if he does not sin against the man , then he shall give it to him , and he shall give it to the priest , and he shall make atonement for the ram .
GOLD:	But if the person who was wronged is dead , and there are no near relatives to whom restitution can be made , the payment belongs to the Lord and must be given to the priest . Those who are guilty must also bring a ram as a sacrifice , and they will be purified and made right with the Lord .

ID:	4844
INPUT:	Áádóó ádidooniił , Háájíshą' hadiyin dabidi'níinii índa hatsé bada'jólí nít'é'ígíí ?
PRED:	He will say , “ Where is the gods and stone ? ”
GOLD:	Then he will ask , ‘ Where are their gods , the rocks they fled to for refuge ?

ID:	4845
INPUT:	T'áadoo naaki nilíní aláahgo át'éii éí a'ohgo át'éii yik'ijidlíigo bééhózin .
PRED:	He is greater than two . He knows that he is greater .
GOLD:	And without question , the person who has the power to give a blessing is greater than the one who is blessed .

ID:	4846
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii ádííniid , Ha'át'íí ił ílį́į́ shį́į́ , doodaii' ha'át'íí ádił ídlį́į́ shį́į́ Mórdiikai bá baa na'asdee' ? Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii bá nidaal'a'í ádabidííniid , t'áadoo há baa na'asdee'í da .
PRED:	The king said to him , “ What is this great thing that you have done for Mordecai ? ” So the king 's servants answered , “ Do n't let your enemies do it . ”
GOLD:	“ What reward or recognition did we ever give Mordecai for this ? ” the king asked.His attendants replied , “ Nothing has been done for him . ”

ID:	4847
INPUT:	Díí kin haal'áagi t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nidajikaii éí diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił , áádóó dichin índa naałniih nidahodoołtsił , nidi díí kin haal'áádóó nahgóó ch'ízhníyáii éí Kaldíya dine'é bisiláo honáshzhiizhii dahwiidoołtsołgo éí jiináa doo , áádóó binaalte' jílį́į doo .
PRED:	Those who live in this city will die by the sword , famine , famine , famine , and pestilence , but the army of the Chaldeans will give him life , and he will live .
GOLD:	Everyone who stays in Jerusalem will die from war , famine , or disease , but those who go out and surrender to the Babylonians will live . Their reward will be life !

ID:	4848
INPUT:	díí doo bizhdeelchíid da , díí doo jiilįh da , éí doo nízhdiilée da ?
PRED:	He did not come with him , and he did not eat these things ?
GOLD:	“ Do n't handle ! Do n't taste ! Do n't touch ! ” ?

ID:	4849
INPUT:	Ákohgo doo haa nááhodeeshnih da , índa házhi' binahjį' doo nááhodeeshnih da , dííniidgo hazaad éí shijéí bii'di hólǫ́ǫgo shits'in bii'di kǫ' nahalingo bidá'deelkaal , áádóó ch'ééh bił t'ą́ą́' sétį́įgo bąąh niníyá . Áko Diyin God bizaad doo bee yáshti' da dooleeł nisingo ch'ééh ááł'įįd .
PRED:	Then I will answer him again , and I will not answer him . I said , “ My words is in the midst of my heart , and I have shut up my bones like a fire in the midst of fire , and I have found it . ”
GOLD:	But if I say I 'll never mention the Lordor speak in his name , his word burns in my heart like a fire.It 's like a fire in my bones ! I am worn out trying to hold it in ! I ca n't do it !

ID:	4850
INPUT:	T'áá nił naash'aashgo naadiin nááhai ; nidibé dabi'ádígíí índa tł'ízí dabi'ádígíí t'áadoo bitsą́ hada'iiz'éel da , índa nideenásts'aa' t'áadoo ła' yishghal da .
PRED:	I have been with you thirty years old when you were with you , sheep and goats , and no ram , and no ram .
GOLD:	“ For twenty years I have been with you , caring for your flocks . In all that time your sheep and goats never miscarried . In all those years I never used a single ram of yours for food .

ID:	4851
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Bóhólníihii náyookąąhgo kóní , Díí dinéshą' daa deeshłííł ? K'adę́ę tsé yee shił nidadzíłne' .
PRED:	Moses cried out to the Lord , saying , “ What will I do to these men ? ”
GOLD:	Then Moses cried out to the Lord , “ What should I do with these people ? They are ready to stone me ! ”

ID:	4852
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , Diyin God doo nihá nihodiyoo'aał daígíí biniyé t'áadoo ałch'į' saad dahonoł'íní . Jó'akon , ánihwii'aahii ch'é'étiindę́ę́' sizį́ !
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , do n't send them to you . Behold , the judge stood at the door .
GOLD:	Do n't grumble about each other , brothers and sisters , or you will be judged . For look — the Judge is standing at the door !

ID:	4853
INPUT:	Háishą' biyooch'íidii nilį́ ? Jesus éí doo Christ át'į́į da , jinínígíí lą́ą . ATaa' índa biYe' doo ádízhdéélt'i'góó hadziidziihígíí éí lá Christ bi'ana'í jílį́ .
PRED:	Who is a false witness ? He who does not say that Jesus is the Messiah . He is the enemy and the one who does not say that he is the enemy .
GOLD:	And who is a liar ? Anyone who says that Jesus is not the Christ . Anyone who denies the Father and the Son is an antichrist .

ID:	4854
INPUT:	Áko , Nídayínóhkááh , bizhdííniidgo tsinaa'eeł biih jííyá , áádóó Mágdala nahós'a'jį' tsé'naa nida'dzis'éél .
PRED:	And they went out , and went into the boat , and went into the boat ; and they passed over to the land of Galilee .
GOLD:	Then Jesus sent the people home , and he got into a boat and crossed over to the region of Magadan .

ID:	4855
INPUT:	David yę́ę biye' aláahgo naat'áanii nilíinii Jerúsalemgi halne'í nilį́įgo díí saad yee hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	This is the words of David the son of David the son of David , the son of David , the son of David , in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	These are the words of the Teacher , King David 's son , who ruled in Jerusalem .

ID:	4856
INPUT:	Jóseph daaztsą́
PRED:	Joseph 's Death
GOLD:	The Death of Joseph

ID:	4857
INPUT:	Dį́į́' náhááh góne' éí nídízííd Zif yiziłígíí binih Bóhólníihii bikin bitł'ááh nástł'iní ályaa ,
PRED:	In the fourth year of the Lord 's house was built ,
GOLD:	The foundation of the Lord 's Temple was laid in midspring , in the month of Ziv , during the fourth year of Solomon 's reign .

ID:	4858
INPUT:	Háálá t'ááłá'í jinítínígo ha'át'íhída hwee hólónígíí biláahgo ła' haa náádoolyééł , áko lą'í hwee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł , nidi ha'át'íhída hwee ádinígíí éí t'áá hwee hólónígíí nidi haghadoolyééł .
PRED:	For everyone who has anything will be given to him , and he who does not have , but he who does what he has will be taken away .
GOLD:	To those who use well what they are given , even more will be given , and they will have an abundance . But from those who do nothing , even what little they have will be taken away .

ID:	4859
INPUT:	Ádił oodzíí' k'ééhodoodǫǫłjí yoołkáłígíí
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Day of Atonement

ID:	4860
INPUT:	Áko biiskání , Agrípa índa Bernáísii , ayóó át'éego baa dzólníigo ní'áazhgo aa hwiinít'į́į́ góne' siláo aląąjį' bindanit'a'í índa kin haal'áádóó diné alááh dahideezíinii yił yah aakai . Índa Féstas bizaad k'ehgo , Paul yił yah adaaskai .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that Agrippa , and Agrippa , and the princes of the city , and the elders of the city , and the elders of the people of the city , and went with Paul .
GOLD:	So the next day Agrippa and Bernice arrived at the auditorium with great pomp , accompanied by military officers and prominent men of the city . Festus ordered that Paul be brought in .

ID:	4861
INPUT:	Ákohgo náá'iiłniihii Éran dine'é éí Hííbran kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił yaa deideez'ą́ ; éí kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichéehii iisxíinii bá át'é , áádóó Líbnah kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił yaa deideez'ą́ .
PRED:	And the priest gave it to Aaron the priest of Hebron , Hebron , for a refuge in Hebron , and its suburbs with its pasture lands .
GOLD:	The following towns with their pasturelands were given to the descendants of Aaron the priest : Hebron ( a city of refuge for those who accidentally killed someone ) , Libnah ,

ID:	4862
INPUT:	Éí bąą bit'áahgi honishłónígíí bik'ee shił yéé' ; baa nitsískeesgo t'áá íiyisí binásdzid .
PRED:	Therefore I am afraid of me , and I am afraid .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so terrified in his presence.When I think of it , terror grips me .

ID:	4863
INPUT:	Lk . 5 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals the Blind

ID:	4864
INPUT:	Áádóó abínígo Béílam nídii'na'go bitélii yik'i dah aznil áádóó Mó'ab dine'é bindanit'a'í yił dah diikai .
PRED:	And Balaam rose up early in the morning , and put his donkey on his donkey , and the princes of Moab went with him .
GOLD:	So the next morning Balaam got up , saddled his donkey , and started off with the Moabite officials .

ID:	4865
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí éí yóó'adahineezhchą́'ígíí behétł'óól łeeh dadínóoséełgo áádóó dego dadínóoséełgo bineest'ą' dahodooleeł .
PRED:	And the remnant of Judah that are left shall be cut off , and they shall bear fruit , and bear fruit .
GOLD:	And you who are left in Judah , who have escaped the ravages of the siege , will put roots down in your own soiland will grow up and flourish .

ID:	4866
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' ahééh hwiindzin
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	God Offers Comfort to All

ID:	4867
INPUT:	Dániel , Gíniithan , Bérak ,
PRED:	Daniel , Benaiah , Benaiah ,
GOLD:	Daniel , Ginnethon , Baruch ,

ID:	4868
INPUT:	Nidine'é Ízrel nich'į' nida'iisíi'go biniinaa bi'ana'í bik'eh dadeesdlį́į'go áádóó nízhi' dayózhíigo nich'į' ninákaigo índa díí kin biyi' nída'ookąąhgo sodadilzingo
PRED:	The Israelites have sinned against you because of your enemies , and when they call out to your name , and pray in this house .
GOLD:	“ If your people Israel are defeated by their enemies because they have sinned against you , and if they turn to you and acknowledge your name and pray to you here in this Temple ,

ID:	4869
INPUT:	Dabitsoo' éí k'aa' na'ałtseedii yee da'diłt'ohígíí nidahalin ; atsoo' biyooch'íidgo yáłti' . Ła' yił kééhat'íinii k'é yiłníigo yich'į' yáłti' łeh , nidi t'áá biyi'ídi éí yaa nahaadáago áníi łeh .
PRED:	The tongue of their tongue are like a arrows ; they speak lies against their neighbor , but they speak against their neighbor .
GOLD:	For their tongues shoot lies like poisoned arrows.They speak friendly words to their neighborswhile scheming in their heart to kill them .

ID:	4870
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kintaa da'aztiingóó díí saad baa nahólne'go kódíní , Díí bee aha'deet'áanii saad deísínółts'ą́ą'go bida'oł'į́ .
PRED:	The Lord said to me , “ Listen to these words in Judah and in Jerusalem , and say to them , “ Listen to the words of this covenant .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	4871
INPUT:	Éí bąą Mó'ab dine'é baa yínííł nishłį́įgo t'áá aaníí Mó'ab dine'é t'áá ałtso yéego baa yishcha doo ; <unk> kin haal'áádóó diné baa yínííł nishłį́įgo dish'níi doo .
PRED:	Therefore I will weep for Moab , and I will cry for all Moab ; I will cry out of the city .
GOLD:	So now I wail for Moab ; yes , I will mourn for Moab.My heart is broken for the men of Kir-hareseth .

ID:	4872
INPUT:	Kaldíya dine'é díí kin haal'áhígíí yik'ijį' anadeił'į́įgo áajį' dah didoojahgo yidahodidooniłgo deididoołił . Yee shá dahodoołchįįłgo kin bighą́ą́'góó diyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' yanáadzi'go nááhániihii yadayiinilii áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii Béíyal yich'į' náádayiiłniihii éí t'áá bił ałtso deididoołił .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , that the Chaldeans shall burn up against this city , and burn them with fire , and burn them upon the high places , and burn incense upon the high places , and burn incense , and burnt offering .
GOLD:	The Babylonians outside the walls will come in and set fire to the city . They will burn down all these houses where the people provoked my anger by burning incense to Baal on the rooftops and by pouring out liquid offerings to other gods .

ID:	4873
INPUT:	Dooládó' Diyin God nich'į' <unk> ti' laanaa nisin , áádóó nik'ijį' hadoodzihgo
PRED:	How can God answer you , and he will speak against you .
GOLD:	If only God would speak ; if only he would tell you what he thinks !

ID:	4874
INPUT:	Shi'ana'í danilíinii biláahgo nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii honisą́ągo áshósin , háálá hool'áágóó shił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	I have kept my commandments above my enemies , because he is with me forever .
GOLD:	Your commands make me wiser than my enemies , for they are my constant guide .

ID:	4875
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph bits'in Ízrel dine'é danilíinii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' deizhjaa'ígíí ałdó' Shííkem kin haal'áagi yóó'ádayiilaa ; éí Shííkem bizhé'é Héímor wolyéii biye'ké éí kéyah haz'ą́ągi béésh łigaii neeznádiin bíighahgo Jéíkab nahwiisnii' yę́ęgi yóó'ádahoolaa ; éí kéyah Jóseph ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And they buried the bones of Israel from the land of Egypt , which they had brought out of Shechem , and they buried them in Shechem , a hundred and twenty hundred years in the land of Shechem , which was in the land of Jacob .
GOLD:	The bones of Joseph , which the Israelites had brought along with them when they left Egypt , were buried at Shechem , in the plot of land Jacob had bought from the sons of Hamor for 100 pieces of silver . This land was located in the territory allotted to the descendants of Joseph .

ID:	4876
INPUT:	Áko hajííghalgo ájíní , Diné éí tsin naazkaadii nidahalingo tádazhdikáahgo yish'į́ .
PRED:	And he lifted up his eyes , and said , I see them as the trees of the trees .
GOLD:	The man looked around . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I see people , but I ca n't see them very clearly . They look like trees walking around . ”

ID:	4877
INPUT:	Sálaman bá nidaal'a'í bada'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii : Sótai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Sófiireth ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Piiráída ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	The sons of Solomon 's servants : the sons of Ahab , the sons of Tema , the sons of Tema ,
GOLD:	The descendants of these servants of King Solomon returned from exile : Sotai , Hassophereth , Peruda ,

ID:	4878
INPUT:	Nihí nihich'į'go yit'íní ályaa , áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God nilį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł . Jó , doo ła' Diyin God nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	The Lord your God is revealed to you , and you will know that there is no other God .
GOLD:	“ He showed you these things so you would know that the Lord is God and there is no other .

ID:	4879
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , nízhi' bee yisdáshíłteeh , áádóó nibee adziilii binahjį' t'áá ákogi át'é , shidiní .
PRED:	O God , save me in thy name , and in thy power thou hast spoken righteousness .
GOLD:	Come with great power , O God , and rescue me ! Defend me with your might .

ID:	4880
INPUT:	áádóó t'áákáajį' ch'ího'deeltį́įgo , Féro bitsi' náhodiiłtį́įgo t'áá bí biyáázh jílį́ nahalingo honeesą́ .
PRED:	And when he had gone out , he took the daughter of Pharaoh 's daughter as his own son .
GOLD:	When they had to abandon him , Pharaoh 's daughter adopted him and raised him as her own son .

ID:	4881
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' Bénjamin dine'é nináhaaskaigo Jéíbesh-gíliyadóó ch'ikéí ninádajiizh'eezhígíí baa dadziiznil , nidi doo ałtso bininíłna' da .
PRED:	And the men of Benjamin came to Benjamin at that time , and brought them to the women of Jabesh , but they did not destroy them .
GOLD:	Then the men of Benjamin returned to their homes , and the 400 women of Jabesh-gilead who had been spared were given to them as wives . But there were not enough women for all of them .

ID:	4882
INPUT:	Sáíman Peter áhodííniid , Bóhólníihii , háísh ałdó' bich'į' dah náádidiikah ? Ni t'éí saad binahjį' iiná doo ninít'i'ii hodooleełii nee hólǫ́ ,
PRED:	Simon said to Peter , “ Lord , who will go up with us ? You have a way of eternal life .
GOLD:	Simon Peter replied , “ Lord , to whom would we go ? You have the words that give eternal life .

ID:	4883
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é kóbidohní , Ni' bikáá'góó naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso díí kódaat'éhígíí t'éí daohsą́ą dooleeł :
PRED:	“ Tell the Israelites , ‘ This is what the animals of the earth will eat .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ Of all the land animals , these are the ones you may use for food .

ID:	4884
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá áníiltso t'ááłá'í nihiTaa' . Diyin God ts'ídá t'ááłá'ígíí ánihiilaa . Áko haash yit'éego nihí t'ááłá'í niitínígo nihik'isóó binda'siidlo'go bee danihizhé'é yę́ę bibee aha'deet'áanii <unk> <unk> ?
PRED:	All of us have made a covenant with God our Father . How can each man make a covenant with his brothers ?
GOLD:	Are we not all children of the same Father ? Are we not all created by the same God ? Then why do we betray each other , violating the covenant of our ancestors ?

ID:	4885
INPUT:	Gad naa'anííkaadii éí tsídii wót'áahdi nidaat'a'ii t'áá ałtso yii'góó dabaghan doo , áádóó halgaigóó naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso éí gad bits'áoz'a' yik'i naaldeeh doo .
PRED:	And he shall take away all the birds of the sky , and all the birds of the sky shall dwell in the field , and all the beasts of the field shall be upon it .
GOLD:	“ The birds roost on its fallen trunk , and the wild animals lie among its branches .

ID:	4886
INPUT:	Dooládó' Diyin God bich'į' nihaa ahééh daniidzin da ! T'áá íiyisí ił hózhóonii bee nihiDiyin God binááł nihaa nihił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	We give thanks to God ! We rejoice in our God !
GOLD:	How we thank God for you ! Because of you we have great joy as we enter God 's presence .

ID:	4887
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii doo haada yit'ée da
PRED:	The Lord 's Law
GOLD:	Tsadhe

ID:	4888
INPUT:	Kót'éego dibé yázhí índa ak'áán áádóó áliv ak'ah t'áá áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániih doo biniyé t'áá ákwíí bíní hasht'éédayiil'įįhgo ahool'áa doo .
PRED:	In the morning , the lambs , the oil , the oil , and the oil , shall be kept in the morning .
GOLD:	The lamb , the grain offering , and the olive oil must be given as a daily sacrifice every morning without fail .

ID:	4889
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4890
INPUT:	Azhą́ diltłish baa ajił<unk> nidi , doo baa ii<unk> da , índa tsiidétáán áádóó k'aa'da índa k'aabéésh tsin bighą́ą́h dí'áii doo ła' baa ii<unk> da .
PRED:	Even though he does not send a prostitute to the sword , neither does he break the spear , the shield , the shield , and the shield .
GOLD:	No sword can stop it , no spear , dart , or javelin .

ID:	4891
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus éí be'ek'id bąąhgóó anáádzoodzáago , áadi diné t'áá yíl'áá nít'éé' haa áłah silį́į'go nazneeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	Jesus went back to the sea of the sea , where the crowd gathered together and taught him .
GOLD:	Then Jesus went out to the lakeshore again and taught the crowds that were coming to him .

ID:	4892
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , t'áá ałk'idą́ą́' nibik'eh hoogáałii bénáshniihgo bee ha'ííníshní .
PRED:	I remember your laws , O Lord , when I remember your ordinances .
GOLD:	I meditate on your age-old regulations ; O Lord , they comfort me .

ID:	4893
INPUT:	Áádóó diné naaljį́į́d nilį́įgo náábi'diilzáhígíí Peter índa John yąąh dah sitį́įgo , diné t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí t'óó bił daahaadago , kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi Sálaman bichaha'oh hoolyéejį' ahaneheezhjée'go haa áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	And all the people who had been healed , having been healed by Peter , and John , and John , and all the people came to him at the entrance of the temple .
GOLD:	They all rushed out in amazement to Solomon 's Colonnade , where the man was holding tightly to Peter and John .

ID:	4894
INPUT:	Ákóhodoo'niidígíí shił hóó<unk> go nihitahdóó diné naakits'áadah yilt'éego ał'ąą dine'é nohłínígíí nihik'eh nítį́įgo nídiinil .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that I took twelve men from among you , twelve men of the nations .
GOLD:	“ This seemed like a good idea to me , so I chose twelve scouts , one from each of your tribes .

ID:	4895
INPUT:	Áko ch'ał t'ááłáhíjį' yáádaa'áago ádayiilaa áádóó kéyah t'áá íiyisí <unk> xon silį́į́' .
PRED:	And they made the frogs , and the land was full .
GOLD:	The Egyptians piled them into great heaps , and a terrible stench filled the land .

ID:	4896
INPUT:	Dabinááł shidiltłish bee naaná'eeshxałgo nik'eh hodeesdlį́į́' bijį́ t'áá ádzíłtso t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'áadoo bita' hoo'aahí hatah dahoditłid doo , índa dadine'é t'óó ahayóí nik'ee t'óó bił adahayóigo áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii niniinaa t'óó báhádzidgo nídadool<unk> ł .
PRED:	And the sword shall fall before me , and the sword shall tremble at all that day , and all the peoples shall tremble , because of the hand of the king , and the princes of the king .
GOLD:	Yes , I will shock many lands , and their kings will be terrified at your fate . They will shudder in fear for their lives as I brandish my sword before them on the day of your fall .

ID:	4897
INPUT:	Léíkish kin haal'áadi kéédahoht'íinii , nihitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí éí łį́į́' dilwo'ii bighą́ą́h dadohnííł ; Záíyan bich'é'é ádił ni'iidzííh bee deezt'i'ii nilį́ , háálá Ízrel dine'é bee haz'áanii dayiizti'ii nits'ą́ą́dóó bee bééhoozin .
PRED:	You inhabitants of Achish , you inhabitants of Gath , do n't let your chariots be forgiven , because the law of Israel has been known from Israel .
GOLD:	Harness your chariot horses and flee , you people of Lachish.You were the first city in Judahto follow Israel in her rebellion , and you led Jerusalem into sin .

ID:	4898
INPUT:	nidi díí bee bich'į' haasdzíí' : ádíshníinii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ , áko nihiDiyin God nishłį́į doo áádóó nihí éí shidine'é danohłį́į doo . Áko nihá yá'át'éeh dooleeł biniyé bee nihich'į' hahasdziihígíí éí t'áá ałtso bik'eh dahinohná .
PRED:	But I have commanded you , and you shall be my God , and you shall be my people , and you shall be my people . And you shall do all that I command you .
GOLD:	This is what I told them : ‘ Obey me , and I will be your God , and you will be my people . Do everything as I say , and all will be well ! '

ID:	4899
INPUT:	Ákohgo Nébukadnézzar t'áá íiyisí bił hazhchxihgo éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo nídoot'ishgo yee haadzíí' áádóó éí diné nídeizh'eezhgo aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó nideizh'eezh .
PRED:	Then Nebuchadnezzar was very angry with him . He said , “ They brought some men and brought them to the king . ”
GOLD:	Then Nebuchadnezzar flew into a rage and ordered that Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego be brought before him . When they were brought in ,

ID:	4900
INPUT:	Ayóó íits'a'go nahałtingo tónteel ałch'į' ádaaní áádóó ałkéé' deílk'oołígíí shik'i ch'é<unk> k'ooł nít'éé' .
PRED:	They cried out to the sea with a loud voice , saying , “ The waves of the sea has been broken . ”
GOLD:	I hear the tumult of the raging seasas your waves and surging tides sweep over me .

ID:	4901
INPUT:	Nidi nik'is nilíinii yisnááh silį́į'go doo baa ts'ííd nínízin da doo nít'éé' ; Júdah dine'é danilíinii atídabi'diilyaa góne' doo baa nił nihoozhǫǫh da doo nít'éé' ; yínííł bił beiníłką́ągo doo ádaa hó'niihgóó hadíídzih da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But the brother of Judah was taken away , and they did not rejoice in the house of Judah ; they did not rejoice in the day of the day of their affliction .
GOLD:	“ You should not have gloatedwhen they exiled your relatives to distant lands.You should not have rejoicedwhen the people of Judah suffered such misfortune.You should not have spoken arrogantlyin that terrible time of trouble .

ID:	4902
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánáádí'ní , Yówehdi naniná , Séítan ! Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání : Bóhólníihii niDiyin God bich'į' nahółáa doo , áádóó t'áá bí t'éiyá bá nanil'a' doo .
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ You are still , Satan ! For it is written , ‘ The Lord your God will worship him , and he will serve him . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Get out of here , Satan , ” Jesus told him . “ For the Scriptures say , ‘ You must worship the your Godand serve only him . ' ”

ID:	4903
INPUT:	Nidi t'ááká bee ba'dóó'ááł lágo , háálá dízdiindóó ba'aan yilt'éego , Paul t'áadoo dasiilyéhí ts'ídá doo nááda'diidį́įł da , doo nidi nááda'diidlį́įł da daaníigo , ádee hadadeesdzíi'go hondahaz'ą́ , áko k'ad lą́ didííniiłígíí yiba' hasht'e'ádadólzin .
PRED:	But do not let us eat it , because we do not eat anything that we drink or drink or drink . But now we will be ready to drink . ”
GOLD:	But do n't do it ! There are more than forty men hiding along the way ready to ambush him . They have vowed not to eat or drink anything until they have killed him . They are ready now , just waiting for your consent . ”

ID:	4904
INPUT:	Háálá diné ła' ałjiłnii bí<unk> nigo'go hahojoobá'í áhodoolííł , áádóó asdzání adiléii iiná ílíinii deeshchxǫǫł nízingo haintá .
PRED:	For a man shall fall down to a prostitute , and I will destroy the widow , and shall seek it .
GOLD:	For a prostitute will bring you to poverty , but sleeping with another man 's wife will cost you your life .

ID:	4905
INPUT:	Wót'ááhdę́ę́' shits'in bii'jį' kǫ' yi'níłnii'go shik'eh deesdlį́į́' ; shidááhgóó biih dideeshtałii neineesdizgo t'ą́ą́' kónáshiidlaa ; shinaagi doo naagháhígóó áshiilaago shá bíighah doo shidziilgóó i'ii'aah .
PRED:	He stretched out my bones from heaven ; he sent me back before me , and he sent me back before me ; and he made me a high place , and my strength shall be strong until morning .
GOLD:	“ He has sent fire from heaven that burns in my bones.He has placed a trap in my path and turned me back.He has left me devastated , racked with sickness all day long .

ID:	4906
INPUT:	Bé<unk> yakandóó dah náádii'náago Hor-hagídgad hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And they set out from there and camped at Kadesh .
GOLD:	They left Bene-jaakan and camped at Hor-haggidgad .

ID:	4907
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bééda'alyaago dabiká'ígíí bidááhdóó Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó aląąjį' naazíinii tsosts'idiin yilt'éhígíí ákwii naazį́ . Shéífan biye' Jeiyazanáíyah ákwii atah sizį́ . T'áá ałtso łeets'aa' biyi'dóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchingo nááhániihii dah deíjááh , áko éí dabilid dego ada'iijooł .
PRED:	And I stood there before the elders of Israel before the elders of the elders of Israel , and I saw Shaphan the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , and all the vessels of incense ; and they went up and burned incense .
GOLD:	Seventy leaders of Israel were standing there with Jaazaniah son of Shaphan in the center . Each of them held an incense burner , from which a cloud of incense rose above their heads .

ID:	4908
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso nihił danilį́į le' . Christ bee ałk'isóó danidlíinii ayóó'ádeínóh'ní . Diyin God dadíínóhsin . Aláahgo naat'áanii nihił danilį́į le' .
PRED:	Let all men be with you ; love God 's brothers , and fear the king .
GOLD:	Respect everyone , and love the family of believers . Fear God , and respect the king .

ID:	4909
INPUT:	Áko éí bee ha'deet'ą́ągo , ałk'i hoo'nilgo ha'az'áii hááda'aldáhígíí bikáá' Paul dah dziizį'go diné bich'į' dashdidiilnii' , áko t'áá íiyisí hodiiyeelgo , Hííbrew k'ehjí bich'į' ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní :
PRED:	And when Paul had made a covenant with him , he lifted up his hand upon the men , and lifted up his hand upon the people , and said unto them ,
GOLD:	The commander agreed , so Paul stood on the stairs and motioned to the people to be quiet . Soon a deep silence enveloped the crowd , and he addressed them in their own language , Aramaic .

ID:	4910
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bits'ą́ądi doo nádiinághánídi bee yisdá'iildéehii hólǫ́ , háálá bee nihoyíní'áanii doo hádaat'į́į da .
PRED:	The salvation of the wicked is far from the wicked ; for they do not seek Your law .
GOLD:	The wicked are far from rescue , for they do not bother with your decrees .

ID:	4911
INPUT:	T'áá nida'iisdįįdjį' anoonééł ił hółyée'ii dabótą'ígíí bigháázhdoo'niłgo doo bidahodiit'i'góó ánídazhdoodlííł biniyé diné dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	But they were destroyed from death , so that they could not be able to turn away from them .
GOLD:	Only in this way could he set free all who have lived their lives as slaves to the fear of dying .

ID:	4912
INPUT:	Áko ánáábizhdoo'niid , Éí bąą bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii t'ááłá'í nítínígo yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii yíhooł'aahii silį́į'ii , éí diné léi' kin bee bóhólníhígíí binaalye'é da'ílíinii bitahdóó ádaaniidíii índa t'áá da'ałk'idą́'ígíí ch'íyiiníiłii nahalin .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Therefore the scribes of the Law of heaven is like one of his disciples , who is the kingdom of the kingdom of heaven , the old and the old . ”
GOLD:	Then he added , “ Every teacher of religious law who becomes a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like a homeowner who brings from his storeroom new gems of truth as well as old . ”

ID:	4913
INPUT:	Diyin God ba'áłchíní
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	Love One Another

ID:	4914
INPUT:	Haadzihgo yót'áahdi t'óó ahayóí tó yileeh , áádóó nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' siil dah dadi'yiijoołgo ádeile' ; nahałtingo atsiniltł'ish anídahata'go ííł'į́ áádóó biyódí hólǫ́ǫ́dę́ę́' níyolgo ííł'į́ .
PRED:	He brings rain to the sky , and water out of the waters of the earth , and send rain out of the waters of the earth ; he makes the lightning of the lightning , and his hand is in his hand .
GOLD:	When he speaks in the thunder , the heavens roar with rain.He causes the clouds to rise over the earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	4915
INPUT:	Díí Diyin God biYe' , Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii baa hane' . Éí David ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii bits'ą́ą́dóó diné dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	This is the word of the Lord Jesus Christ , the son of David , the house of David , became a man .
GOLD:	The Good News is about his Son . In his earthly life he was born into King David 's family line ,

ID:	4916
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí t'áá nahont'ingo doo ákogi ádaat'éii haBóhólníihii Diyin God binááł baa nijikaigo t'áá kéédahojit'į́į́góó t'áá át'é éí ya'ii'áago bikáá'dóó ha'alzídídóó kin hadaas'áii ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'inígóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And the children of Israel dwelt in the place of the Lord their God , in the place of the righteous , and built high places .
GOLD:	The people of Israel had also secretly done many things that were not pleasing to the Lord their God . They built pagan shrines for themselves in all their towns , from the smallest outpost to the largest walled city .

ID:	4917
INPUT:	Háálá doo t'áá shíniik'eh hahásdzíi' da , nidi aTaa' shiníł'a'ii éí bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee hahideesdzihígíí índa bee yáshti' dooígíí sheidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	For I have not spoken in my mouth , but the Father has given me the commandment and the commandment which he sent me .
GOLD:	I do n't speak on my own authority . The Father who sent me has commanded me what to say and how to say it .

ID:	4918
INPUT:	Héízargi éí mą'ii dabi<unk> doo áádóó hool'áágóó doo naagháhí da doo . Diné doo ła' ákwe'é índa ba'áłchíní doo ła' ákwii kééhat'į́į da doo .
PRED:	There is no one to dwell there for ever and ever . There is no one to dwell there .
GOLD:	“ Hazor will be inhabited by jackals , and it will be desolate forever.No one will live there ; no one will inhabit it . ”

ID:	4919
INPUT:	Doo handziihgóó éí t'óó shííníłts'ą́ą́' ; hazhó'ó dííníłhéelgo hódzą́ bínandínéeshtįįł .
PRED:	Do n't listen to me , and I will teach you wisdom .
GOLD:	But if not , then listen to me.Keep silent and I will teach you wisdom ! ”

ID:	4920
INPUT:	Áádóó kódadidoohniiłgo , Tsosts'id náhááh góne' ha'át'íishą' deiidą́ą dooleeł ? Jó , doo k'ééda'didiilyéeł da lá , doodaii' nídaneest'áanii doo dadiigish da lá .
PRED:	And thou shalt say unto them , What shall we eat ? for in the seventh year we shall not give it , neither shall we bear it .
GOLD:	But you might ask , ‘ What will we eat during the seventh year , since we are not allowed to plant or harvest crops that year ? '

ID:	4921
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí baa shił nihoozhǫǫh doo ; shii' sizíinii éí shiDiyin God bił hóshǫ́ǫ doo , háálá iiyehii éí nizhóníii ádéíyíístł'inígi át'éego áádóó bá'iigehii nitł'iz yee hadiidzaa nahalingo yisdá'iildééh éé' yee hashidiilaa índa t'áá ákogi át'éii éé' shik'íísti' .
PRED:	I will rejoice in the Lord , and my soul shall rejoice in him : for he hath made my God as a thief , and hath covered my robe as a garment , and covered my robe with righteousness .
GOLD:	I am overwhelmed with joy in the Lord my God ! For he has dressed me with the clothing of salvationand draped me in a robe of righteousness.I am like a bridegroom dressed for his weddingor a bride with her jewels .

ID:	4922
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahgi doo naagháhí da doo ; t'ááníí' t'éí hadaasgai doo , áadi índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo bił béédahodoozįįł . Náil tooh nílínígíí áshłaa , áádóó éí shí , dííníniidígíí bąą
PRED:	The land of Egypt will be desolate , and they will know that I am the Lord , and they will know that I am the river , and because I have commanded you .
GOLD:	The land of Egypt will become a desolate wasteland , and the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord. “ Because you said , ‘ The Nile River is mine ; I made it , '

ID:	4923
INPUT:	Áko Romegi Diyin God ayóó'ánihó'níinii t'áá ánółtso Diyin God bidiyį́į́' dadoohłeełgo nihíká áhodoo'niidii nihich'į' ak'e'ashchí . Diyin God nihiTaa' áádóó Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ bibee ajooba' áádóó bibee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'ii yee nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	And I write unto you all the saints that God loved you in Rome , that ye may be called , and peace be with you in the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I am writing to all of you in Rome who are loved by God and are called to be his own holy people.May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	4924
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída bibid yee nidaa'na'ii áádóó bijáád dį́į'go yee nidaajeehii , doodaii' t'áá ha'átíhída bijáád t'óó adahayóigo łeeshtahgóó nidaajeehii éí doo yidą́ą da ; jó , éí baa'ihii ádaat'é .
PRED:	And every living creature that is on the earth shall be eaten , and upon the four horns , or upon the four horns , and upon the ground shall be unclean ; for it is unclean .
GOLD:	This includes all animals that slither along on their bellies , as well as those with four legs and those with many feet . All such animals that scurry along the ground are detestable , and you must never eat them .

ID:	4925
INPUT:	T'áadoo ahináádadoołtłi'í áádóó t'áadoo saad bee hada'ahiyołdlaadí , háálá ákódaaht'į́įgo ałtso ahididołtah , éí bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the words , and do not be afraid of the words , for it is done to you , and be careful to be careful .
GOLD:	But if you are always biting and devouring one another , watch out ! Beware of destroying one another .

ID:	4926
INPUT:	Dóor agháhóó'áadi kin haal'áhígóó kéédahat'íinii aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í , Gílgal dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	The king of the city , one ; the king of Gilgal , one ;
GOLD:	The king of Dor in the town of Naphoth-dorThe king of Goyim in Gilgal

ID:	4927
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá bí t'éiyá nihí índa danihizhé'é yę́ę Ííjip kéyahdóó naalte' dajílį́įgo haz'ą́ą́dóó hoł ch'ínihiní'eezh , áádóó éí bee ééhózinii ayóó ádaat'éii nihinááł áyiilaa , áádóó t'áá ałtsogóó tádadii'nánígóó índa diné t'áá ałtso bitahgóó ch'ídahii'ná yę́ędą́ą́' Bí nihaa áhályą́ą́ nít'éé' ,
PRED:	For the Lord our God hath brought us out of the land of Egypt , and out of the house of our fathers , and he brought us out of all the people , and he hath brought us out of all the peoples ,
GOLD:	For the Lord our God is the one who rescued us and our ancestors from slavery in the land of Egypt . He performed mighty miracles before our very eyes . As we traveled through the wilderness among our enemies , he preserved us .

ID:	4928
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh bee naalnishí yinaalnishii bá bíná'ayiideeł ?
PRED:	Why do the work of the servant of his servant ?
GOLD:	What do people really get for all their hard work ?

ID:	4929
INPUT:	Daniel éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá nanit'a'í nilíinii Áriyak ábizhdííniid , Ha'át'íísh biniinaa aláahgo naat'áanii yee nihoní'áanii dah yííyił ? Ákohgo Áriyak éí Daniel hazhó'ó yił hoolne' .
PRED:	Daniel said to him , “ Why did the king take the law of the king ? ” Then Daniel told Daniel .
GOLD:	He asked Arioch , “ Why has the king issued such a harsh decree ? ” So Arioch told him all that had happened .

ID:	4930
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii jidósin jileehdóó hoł ni'ééhwiizįįhgo hahalzhish , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii hódzą́ índa na'nitin ąąh dayiiłkóóh .
PRED:	The fear of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ] is at the end of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) , but they see wisdom and understanding .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord is the foundation of true knowledge , but fools despise wisdom and discipline .

ID:	4931
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus t'áá hó hakéyahgóó dah nízhdiidzá , áádóó hódahooł'aahii hakéé' dah diikai .
PRED:	Jesus went back to his own country , and his disciples followed him .
GOLD:	Jesus left that part of the country and returned with his disciples to Nazareth , his hometown .

ID:	4932
INPUT:	Éí bąą shí Paul , nihí doo Jew dine'é danohłíinii nihá Christ Jesus baa hashne'go biniinaa awáalyaaí nishłį́ .
PRED:	Therefore , Paul , I am a prisoner of the Jews , because of the testimony of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I , Paul , a prisoner of Christ Jesus for the benefit of you Gentiles . . .

ID:	4933
INPUT:	Áko Tíírah bíídíiską́ą́dóó naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' binááhaigo Héírangi daaztsą́ .
PRED:	And all the days of Terah were two hundred and five years old when he died .
GOLD:	Terah lived for 205 years and died while still in Haran .

ID:	4934
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní áyiilaadą́ą́' biką'ii índa bi'áadii áyiilaa .
PRED:	But God created all things , male and female .
GOLD:	But ‘ God made them male and female ' from the beginning of creation .

ID:	4935
INPUT:	Áko diné éí Lat áyidííniid , Da' ni<unk> ła' kwe'é kénáádahat'į́ ? Naadaaní índa niye'kéda áádóó nitsi'kéda índa díí kin haal'áhígi nik'éída díí haz'ánídóó ałtso nahgóó hani'éésh ,
PRED:	Then Lot said to Lot , “ Is there a place where we are here ? ” They said , “ Do n't you take your sons , your sons , your land , your sons , your land , and your daughters , and all this city .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the angels questioned Lot . “ Do you have any other relatives here in the city ? ” they asked . “ Get them out of this place — your sons-in-law , sons , daughters , or anyone else .

ID:	4936
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí t'áá bí áyiilaa yę́ę doo yiníł'į́į da dooleeł , índa asdzání bida'alyaii , doodaii' eda'alyaii t'áá bí áyiilaa yę́ę doo bił nilį́į da dooleeł .
PRED:	And he shall not see the altar which he had made , nor shall he be able to make for himself , nor for the idols which he had made .
GOLD:	They will no longer look to their idols for helpor worship what their own hands have made.They will never again bow down to their Asherah polesor worship at the pagan shrines they have built .

ID:	4937
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí doo bąąh bíni'góó t'áadoo łahgo át'éego yąąh tsíndeezkéézgóó kin hadaas'áágóó atíyiilaa yę́ęgi át'éego éí diné ákóbi'dólne' . Áko háni'dii abínígo diwosh háá'áhígíí áádóó ałné'é'áahgo anaa' bik'ee diwosh háá'á ,
PRED:	And the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ He Holds Onto The Heel Of The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Heel Of The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Heel Of The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Heel Of The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] , [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] ,
GOLD:	Let him be destroyed like the cities of oldthat the Lord overthrew without mercy.Terrify him all day long with battle shouts ,

ID:	4938
INPUT:	K'é yijoołáii bitahgi kééhasht'į́įgo t'áá íiyisí nízaadgóó ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	It is a long time to dwell among those who live in peace .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	4939
INPUT:	T'áá áko , t'ah yájíłti'go Júdas , naakits'áadahígíí ła' nilíinii níyá , áádóó aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii áádóó diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii bits'ą́ą́dóó , diné t'óó ahayóí diltłish índa tsihał dayíjáahgo yił haa níná .
PRED:	While he was speaking , Judas , one of the twelve disciples came to him , and the chief priests , and the scribes , and the elders , and the elders , and the elders of the people with swords .
GOLD:	And immediately , even as Jesus said this , Judas , one of the twelve disciples , arrived with a crowd of men armed with swords and clubs . They had been sent by the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders .

ID:	4940
INPUT:	Áko Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Ríízin áádóó Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Remaláíyah éí Jerúsalemgi anaa' hodoołeeł yiniyé bisiláo yił nínáago Éíhaz yizénáshzhiizh , nidi doo bik'eh dazhdódle' át'ée da .
PRED:	Then King Ahaz went up with his army to fight against King Ahaz of Aram , to fight against Jerusalem , but they could not stand .
GOLD:	Then King Rezin of Aram and King Pekah of Israel came up to attack Jerusalem . They besieged Ahaz but could not conquer him .

ID:	4941
INPUT:	Nidajilnishgo yá'át'ééh
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	An Exhortation to Proper Living

ID:	4942
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes ání , Díí bee nihił béédahózin doo ; naanish t'áá át'é ááshłíił doo biniyé Bóhólníihii shiníł'a' áádóó doo t'áá shí shíniik'eh ááshníił da .
PRED:	Moses said , “ You will know that I will do everything that the Lord has sent me , and I do not do what I do .
GOLD:	And Moses said , “ This is how you will know that the Lord has sent me to do all these things that I have done — for I have not done them on my own .

ID:	4943
INPUT:	Kót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii Heziikáíyah bá nidaal'a'í Aizéíyah yaa yíkai .
PRED:	So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah .
GOLD:	After King Hezekiah 's officials delivered the king 's message to Isaiah ,

ID:	4944
INPUT:	Nich'į' t'áá íiyisí t'óó baa'ihígi ádeiit'įįd ; nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó bee nihodiyíní'áanii índa nibee nihodiit'aahii Mózes bich'į' bee hahíínídzíi'ii doo bik'eh dahoniil'į́į da nít'éé' .
PRED:	We have sinned against you ; we have not obeyed your commandments , statutes , and ordinances .
GOLD:	We have sinned terribly by not obeying the commands , decrees , and regulations that you gave us through your servant Moses .

ID:	4945
INPUT:	Bich'ą́ąhgi k'os diłhiłgo biniinaa doo ahoyoot'į́į da , áádóó yá'ąąsh yii'góó tádíghááh .
PRED:	They have not seen the clouds of the clouds , And they have gone down to heaven .
GOLD:	For thick clouds swirl about him , and he can not see us.He is way up there , walking on the vault of heaven . '

ID:	4946
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , T'áá shǫǫdí , da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , baa neiséyeelígíí bee nihił hodeesh'nih :
PRED:	He said to them , “ Please listen to me , and I will tell you the dream .
GOLD:	“ Listen to this dream , ” he said .

ID:	4947
INPUT:	Ákohgo Saul łahgo ízh'diilyaago éé' ła' bee hazdiidzaa ; diné nidilt'éego bił dashdiikaigo tł'ée'go asdzání baa jíkai . Áko ázhdííniid , Shá na'ídídííłkił nisin ; t'áá yízhi'ígíí shá bił hadíí'ash .
PRED:	Then Saul made a robe , and he went with two men , and came to the woman in the night . And he said , Give me a present time .
GOLD:	So Saul disguised himself by wearing ordinary clothing instead of his royal robes . Then he went to the woman 's home at night , accompanied by two of his men. “ I have to talk to a man who has died , ” he said . “ Will you call up his spirit for me ? ”

ID:	4948
INPUT:	Áko diné nidilt'é ní'ázhígíí áháłní , Yisdánihíínínilígi át'éego nihí ałdó' yisdánihidii'nił ; nihinaanish nilíinii t'áadoo baa hwíínílne'góogo ákót'é . Áko ákót'ée doo : Bóhólníihii éí kéyah nihaidiní'ą́ągo naa dajiiniiba' doo , índa t'áá aaníí nich'į' ákódaniit'ée doo .
PRED:	The people said to him , “ If you are saved , we will save us . If you do n't tell us what we do , do n't tell us what the Lord has given us . ”
GOLD:	“ We offer our own lives as a guarantee for your safety , ” the men agreed . “ If you do n't betray us , we will keep our promise and be kind to you when the Lord gives us the land . ”

ID:	4949
INPUT:	nidi tł'ée'go kin haal'á ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'in góyaa ts'iizis bii' dzizdáago ídahooł'aahii hadah adahazlo' .
PRED:	But the disciples went down in the night in the middle of the city , and the disciples took him away .
GOLD:	So during the night , some of the other believers lowered him in a large basket through an opening in the city wall .

ID:	4950
INPUT:	Sáídan dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa hane'
PRED:	The People of Sidon
GOLD:	Restoration for Israel

ID:	4951
INPUT:	Náhodi'niltsxisgo hak'i nidzisk'ą́ągo é'éł'ínígíí áádóó náhodi'niltsxisgo ayi' góne' baa ahiłch'iihígíí éí doo yá'áshóonii ałtso nahjį' kwííł'į́ .
PRED:	The evil of the evil things that is evil in the midst of the evil , in anger , and in anger , and in anger .
GOLD:	Physical punishment cleanses away evil ; such discipline purifies the heart .

ID:	4952
INPUT:	Áádóó Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Asíriya kéyahgóó Ízrel dine'é ayiizh'eezhgo Héílah kin haal'áadi áádóó Gózan kéyahgi Héíbar tooh nílíní bibąąhgóó índa Míídiya dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígóó niyiizh'eezh .
PRED:	And the king of Assyria brought them into Assyria , and brought them to Assyria , and took them in the land of Goshen , and in the midst of the river , and in the sea .
GOLD:	At that time the king of Assyria exiled the Israelites to Assyria and placed them in colonies in Halah , along the banks of the Habor River in Gozan , and in the cities of the Medes .

ID:	4953
INPUT:	Da' doósh Jesus Christ bá yil'aadii nishłį́į da ? Da' doósh t'áá aaníí doo shohodiit'i' da ? Da' doósh t'áá aaníí Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii yiiłtsą́ą da ? Da' doósh nihí Bóhólníihii bee shinaanish danohłį́į da ?
PRED:	Are n't I a judge of Christ Jesus Christ ? Did n't I see you the Lord Jesus Christ ? Did n't you not do the work of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Am I not as free as anyone else ? Am I not an apostle ? Have n't I seen Jesus our Lord with my own eyes ? Is n't it because of my work that you belong to the Lord ?

ID:	4954
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí shighan góne' doo yah adeesháał da índa shitsásk'eh doo biih deesh'nah da ,
PRED:	I will not go into my house , neither will I forget my bed .
GOLD:	“ I will not go home ; I will not let myself rest .

ID:	4955
INPUT:	Ts'ídá doo adidííléeł da .
PRED:	You shall not commit adultery .
GOLD:	“ You must not commit adultery .

ID:	4956
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí dabizhé' é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh , áádóó hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi yóó'áho'diilyaago haye' Riihobówam hatsásk'ehgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Solomon slept with his fathers , and he was buried in the city of David his father , and Rehoboam his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When he died , he was buried in the City of David , named for his father . Then his son Rehoboam became the next king .

ID:	4957
INPUT:	1Kgs . 22 : <unk>
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	The Death of Ahab

ID:	4958
INPUT:	Jesus ábidííniid , Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ánísht'ée doo nínízingo , nílááh nídídáahgo nee hólónígíí t'áá ałtso naa nahóniihgo , bee shóisíníłt'e'ígíí badahojoobá'íígíí bitaa díínih , áko yá'ąąshdi naalye'é ílíinii nee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł , ákohgo índa dah diináahgo shikéé' yínááł .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ If you do what is right , give it to all that you have , and give it to the poor , and you will have riches in heaven , and you will follow me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told him , “ If you want to be perfect , go and sell all your possessions and give the money to the poor , and you will have treasure in heaven . Then come , follow me . ”

ID:	4959
INPUT:	Shik'ééhodootah biniyé hadeesdzih ; hadeesdzihgo énáhodeesįįł .
PRED:	I will answer him , and I will answer him , and I will answer him .
GOLD:	I must speak to find relief , so let me give my answers .

ID:	4960
INPUT:	Ayóó'óósh'níinii bíí' nishłį́ áádóó laanaa shó'níigo shich'į' nitsíkees .
PRED:	I am my beloved , and my thoughts are against me .
GOLD:	I am my lover 's , and he claims me as his own .

ID:	4961
INPUT:	éí bąą Sháílohdi atídahooshłaa yę́ęgi át'éego díí kin shízhi' bee wójíigo si'ánígíí baa dadzíínóhłíigo índa nihí áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę kwe'é haz'ą́ baa diní'ánígíí t'áá bił atínihideeshłííł .
PRED:	So I will punish you in Shiloh , just as I did to them in Shiloh . I will punish you and your ancestors there . ”
GOLD:	So just as I destroyed Shiloh , I will now destroy this Temple that bears my name , this Temple that you trust in for help , this place that I gave to you and your ancestors .

ID:	4962
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bikin bii' sohodizin biniyé yá'át'éehii ná hásht'į́į doo .
PRED:	I will do good to you , that I may seek the house of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	For the sake of the house of the Lord our God , I will seek what is best for you , O Jerusalem .

ID:	4963
INPUT:	Ézra náá'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yína'niłtinii , t'áá éí Bóhólníihii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó bibee nahaz'áanii Ízrel dine'é baa deet'áanii yíhooł'ą́ą'ii nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii Artazérksiiz díí naaltsoos hainíłtsoozígíí át'é .
PRED:	Ezra the priest , the law , the law , and the law of the Lord , and the law of the Lord , and the law of the king of Israel .
GOLD:	King Artaxerxes had given a copy of the following letter to Ezra , the priest and scribe who studied and taught the commands and decrees of the Lord to Israel :

ID:	4964
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago bíyoołkááł yę́ędóó Josáíyah biye' Zedekáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago ła'ts'áadah nááhaijį' ashdla' nídízííd binih Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii dabi'disnáajį' Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanádzihgo hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	And the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah from the hand of Josiah the son of Josiah , the son of Josiah , king of Judah , in the fifth month of Josiah , the son of Josiah , king of Judah , which dwelt in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	4965
INPUT:	áádóó bee ééhózinii , doodaii' bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóii nihich'į' yee yáłti' yę́ę bik'eh áhoodzaago , jó , t'áá bítséedi kónihidííniid , Tį' , diyin dabidi'níinii doo béédahonohsinii bikéé' dah dahididiikah áádóó bá nideil'a' doo .
PRED:	And when he spake to us a sign or wonders , behold , he said unto us , Come , and serve other gods , and serve them .
GOLD:	and the predicted signs or miracles occur . If they then say , ‘ Come , let us worship other gods ' — gods you have not known before —

ID:	4966
INPUT:	táá' góne' hanáádiit'i'ígíí éí jéísinth , áádóó égad , índa ámethist ;
PRED:	And the third row , an ephah , an ephah , and an ephah ;
GOLD:	The third row contained an orange jacinth , an agate , and a purple amethyst .

ID:	4967
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kóní : Jó'akon , Záíyangi tsé bee naaná'ástł'inii ílį́įgo ats'ání'áanii ninish'aah , áko hoodlą́ągo ha'ólíhígíí doo haa yánízingóó ábidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	For it is written : Behold , I have set a stone from Zion , and it shall be done to him that believe in him .
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ I am placing a cornerstone in Jerusalem , chosen for great honor , and anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	4968
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God yee has'áanii diné yéé'iiłníihii bik'ehgo nihá nihwiit'aah dooleełii danohłį́įgo éí bik'ehgo hadahohdziih áádóó ádaahníił le' .
PRED:	And ye shall do according to the law of God , according to the law of men , and do it .
GOLD:	So whatever you say or whatever you do , remember that you will be judged by the law that sets you free .

ID:	4969
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'oii yiyiisxį́ áádóó shash ałdó' yiyiisxį́ , áko díí Filístiya dine'é doo bąąh náhineeshgizhii ałdó' ákwíidoolííł , háálá Diyin God hináanii bisiláo yódziih .
PRED:	Your servant killed a lion and killed him . He will also kill him . He will also let the Philistines also be circumcised . He will make the army of the living God .
GOLD:	I have done this to both lions and bears , and I 'll do it to this pagan Philistine , too , for he has defied the armies of the living God !

ID:	4970
INPUT:	Éí bąą shí ałdó' díí t'áá ałtso t'áá dadeezt'i'dóó wóshdę́ę́' hazhó'ó bik'i'diitą́ągo t'áá ádaat'éégóó ałkéé' sinilgo bee nich'į' ak'e'deeshchíiłgo yá'át'ééh nisin , Thiyáfilas t'áá íiyisí ił nílíinii ,
PRED:	Therefore I also write to you all these things , that I may write to you all things , and to teach all things , all things ,
GOLD:	Having carefully investigated everything from the beginning , I also have decided to write an accurate account for you , most honorable Theophilus ,

ID:	4971
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii ayóó'ánihó'nínígíí biniinaa áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' kéyah yee ádee hadoodzíi'go t'áádóo nídí yee nihoní'ánígíí yi'doolíłígíí biniinaa Bóhólníihii bigaan ayóó ábóodziilii yee háánihíí'eezh índa naalte' danohłį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ędę́ę́' , t'áá éí Féro bits'ą́ąjį' nihik'é niná'ídlá ,
PRED:	But the Lord loved you , because he loved you , and he swore to your fathers , because he swore to your fathers , because of his great power , and by the hand of the Lord brought you out of Pharaoh , and from Pharaoh .
GOLD:	Rather , it was simply that the Lord loves you , and he was keeping the oath he had sworn to your ancestors . That is why the Lord rescued you with such a strong hand from your slavery and from the oppressive hand of Pharaoh , king of Egypt .

ID:	4972
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné t'áá ałtso Gílgalgóó dah diikai , áádóó Gílgalgi Bóhólníihii binááł Saul éí aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa . Áadi nááhidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii Bóhólníihii binááł náádayiisnii' , áko áadi Saul índa Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso ayóó át'éego bił dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	And all the people went up to Gilgal , and set them before the Lord at Gilgal . And there they offered sacrifices before the Lord , and all Israel were glad .
GOLD:	So they all went to Gilgal , and in a solemn ceremony before the Lord they made Saul king . Then they offered peace offerings to the Lord , and Saul and all the Israelites were filled with joy .

ID:	4973
INPUT:	Seth bits'ą́ą́dóó adideezhchíinii
PRED:	The sons of Adam
GOLD:	The Birth of Seth

ID:	4974
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David dinééh ła' hágo yidííniidgo ííłní , Áháníjį' bich'į' dah diilyeedgo síłhé .
PRED:	Then David called a young man and said to him , “ I will turn back from you . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to one of his men , “ Kill him ! ” So the man thrust his sword into the Amalekite and killed him .

ID:	4975
INPUT:	Éíbraham áádóó Abímelek
PRED:	Abraham and Abimelech
GOLD:	Abraham Deceives Abimelech

ID:	4976
INPUT:	Tó ałt'anehegeehgo ałk'iditą́ągo áyiilaa ; kin biyi' hasht'e'na'aznilígi át'éego tónteel ayóó íídéetą́'ígíí beełt'éego hasht'éyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the waters of water , and made the waters of water ; he made the sea like the waters of his feet .
GOLD:	He assigned the sea its boundariesand locked the oceans in vast reservoirs .

ID:	4977
INPUT:	Béégashii bits'ą́ą́dóó géeso índa dibé bibe' áádóó dibé yázhí áádóó Béíshandóó deenásts'aa' áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh agháago yá'át'éehii índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' agháago yá'át'éehii bił jiyą́ą́ nít'éé' ; ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' dił nahalingo łichíi'ii nidlą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	He ate the fat , the sheep , the sheep , the goats , the best goats , and the best goats , and the best , and the best of the wine , as the wine of wine .
GOLD:	He fed them yogurt from the herdand milk from the flock , together with the fat of lambs.He gave them choice rams from Bashan , and goats , together with the choicest wheat.You drank the finest wine , made from the juice of grapes .

ID:	4978
INPUT:	Áko David bits'ą́ą́dóó náás ahoolchíłígíí yóó'adashizhdeez'ánígíí biniinaa atídeeshłííł , nidi hool'áágóó doo t'áá ákót'ée da doo .
PRED:	I will punish the house of David because of the house of David , but it will never be like him forever .
GOLD:	Because of Solomon 's sin I will punish the descendants of David — though not forever . ' ”

ID:	4979
INPUT:	Áko índída , Nigaan nish'náájí bee yisdá'ádííníltį́ bííníghah , nidideeshniił .
PRED:	And thou hast delivered thy right hand in thy right hand , and I will say unto thee ,
GOLD:	Then even I would praise you , for your own strength would save you .

ID:	4980
INPUT:	nidi ádiníl'įįhgo áádóó dah diigháahgo ánoolninii t'óó yaa yoonah .
PRED:	But when the morning comes , he goes away , and forget his face .
GOLD:	You see yourself , walk away , and forget what you look like .

ID:	4981
INPUT:	Ákwii kénáádahat'į́į doo áádóó doo atínáádoolníił da , nidi Jerúsalemgi ts'ídá hasihgo ákwii diné kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	And there they shall dwell there , and no more ; but in Jerusalem shall dwell in it .
GOLD:	And Jerusalem will be filled , safe at last , never again to be cursed and destroyed .

ID:	4982
INPUT:	Ákohgo bidiyin Nísrak wolyéii bikin góne' yich'į' nahałáago haye'ké Adrámelek áádóó Sharíízer diltłish yee hwiisxį́įgo Armíniya kéyahgóó yóó'ahi'noolchą́ą́' , áko haye' Íísar-hádan hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And he served him in the house of his god , in the house of his god : and his sons killed him with the sword , and killed him with the sword , and they fled to the land of Canaan , and his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	One day while he was worshiping in the temple of his god Nisroch , his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer killed him with their swords . They then escaped to the land of Ararat , and another son , Esarhaddon , became the next king of Assyria .

ID:	4983
INPUT:	Éí bąą Trówasdóó nihił dah adii'éelgo Sá<unk> jį' t'óó k'ídahosiildǫǫd , índa biiskání Ni<unk> lisdi nihił aní'éél ,
PRED:	So we went out from Cyprus , and found it for the next day , and to go to Cyprus .
GOLD:	We boarded a boat at Troas and sailed straight across to the island of Samothrace , and the next day we landed at Neapolis .

ID:	4984
INPUT:	Áko Réíchel izh'niiltsąądgo ashkii jishchį́ , áádóó ájíní , Doo ił nishłį́į da yę́ę Diyin God shits'áidiní'ą́ ;
PRED:	And Rachel conceived and gave birth to a son , and said , God has given me a son .
GOLD:	She became pregnant and gave birth to a son . “ God has removed my disgrace , ” she said .

ID:	4985
INPUT:	T'áá Christ Jesus aa nitsíkees yę́ęgi át'éego nihí ałdó' ákót'éego ahaa nitsídaahkees .
PRED:	In the same way , as in Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	You must have the same attitude that Christ Jesus had .

ID:	4986
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	4987
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nik'ee dadiniihii t'áá íiyisí bik'ee dinishniih . Áádóó nich'į' nídahidiikáahii bił ni'nish'įįh .
PRED:	Lord , I hate those who hate you , and I will make those who hate you .
GOLD:	O Lord , should n't I hate those who hate you ? Should n't I despise those who oppose you ?

ID:	4988
INPUT:	Háálá nahasdzáán bikáá' t'áá át'éé nít'éé' kéédahojit'ínígíí t'áá ádzíłtso łoh á si'ą́ nahalingo haa hodoolzhish .
PRED:	For it shall come to pass , that all the inhabitants of the earth shall be a net for all the inhabitants of the earth .
GOLD:	like a trap . For that day will come upon everyone living on the earth .

ID:	4989
INPUT:	Nidi ná sodeeszin , áko ne'oodlą' bee aa dzódlí doo bígééd dííleeł da , áko adíísihígíí bits'ą́ąjį' dah nídinidzáago , nik'isóó dabidziilgo áńdadíídlííł .
PRED:	But I pray for thee , that thy faith may not be faithful ; and when thou hast turned away from them , thou shalt make thy brethren strong .
GOLD:	But I have pleaded in prayer for you , Simon , that your faith should not fail . So when you have repented and turned to me again , strengthen your brothers . ”

ID:	4990
INPUT:	Háálá awéé' éí doo yá'át'éehii yóó'ahidit'aah índa yá'át'éehii nihidit'aahgi bił bééhózin dooígíí t'ah bítséedi díí aláahgo naat'áanii nidilt'éego bééníldzidígíí bikéyah yóó'adidoot'ááł .
PRED:	For the child will be forgiven when you know that evil and good things will be forgiven before you have been forgiven .
GOLD:	For before the child is that old , the lands of the two kings you fear so much will both be deserted .

ID:	4991
INPUT:	éí Shálam yę́ę biye' , éí Zéídak yę́ę biye' , éí Aháítab yę́ę biye' ,
PRED:	The son of Zadok , the son of Zadok , the son of Zadok ,
GOLD:	son of Shallum , son of Zadok , son of Ahitub ,

ID:	4992
INPUT:	Íínak hwe'oodlą' bee éí doo dazdootsaał da biniyé dego aho'dooltį́ . Áko t'áadoo nááho'diiltsą́ą da , háálá Diyin God nááhodiiłtį́ . Háálá t'ah doo nááho'diilteeh yę́ędą́ą́' Diyin God yił hóshǫ́ ha'níigo há ha'oodzíí' .
PRED:	By faith he was raised up to die , and he was not raised to death . For God had given him peace in the beginning of his death .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Enoch was taken up to heaven without dying — “ he disappeared , because God took him. ” For before he was taken up , he was known as a person who pleased God .

ID:	4993
INPUT:	Tónteel ałdó' bí , háálá bí áyiilaa áádóó ni' yíłtseii áyiilaa .
PRED:	He has made the sea , because he has made the dry land dry .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	4994
INPUT:	Áko Esther ázhdííniidígíí Mórdiikai yee yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	Esther told Mordecai what Mordecai had said .
GOLD:	So Hathach gave Esther 's message to Mordecai .

ID:	4995
INPUT:	( Áko Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yisdábidooniłii yeidiní' ą́ , ákót'éego Síriya dine'é biyaadóó hajookai , áko índa Ízrel dine'é átséédą́ą́' dabighan yii' kéédahat'į́į́ nít'é'ígi át'éego ninákai .
PRED:	The Lord saved Israel , and they went back from Aram , just as they lived in the first time .
GOLD:	So the Lord provided someone to rescue the Israelites from the tyranny of the Arameans . Then Israel lived in safety again as they had in former days .

ID:	4996
INPUT:	Áko níyáago , aa dasooláhígíí Jerúsalemgóó dazhdoojih biniyé t'áá háiida hwee lą́ da'soohłį́'ígíí naaltsoos bee haa hashne'go bił dahodeesh'aał .
PRED:	And when I came , I sent them to bring them to Jerusalem , that they might bring them back to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	When I come , I will write letters of recommendation for the messengers you choose to deliver your gift to Jerusalem .

ID:	4997
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nihida'ana'í nihik'ijį' náádadiibahígíí nihinááł nidabi'ditseedgo áyósin doo ; t'ááłáhídę́ę'go nihich'į' náádadiibah doo , áádóó nihits'ą́ąjį' tsosts'idgóó tanídanoochéeh doo .
PRED:	The Lord will destroy us before our enemies , and they will fight against us , and we will turn against one another , and seven nations will flee from us .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will conquer your enemies when they attack you . They will attack you from one direction , but they will scatter from you in seven !

ID:	4998
INPUT:	Kót'éego éí bí'néél'ąąd doo : t'áá dį́į́'dę́ę́' t'ááłá'ídóó náá'áłníí' tsin sitą́ ákódahonízah doo .
PRED:	This is the number of these things : four hundred cubits long and twenty cubits .
GOLD:	The city will measure 11/2 miles on each side — north , south , east , and west .

ID:	4999
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá yówééh át'éego doo ádahosoołyąąd da ! Da' Níłch'i Diyinii bee nínáádanihi'dizhchį́įgo dahisidoonaadgo k'adísh éí bee haz'áanii bik'eh hól'į́ bee hadaałt'é ída'dołnééh lá ?
PRED:	Why do you see that you were blind ? Do you think that you were born of the Holy Spirit ? Do you want to obey the law ?
GOLD:	How foolish can you be ? After starting your new lives in the Spirit , why are you now trying to become perfect by your own human effort ?

ID:	5000
INPUT:	Éí dazhdínóonéłígíí t'áadoo baa dahwiilzhíshí t'áá bítséedi nahjį' kódaho'diilyaa . Bee dadzíłdzilii yę́ę adahaaz'éél .
PRED:	For we have been taken away from the beginning of those who would die .
GOLD:	They were snatched away in the prime of life , the foundations of their lives washed away .

ID:	5001
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' yah anídaakahgo átsé tá'ánídadigisgo , áko doo dadínóonéeł da , doodaii' bikáá' náá'iiniihí yich'į' ninádaakahgo shá nidaal'a'go Bóhólníihii yich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náádayiiłniih doo biniyé ,
PRED:	And when they enter into the tent of meeting , they shall wash the stones , and they shall not die , neither shall they die , nor shall they die , nor shall they go to the altar of the Lord ;
GOLD:	They must wash with water whenever they go into the Tabernacle to appear before the Lord and when they approach the altar to burn up their special gifts to the Lord — or they will die !

ID:	5002
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh daalkizhii dadilwo'ígíí bilááh át'éego dabilį́į́' ayóó ádeídóolwo' ; e'e'áahgo mą'iitsoh hashké daniidzįįhígíí bilááh át'éego hashké dandzin . Bisiláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii t'áá nízaadę́ę́' łį́į́' bił yijah . Bisiláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii atsági át'éego yidooyį́įłii yich'į' nídiilwo'go yił haat'ahígi át'éego naaldeeh .
PRED:	They are more powerful than a young lion , and they are more than the morning ; their army is far off from far away , and they are like an army .
GOLD:	Their horses are swifter than cheetahsand fiercer than wolves at dusk.Their charioteers charge from far away.Like eagles , they swoop down to devour their prey .

ID:	5003
INPUT:	Nihíká a'doolwoł biniyé ch'ééh dadíit'į́į'go nihináá' ch'ééh dadeeskai . Hada'iilzíidgo dine'é ła' yisdádanihidooniłgo yídaneel'áanii ádin .
PRED:	They have looked for us , so that we can not help us ; let us deliver us from the hand of the nations .
GOLD:	We looked in vain for our alliesto come and save us , but we were looking to nationsthat could not help us .

ID:	5004
INPUT:	Áko Béthaniigi Sáíman éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí bikin góne' Jesus yah ajííyáago ,
PRED:	Jesus went into the house of Simon Peter , who had a leprosy disease , and went into the house of Jesus .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jesus was in Bethany at the home of Simon , a man who had previously had leprosy .

ID:	5005
INPUT:	Áko shii' dahonohłǫ́ǫgo , áádóó shizaad nihii' dahólǫ́ǫgo , t'áá danohsinígíí dayínóhkeed , áko nihá bi'doolnííł .
PRED:	If you are in me , ask for my words , and ask for you , and it will be done for you .
GOLD:	But if you remain in me and my words remain in you , you may ask for anything you want , and it will be granted !

ID:	5006
INPUT:	Shitsi' haada yinilaago áádóó asdzání ła' ne'asdzą́ą́ ánáádeindlaago , azhą́ diné doo ła' nihinaagóó naagháa da nidi , Diyin God nihita'gi hólǫ́ǫgo ániit'éegi bił bééhózin ; éí béénílniih .
PRED:	My daughter has made her a wife and a woman , and no man knows that he is between us , and know that he is between us .
GOLD:	If you mistreat my daughters or if you marry other wives , God will see it even if no one else does . He is a witness to this covenant between us .

ID:	5007
INPUT:	<unk> tsą́ą́ nít'éé' , awéé' nihéédadii'nah nít'éé' , níyol t'éiyá dashiilchį́įgi ádeidzaa ; nihokáa'gi t'áadoo yisdáda'ii'nil da , doo nidi nihokáá' dine'é ła' dashiilchį́į da .
PRED:	And when we saw that the child was born , we would not save the breath of the wind , but there was none of the world .
GOLD:	We , too , writhe in agony , but nothing comes of our suffering.We have not given salvation to the earth , nor brought life into the world .

ID:	5008
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Diyin God biYe' joodlą́ągo baijólíii Diyin God t'áá bí biYe' yaa halne'ígíí hoł bééhózin doo . Nidi t'áá háiida Diyin God doo joodláanii éí Diyin God biyooch'íidii nilį́ jinízin , háálá Diyin God t'áá bí biYe' yaa halne'ígíí t'áadoo joosdląąd da .
PRED:	Whoever believes in the Son of God will know that he is the Son of God . But whoever does not believe in God is a prophet , because he does not believe the Son of God .
GOLD:	All who believe in the Son of God know in their hearts that this testimony is true . Those who do n't believe this are actually calling God a liar because they do n't believe what God has testified about his Son .

ID:	5009
INPUT:	Háálá tsin ałnáoszid bąąhjį' Christ daaztsą́ągo baa hane'ígíí yi'ana'í danilíinii t'óó ahayóí deíkááh , éí t'áá ahą́ą́h bee nihił náháshnih nít'éé' , áádóó k'ad nidi shinák'eeshto' náálį́įgo bee nihił nááháshne' .
PRED:	For many of your enemies have come to the cross of Christ , but now I will tell you , but now I will speak to you with tears .
GOLD:	For I have told you often before , and I say it again with tears in my eyes , that there are many whose conduct shows they are really enemies of the cross of Christ .

ID:	5010
INPUT:	Haleebee naalnishii naalye'é bee áda'azįįdjį' bá dahodiit'i' , nidi doo hodina' naalnishii tsxį́įłgo té'é'į́ yileeh .
PRED:	The wealth of the wealth of the wealth is near , but the eye of the donkey is quickly .
GOLD:	Good planning and hard work lead to prosperity , but hasty shortcuts lead to poverty .

ID:	5011
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' danihizhé'é yę́ę Jóseph dayoołch'į́įdgo Ííjipgóó nidahwiisnii' , nidi Diyin God hoł hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' ,
PRED:	They sold Joseph to Egypt , but God was with him .
GOLD:	“ These patriarchs were jealous of their brother Joseph , and they sold him to be a slave in Egypt . But God was with him

ID:	5012
INPUT:	Nít'éé' naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii bisiláo t'áá bił , éí łį́į́' yik'i dah sidáhígíí bisiláo bił yik'ijį' anaa' ádeidoolííł biniyé áłah silį́į'go yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	And I saw the beast , and the princes of the earth , and all the princes of the earth gathered together against him , to fight against him .
GOLD:	Then I saw the beast and the kings of the world and their armies gathered together to fight against the one sitting on the horse and his army .

ID:	5013
INPUT:	bik'i dah adishjée'go ádíílííł ; bich'į' bine' na'adzi'ii ádíílííł índa bíilk'idgo ádíílííł áádóó ałdó' binaagóó siláo dah deínéehgo ádíílííł índa binaagóó tsin bee na'nílgohígíí naaznilgo ádíílííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt set thine hand upon them , and make thee an enemy , and thou shalt make an army , and thou shalt make thy army round about , and thou shalt make thee an army round about .
GOLD:	Show the city under siege . Build a wall around it so no one can escape . Set up the enemy camp , and surround the city with siege ramps and battering rams .

ID:	5014
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí asdzání áyidííniid , Da' díísh doo t'áá át'é Jó'ab ná yinahaz'ą́ą da ? Áádóó asdzání ádííniid , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hiníná ; bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí doo ła' nish'náajigo , doodaii' nishtł'ajigo bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii yee haadzíi'ii bits'ą́ąjį' ázhdooníił da , háálá ná naal'a'í Jó'ab díí yich'į' shííł'aad ; saad t'áá át'é bee hahideesdzihii shá hasht'eyiilaa .
PRED:	Then the king said to the woman , “ Is it not for Joab ? ” The woman answered , “ No , my lord , my lord , as the king commanded me , for he has commanded me . ”
GOLD:	“ Did Joab put you up to this ? ” And the woman replied , “ My lord the king , how can I deny it ? Nobody can hide anything from you . Yes , Joab sent me and told me what to say .

ID:	5015
INPUT:	Diyin God yee a'ááh nízinii éí Paul yaa ahééh nízin
PRED:	The People of God
GOLD:	Paul 's Gratitude for God 's Mercy

ID:	5016
INPUT:	Nidi łahjį' éí Éífek kin haal'áágóó adaneezhchą́ą́' ; ákwii naadiin tsosts'idi míilgo diné ch'éékaígíí éí kin haal'áii ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inígíí bik'iiłdááz . Áko Ben-héídad éí kin haal'áajį' náwóne' góne' anííchą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the men of the city ran away , and the men of the city fell down , and they fell down before the wall , and they fled to the city of Baasha .
GOLD:	The rest fled into the town of Aphek , but the wall fell on them and killed another 27,000 . Ben-hadad fled into the town and hid in a secret room .

ID:	5017
INPUT:	Áko sołtį' , Béthel góde dii'nééł ; áadi Diyin God bich'į' náádi'yeesh'nih biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí ádeeshłííł ; shich'į' nahwii'ná yę́ędą́ą́' éí shich'į' ééhoosinii éí t'áá naasháágóó shaa áhályą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Let 's go up to Bethel , and I will send him to the altar of God , where I was in trouble .
GOLD:	We are now going to Bethel , where I will build an altar to the God who answered my prayers when I was in distress . He has been with me wherever I have gone . ”

ID:	5018
INPUT:	Díí bitaa'iisíłta'ígíí t'áá ałtso háidíígíi<unk> Bóhólníihii ádayiilaago doo hoł bééhózin da ?
PRED:	Who knows that the Lord has made all these ? ”
GOLD:	For they all knowthat my disaster has come from the hand of the Lord .

ID:	5019
INPUT:	Hastą́ągo ats'áda'az'á ; bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áhígíí łahjí táá' bits'ání'á ; náánáłahjí ałdó' táá' bits'ání'á ;
PRED:	There were six lampstand ; the lampstand were three cubits , and the third row .
GOLD:	The lampstand had six branches going out from the center stem , three on each side .

ID:	5020
INPUT:	ATaa' baa yájíłti'go t'áadoo yik'ida'diitą́ą da .
PRED:	They did not understand what the Father said .
GOLD:	But they still did n't understand that he was talking about his Father .

ID:	5021
INPUT:	Kodóó ándishnínígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' : Diné shich'į' nidaalteehígíí nahalingo t'áadoo shich'į' nanilteehí ; na'astso'ígíí niyą́ .
PRED:	Listen to what I say to you : “ Do n't listen to me like a man , like a rebellious man .
GOLD:	Son of man , listen to what I say to you . Do not join them in their rebellion . Open your mouth , and eat what I give you . ”

ID:	5022
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Diyin God aTaa' áádóó biYe' Jesus Christ bił ahił daniidlį́ . Nihí ałdó' ahidiníłnáago nihił ahił daniidlį́į doo biniyé dahoníil'į́'ígíí áádóó dahosidiits'ą́'ígíí bee nihił dahwiilne' .
PRED:	We are the truth of God the Father and the Son of Jesus Christ . We also have seen that we have seen and heard what we have heard .
GOLD:	We proclaim to you what we ourselves have actually seen and heard so that you may have fellowship with us . And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son , Jesus Christ .

ID:	5023
INPUT:	Áádóó dabíínáłígíí diné éí níłch'i bida'iiníziinii bii' hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę ádzaaígíí índa bisóodi ádaadzaaígíí t'áá ałtso baa nidahodzisne' .
PRED:	And they told them all the things that had done , and all that the demons had done , and all that he had done .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others about the demon-possessed man and the pigs .

ID:	5024
INPUT:	Áádóó Líívai dine'é éí Kóhath dine'é áádóó Kórah dine'é danilíinii deizį'go Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God yaa dahaniihgo chánahgo dahataał .
PRED:	The Levites stood up and cried out to the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Levites from the clans of Kohath and Korah stood to praise the Lord , the God of Israel , with a very loud shout .

ID:	5025
INPUT:	Ła' ádaaní , Díí saadígíí doo níłch'i bi'iiníziinii bii' hólóonii ła' bizaad át'ée da . Da' níłch'i bi'iiníziiniísh doo oo'íinii oo'į́įgo íidoolííł ?
PRED:	Some said , “ Is there not one of these words of a devil ? Can he make a blind man ? ”
GOLD:	Others said , “ This does n't sound like a man possessed by a demon ! Can a demon open the eyes of the blind ? ”

ID:	5026
INPUT:	Áko Íísa ádííniid , Haa'íshą' diné bił naashkaígíí ła' nił ninish'nííł . Áko ájíní , Éíshą' ha'át'íí biniyé ? Shinanit'a'í nílíinii , háni'dii ajooba' t'éí bee shich'oha'néego shąąh tsídíkees .
PRED:	And Esau said , Let there be some men with thee . And he said , What is thy servant ? And he said , O my lord , let me find favor in thy sight .
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Esau said , “ but at least let me assign some of my men to guide and protect you. ” Jacob responded , “ That 's not necessary . It 's enough that you 've received me warmly , my lord ! ”

ID:	5027
INPUT:	Áko hasiláo ałts'ájíínilgo táa'go dah yinéełgo halgaigi bił baa nijiyeekai , áádóó jidéé'į́į'go kin haal'áádóó diné ch'ídahaazhjée'ii áadi dziiłtsą́ , áko náhizhdiitahgo bich'į' jiyeedzáago ałtso nidzistseed .
PRED:	And he took three men out of his hand , and went with him in the field , and looked , and saw two men out of the city ; and he went to them , and smote them .
GOLD:	he divided his men into three groups and set an ambush in the fields . When Abimelech saw the people coming out of the city , he and his men jumped up from their hiding places and attacked them .

ID:	5028
INPUT:	Díí baa nisíníyá . Shí éí t'óó dííníshhéél nít'éé' . T'áá shígi ájít'é nínízingo shaa nitsíníkees nít'éé' . Nidi k'ad éí nidideeshteh , baa nisíníyáhígíí ałkéé' sinilgo bee nił hashne' doo .
PRED:	“ I have come to you , and I am still afraid . You know what I have done . But now I will tell you what you have done . I will tell you what you have done . ”
GOLD:	While you did all this , I remained silent , and you thought I did n't care.But now I will rebuke you , listing all my charges against you .

ID:	5029
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , díí oo'áłígíí , díí jínígíí bízhi' bikáá' ánílééh ; díí jį́ Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo Jerúsalem yináshzhiizh .
PRED:	“ Son of man , set your name on this day , and this day the army of the king of Babylon has come to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , write down today 's date , because on this very day the king of Babylon is beginning his attack against Jerusalem .

ID:	5030
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	The Prophecy of Simeon

ID:	5031
INPUT:	Nich'į' nidahwiisnáá' yę́ę ba'áłchíní nich'į' nihidookahgo nitsidadidoogoh , áádóó dani'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso nikétsį́įjį' yaa ádadoonííł , índa ádandidooniił , Bóhólníihii bikin haal'áhígíí , t'áá éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin nilíinii biDził Záíyan yinílyée doo .
PRED:	The eyes of your eyes will bow down before you , and they will bow down before you at your feet , and they will say to you , ‘ The city of the Lord , the Holy One of Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	The descendants of your tormentorswill come and bow before you.Those who despised youwill kiss your feet.They will call you the City of the Lord , and Zion of the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	5032
INPUT:	T'óó hodíínáá'ígo ádahodooníiłii Jesus Christ bá nidaal'a'í yich'į' íidoolííł biniyé Diyin God bił yit'íní áyiilaa , áádóó John éí Christ bá naal'a'í jílíinii hach'į' bidiyingo naal'a'í yiníł'a'go hoł yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	And God showed him the angels of Christ Jesus to come to his servants , and he showed them the angel of John the angel of Christ .
GOLD:	This is a revelation from Jesus Christ , which God gave him to show his servants the events that must soon take place . He sent an angel to present this revelation to his servant John ,

ID:	5033
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá adinídíín biyi' hojílónígi át'éego adinídíín biyi' dayíníikáahgo , ahidiníłnáago ahił daniidlį́ , áko haYe' Jesus Christ t'áá bí bidił yee nihibąąhági át'éii t'áá át'é ałtso nihąąh tánéigis .
PRED:	But when we came in the light , we are the light , and we are the Son of Jesus Christ , and he will wash all sins in him .
GOLD:	But if we are living in the light , as God is in the light , then we have fellowship with each other , and the blood of Jesus , his Son , cleanses us from all sin .

ID:	5034
INPUT:	Éí doo dił bits'ą́ą́dóó nidahaazhchį́į da , doo nidi ats'íís yinízinii bik'ehgo da , doo nidi diné íinízinii bik'ehgo da , nidi Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó nidahaazhchį́ .
PRED:	They are not born of blood , but not according to the flesh , but by the will of men , but of God .
GOLD:	They are reborn — not with a physical birth resulting from human passion or plan , but a birth that comes from God .

ID:	5035
INPUT:	Dandósinii áádóó nibik'ehgo iináanii yik'eh dahół'íinii t'áá ałtso bik' <unk> nishłį́ .
PRED:	All those who fear you and obey your precepts .
GOLD:	I am a friend to anyone who fears you — anyone who obeys your commandments .

ID:	5036
INPUT:	Áádóó bikéédę́ę́' éí Ábsalam bitsi' Méíyakah yá náá'ásgeh ; éí Abáíjah áádóó Áteiyai áádóó Záíza índa Shelómith há niyiishchį́ .
PRED:	And there came to Absalom the daughter of Absalom , who had given birth to him : Adonijah , Gaza , and Shimei .
GOLD:	Later Rehoboam married another cousin , Maacah , the granddaughter of Absalom . Maacah gave birth to Abijah , Attai , Ziza , and Shelomith .

ID:	5037
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí t'áá ałtsoní t'áá bí bíniik'eh áyiilaa ; t'áá aaníí diné doo yá'ájíshóonii atího'dil'į́į doo biniyé áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	The Lord has done all things ; yea , the Lord has made him suffer for the wicked .
GOLD:	The Lord has made everything for his own purposes , even the wicked for a day of disaster .

ID:	5038
INPUT:	nidi shitsilí Táítas ákwii t'áadoo bik'íníyáágóó biniinaa ch'į́į́góó ch'ééh nitséskeesgo shik'isóó t'óó bílák'e dadéshnii' áádóó Masedóniyagóó dah náádiisdzá .
PRED:	But I could not find my brother Timothy , because I had not found him there , my brothers and Macedonia went to Macedonia .
GOLD:	But I had no peace of mind because my dear brother Titus had n't yet arrived with a report from you . So I said good-bye and went on to Macedonia to find him .

ID:	5039
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Hilkáíyah biye' Iiláíyakim áádóó Shébna índa Jó'ah éí Rábshakeh ádeiłní , Baa nídaniikąąh , ná nidaal'a'í bich'į' Síriya dine'é bizaad bee yáníłti' , háálá éí dadiits'a' ; Jew dine'é bizaad éí t'áadoo bee nihich'į' yáníłti'í , áko tsé ahénátł'inígíí bikáá'dę́ę́' diné doo dandidoots'į́įł da .
PRED:	Then Hilkiah the son of Hilkiah , and Shebna , the son of Hilkiah , said to them , “ Please speak to your servants , for we hear the words of the Arameans , because we hear it , and do not speak to the Jews . ”
GOLD:	Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah , Shebna , and Joah said to the Assyrian chief of staff , “ Please speak to us in Aramaic , for we understand it well . Do n't speak in Hebrew , for the people on the wall will hear . ”

ID:	5040
INPUT:	Diné doo ádahalyáanii nidadi'a'go wólts'ą́'ígíí biláahgo diné hóyáanii hashkéego wólts'ą́ą́'jígo yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	It is better to hear the words of the wise , than the words of the wise .
GOLD:	Better to be criticized by a wise personthan to be praised by a fool .

ID:	5041
INPUT:	Andrew , áádóó Philip , áádóó Barthálemew , áádóó Matthew , áádóó Thomas , áádóó James éí Alfíyas biye' , áádóó Thádiyas , áádóó Sáíman éí Kéínan dine'é jílínígíí ,
PRED:	Philip , Philip , James , James , James , and James , and James the son of James , and Simon , and Simon the Canaanites ,
GOLD:	Andrew , Philip , Bartholomew , Matthew , Thomas , James ( son of Alphaeus ) , Thaddaeus , Simon ( the zealot ) ,

ID:	5042
INPUT:	Tł'iish báhádzidii biyęęzhii yii' hadahakáahgo ádeile' , áádóó na'ashjée'ii bitł'óól nideiniłdiz ; biyęęzhii t'áá háiida yiyííyą́'ígíí éí dadootsaał , áádóó yists'ilígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó tł'iish báhádzidii hadoogááł .
PRED:	And they that walk in the mouth of the mouth of the mouth , and they put on their heads , and they that eat the mouth of the mouth of the mouth shall die ; and he that eats the mouth of the serpent shall come out of the serpent .
GOLD:	They hatch deadly snakesand weave spiders ' webs.Whoever eats their eggs will die ; whoever cracks them will hatch a viper .

ID:	5043
INPUT:	Ákohgo dóola yázhí ła' dadziisxį́ áádóó ashkii éí Íílai bich'į' bił dadziskai .
PRED:	Then they killed one bull , and the boy brought him to Eli .
GOLD:	After sacrificing the bull , they brought the boy to Eli .

ID:	5044
INPUT:	Díí táyi' nidaaldeehii t'áá át'é kódaat'éhígíí t'éí daohsą́ą doo : tó bii'góó áádóó tónteel bii'góó índa tooh bii'góó bit'a' dahólǫ́ǫgo yee nida'ałkǫ́ǫ'ii áádóó bikágí dadich'íizhii éí daohsą́ą doo .
PRED:	You shall eat all these things that are in the water , in the midst of the waters , and in the sea , and in the waters , and in the waters , and in the waters , and in the midst of the river .
GOLD:	“ Of all the marine animals , these are ones you may use for food . You may eat anything from the water if it has both fins and scales , whether taken from salt water or from streams .

ID:	5045
INPUT:	Éí bąą ayóó át'éego hashké niidzį́'ígíí índa bidziilgo anaa' hak'i yayiiką́ áádóó éí yee diltłi'go í'diilyaago doo baa ákozniizį́į' da índa <unk> <unk> go hajéí doo baa nitsídzíkees da nít'éé' .
PRED:	Therefore he made his great anger and battle , and he put fire in his heart , and he did not know his heart .
GOLD:	Therefore , he poured out his fury on themand destroyed them in battle.They were enveloped in flames , but they still refused to understand.They were consumed by fire , but they did not learn their lesson .

ID:	5046
INPUT:	Mk . 1 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Many People

ID:	5047
INPUT:	Sálaman bikin náádaała'ígíí
PRED:	Solomon 's Death
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	5048
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Kéyah biih nihideesh'ishígíí biih woonáago
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , saying , When ye enter into the land which I am giving you ,
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ When you arrive in the land where I am taking you ,

ID:	5049
INPUT:	háálá Diyin God bił bééhózin , éí bijį́ wooyą́ą'go jideezghaliigi ádoohnííł áádóó Diyin Godgi ánóht'ée doo ; yá'át'ééhjí índa doo yá'át'ééhjí nihił ééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	For God knows that day you eat it , and you will do what is evil and evil .
GOLD:	“ God knows that your eyes will be opened as soon as you eat it , and you will be like God , knowing both good and evil . ”

ID:	5050
INPUT:	T'áá dahidikááhgóó nida'iiłchxǫǫh índa ti'da'a<unk> nííh ,
PRED:	They speak in the way of those who walk in the way ,
GOLD:	Destruction and misery always follow them .

ID:	5051
INPUT:	Stephen seesyį́į́dóó bik'ijį' Jesus dajoosdląądígíí biniinaa atídahodil'į́įgo bik'ee tadzooskaígíí Finííshiya áádóó Sáípras índa Ántiyakjį' dajíkááhgóó , t'áá hazhó'ó Jew dine'é t'éiyá Diyin God bizaad bee bił nidahodzisne' .
PRED:	After they had been scattered from Antioch , they went to Antioch and Cyprus . They told them the word of God about the Jews .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the believers who had been scattered during the persecution after Stephen 's death traveled as far as Phoenicia , Cyprus , and Antioch of Syria . They preached the word of God , but only to Jews .

ID:	5052
INPUT:	Háálá bitsį' áádóó bidił dahólóonii doo bił da'ahiigą́ą da , nidi doo daat'į́į́góó aláahdi bídahólníihii , áádóó dabidziilii , áádóó díí k'ad nahasdzáán bikáa'gi chahałheeł bee bídahólníihii , índa níłch'i bida'iiníziinii t'áadoo bee néelą́'ígóó yádiłhił biyi' nahaz'ą́ądi dahólóonii bił da'ahiigą́ .
PRED:	For the flesh and blood are not with blood , but the power of the kings , and the power of the world , and now , the kingdoms of heaven , and the demons in heaven .
GOLD:	For we are not fighting against flesh-and-blood enemies , but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world , against mighty powers in this dark world , and against evil spirits in the heavenly places .

ID:	5053
INPUT:	Índa kin bii' sohodizin bá ahénátł'inígíí yínáá'nééł'ąąd nít'éé' éí neeznáadi ké silá íídéetą́ą́' ; díí kin bá nástł'inígíí binahjį' hooghan éí hastą́ądi ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódaníłtsogo ádaalyaago ahéénínil .
PRED:	And he measured the wall , and measured the breadth of the temple : and the house was six cubits , and the breadth of the house was six cubits .
GOLD:	Then he measured the wall of the Temple , and it was 101/2 feet thick . There was a row of rooms along the outside wall ; each room was 7 feet wide .

ID:	5054
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Éran biye' Eliyéízar bich'į' handziih , Tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee nidaakáhígíí néididooniłgo kǫ' da'níłts'ą́ą'jį' níléígóó iidiyoołkał , háálá tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee nidaakáhígíí dílzin .
PRED:	Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest , the son of Aaron the priest , who shall burn incense , and cast them into the fire , because the incense of incense is holy .
GOLD:	“ Tell Eleazar son of Aaron the priest to pull all the incense burners from the fire , for they are holy . Also tell him to scatter the burning coals .

ID:	5055
INPUT:	íídą́ą́' David éí Zóbah dine'é neistseed yę́ędą́ą́' Ríízan aghada'ii'níiłii danilíinii ádíyii'nilgo yinanit'a'í silį́į́' , áko éí Damáskasgóó eekaigo áadi kéédahat'į́įgo ákwii nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	At that time David killed the Amalekites who had killed them . He killed them . So they went to Damascus and lived there .
GOLD:	and had become the leader of a gang of rebels . After David conquered Hadadezer , Rezon and his men fled to Damascus , where he became king .

ID:	5056
INPUT:	nidi shá halne'ii ła' nááhódlǫ́ , áko yee shaa halne'ii éí ts'ídá t'áá aaníí át'éego shił bééhózin .
PRED:	But there is another prophet , and I know that the prophet is true .
GOLD:	But someone else is also testifying about me , and I assure you that everything he says about me is true .

ID:	5057
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí adiists'a'go áshiilaago doo bich'į' naashteeh da , doo nidi bits'ą́ą́' t'ą́ą́' kónáshnéeh da .
PRED:	I will not listen to the voice of the Lord God , but I will not turn back from them .
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord has spoken to me , and I have listened.I have not rebelled or turned away .

ID:	5058
INPUT:	áko doo ákójínééhgóó éí t'áá ho'dizhchínígi át'éego t'áá łichí'ígo áhodeeshłííł áádóó honoojíigi t'áá hóółtseii nahalingo áhodeeshłííł índa dibáá' hodiyoołhééł .
PRED:	And I will make them white as a man born blind , and I will make them as a wilderness , and thirsty in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Otherwise , I will strip her as nakedas she was on the day she was born.I will leave her to die of thirst , as in a dry and barren wilderness .

ID:	5059
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , doo t'óó shaa yáhásinígi áshidi'doolníił da , háálá nánooshkąąhgo sodeeszin ; bíni' doo yá'ádaashóonii t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádabi'dilnééh ; bíni'dii t'áadoo yee hadaodziihígóó daneeznánígíí bitahgi łeeyi' shijée' le' .
PRED:	O Lord , I will not be ashamed ; for I pray unto thee , for I pray unto thee : let the wicked be ashamed , and let them fall in the midst of the dead .
GOLD:	Do n't let me be disgraced , O Lord , for I call out to you for help.Let the wicked be disgraced ; let them lie silent in the grave .

ID:	5060
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego Mó'ab kéyahdi áádóó Áman dine'é bitahgóó áádóó Íídam kéyahdi índa kédaayahgóó Jew dine'é kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá ałtso éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ kéédahat'į́įgo áyiilaago áádóó Shéífan biye' Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah honant'áa doo biniyé niiníłtį́įgo dayíínii' .
PRED:	In the same way the king of Moab , Edom , and all the Jews who live in the land of Edom , and all the remnant of the Jews who dwell in the land of Judah , sent Shaphan son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan .
GOLD:	When the Judeans in Moab , Ammon , Edom , and the other nearby countries heard that the king of Babylon had left a few people in Judah and that Gedaliah was the governor ,

ID:	5061
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul biye' Jánathan nídii'na'go tsintahdi David yaa níyáago Diyin God binahjį' chánah ánáhojiidlaa .
PRED:	And Jonathan , the son of Saul , rose up , and went down to David in the forest , and strengthened him .
GOLD:	Jonathan went to find David and encouraged him to stay strong in his faith in God .

ID:	5062
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá bí binaagóó nida'dilch'ilgo ííł'į́áádóó tónteel biyaadi haz'ánígíí bik'i ditą́ągo ííł'į́ .
PRED:	For he sees his face in the midst of the sea , and upon the sea .
GOLD:	See how he spreads the lightning around himand how it lights up the depths of the sea .

ID:	5063
INPUT:	Mózes éí Éran bidá'í Azáíyel biye'ké Mísheiyel áádóó Elzéífan hágo yidííniidgo ííłní , Kojį' ninoh'aashgo nihik'is yę́ę hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'ínóhjáahgo níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi ninohjááh .
PRED:	And Moses called unto Amaziah the son of Aaron , and said unto him , Take ye out of the camp , and take them out of the camp , but take them out of the camp .
GOLD:	Then Moses called for Mishael and Elzaphan , Aaron 's cousins , the sons of Aaron 's uncle Uzziel . He said to them , “ Come forward and carry away the bodies of your relatives from in front of the sanctuary to a place outside the camp . ”

ID:	5064
INPUT:	Áko kin ííł'íní éí óola yitsidii chánah áyiilaa , áádóó bee atsidí yee adiiłkǫǫhii béésh nitł'izii yitsidii ííłní , Ahididoolyįh biniyé hasht'eelyaa , áádóó ił adaalkaałí bee niłdzil doo biniyé yił adeiskaal .
PRED:	The house made the gold , and said to them , “ The ark of acacia wood is prepared for us , and they put them in order to be prepared for them . ”
GOLD:	The carver encourages the goldsmith , and the molder helps at the anvil. “ Good , ” they say . “ It 's coming along fine. ” Carefully they join the parts together , then fasten the thing in place so it wo n't fall over .

ID:	5065
INPUT:	Háálá kin haal'áii shízhi' bee wójíii bik'ijį' atí'deeshłíiłgo baa nídiisdzá , jó'akon . Ákoósh nihí doo atínihidi'doolníił da ? Nihí ałdó' atínihidi'doolnííł , háálá t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso atídoolnííł biniyé diltłish yee atída'ał'íinii hágo bidideeshniił .
PRED:	For behold , I have come upon the city of my name , and behold , it shall be done to you , and you shall be destroyed ; for thus saith the Lord of hosts : for I will punish all the earth with the sword .
GOLD:	I have begun to punish Jerusalem , the city that bears my name . Now should I let you go unpunished ? No , you will not escape disaster . I will call for war against all the nations of the earth . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '

ID:	5066
INPUT:	Diyin God bidiyį́į́' danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał , áádóó bízhi' diyinii béédaołniihgo baa ahééh danohsin .
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , all his holy ones , and praise his name .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , all you godly ones ! Praise his holy name .

ID:	5067
INPUT:	T'áá ayóó'ádanihííníi'nínígi át'éego Bóhólníihii éí ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níi dooígíí áádóó diné t'áá ałtso ayóó'ádeínóh'níi dooígíí t'ah yówehígo nooséełgo áyóle' .
PRED:	May the Lord love us more than we love each other , and more than we love each other .
GOLD:	And may the Lord make your love for one another and for all people grow and overflow , just as our love for you overflows .

ID:	5068
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' yéego ádíshní . T'áá shí shiinéé' bee bich'į' hadeesdzihgo shididoots'į́į́ł .
PRED:	I cried to God , “ I will speak to my voice ; I will hear my voice . ”
GOLD:	I cry out to God ; yes , I shout.Oh , that God would listen to me !

ID:	5069
INPUT:	Áko ashchíinii t'óó bił ahayóí , nidi ábizhdííniid , Áhóót'įįdígíí t'ááká diné ła' bił hoołne' lágo .
PRED:	And many children were amazed , but he said to them , “ Do n't tell anyone what has happened . ”
GOLD:	Her parents were overwhelmed , but Jesus insisted that they not tell anyone what had happened .

ID:	5070
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go báhádzidii índa jį́įgo k'aa' yee da'diłt'ohígíí doo bééníldzid da doo .
PRED:	You will not be afraid of the sword in the night and in the day of the arrows .
GOLD:	Do not be afraid of the terrors of the night , nor the arrow that flies in the day .

ID:	5071
INPUT:	Ne'oodlą' bidziilgo índa t'áá ákogi ánít'į́įgo bee ádaa ákonínídzin doo . Éí ła' doo deiniizį́į́'góó tsinaa'eeł neheestǫ'ígíí nahalingo bi'oodlą' dayííłchxǫ' .
PRED:	If you have faith and righteousness , you have broken off your faith , they have broken off like a ship .
GOLD:	Cling to your faith in Christ , and keep your conscience clear . For some people have deliberately violated their consciences ; as a result , their faith has been shipwrecked .

ID:	5072
INPUT:	Ayóo ajit'į́įgo bee haa ha'niihii áádóó ts'ídá aláahgo bee hóhólníihii hólónígíí bá daníl'į́įgo t'óó ahayóí yiską́ ; t'áá éí neeznádiindóó ba'aan tseebídiin yiską́ .
PRED:	You saw the glory of the Lord , and the glory of his glory , and many days were a hundred and eight days .
GOLD:	The celebration lasted 180 days — a tremendous display of the opulent wealth of his empire and the pomp and splendor of his majesty .

ID:	5073
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii éí nahasdzáán yidooghał biniyé yich'į' nídii'na'go Bóhólníihii bik'ee ił yée'ii áádóó yee ayóó át'éii bits'ádi'nílíidii bits'ąą tsénídahasdzą́ą́góó áádóó tséní'da'deezbaalgóó yóó'adajiijeeh doo .
PRED:	And the Lord rose up against the earth , and cast them away from the rock of the glory of the Lord , and from the glory of his glory , and cast their tents .
GOLD:	while they crawl away into cavernsand hide among the jagged rocks in the cliffs.They will try to escape the terror of the Lordand the glory of his majestyas he rises to shake the earth .

ID:	5074
INPUT:	Da'ołzhishgo ásaa' yigádígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'ígíí ał'ąą ádaat'éii índa tsin bee í'dílzoołí bee baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Sing ye in those days , and in the potter , and the trumpets , and the trumpets .
GOLD:	Praise him with the tambourine and dancing ; praise him with strings and flutes !

ID:	5075
INPUT:	Naat'áanii yah anádáahgo éí yah a'atiin bik'i chaha'ohídę́ę́' yah anádáah doo áádóó t'áá ákóne' ch'ééhédáah doo .
PRED:	When the prince goes into the gate , he shall come into the gate , and when he goes out , he shall go out .
GOLD:	“ The prince must enter the gateway through the entry room , and he must leave the same way .

ID:	5076
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham hwe'asdzą́ą́ Sárah , Shideezhí át'é , jiníigo biniinaa Gíírar kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Abímelek wolyéii aníł'a'go Sárah yił anídaaskai .
PRED:	Abraham sent Sarah to Sarah because he had said , “ She is my sister Sarah 's sister . ”
GOLD:	Abraham introduced his wife , Sarah , by saying , “ She is my sister. ” So King Abimelech of Gerar sent for Sarah and had her brought to him at his palace .

ID:	5077
INPUT:	Áko diné danilíinii Sháílohgóó ada'as'a' , áko t'áá ałtsoní biBóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii áádę́ę́' nídeidoo'ááł ; éí Bóhólníihii jílíinii diyingo naal'a'í chérabim wolyéii bita'gi wódahdi hojílǫ́ , áko Íílai biye'ké Háfnai áádóó Fíniyas áadi Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii yéské .
PRED:	And they sent messengers to Shiloh , and they shall take the ark of the Lord of hosts , and the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts , between the cherubim ; and the ark of the covenant of the God was between them .
GOLD:	So they sent men to Shiloh to bring the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim . Hophni and Phinehas , the sons of Eli , were also there with the Ark of the Covenant of God .

ID:	5078
INPUT:	Jó , ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii ayóó ádaat'éii naalte' dajílį́įgo ałdó' ádahodoolííł , áádóó ádajooníiłii , índa ádajíít'įįdii bik'ehgo k'ééhodideeshdlííł .
PRED:	For I will make many nations , and kings , and their kings , and I will repay them according to their works , and according to their deeds .
GOLD:	Many nations and great kings will enslave the Babylonians , just as they enslaved my people . I will punish them in proportion to the suffering they cause my people . ”

ID:	5079
INPUT:	Zébyulan dine'é ałdó' <unk> kin shijaa'gi índa Néíhalal kin shijaa'gi kéédahat'ínígíí t'áadoo ch'ídeineeskaad da , nidi Kéínan dine'é t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ hatahgóó kéédahat'į́įgo hanaalte' ádajiilaa .
PRED:	And the tribe of Zebulun did not drive out the inhabitants of Zebulun , but the Canaanites dwelt among them .
GOLD:	The tribe of Zebulun failed to drive out the residents of Kitron and Nahalol , so the Canaanites continued to live among them . But the Canaanites were forced to work as slaves for the people of Zebulun .

ID:	5080
INPUT:	Héízar-shúwal , Bíyer-shííba , <unk> <unk> jah ,
PRED:	In Beersheba , Ramah , Beersheba ,
GOLD:	Hazar-shual , Beersheba , Biziothiah ,

ID:	5081
INPUT:	Shoo , t'áá aaníí , k'idoolyá , ákoósh dínóosééł ? Ha'a'aahdę́ę́' bich'į' deeyolgo ałtso dínóołnah . K'ídoolyáago nooséłígi t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ dínóołnah .
PRED:	Behold , behold , I am going to get up , and will come down from the east wind , and destroy it , and cut it down , and it will come to pass through the way .
GOLD:	But when the vine is transplanted , will it thrive ? No , it will wither awaywhen the east wind blows against it.It will die in the same good soilwhere it had grown so well . ”

ID:	5082
INPUT:	Síízar bich'į' tax nahalyéegoósh bee haz'ą́ , dooda daats'í ?
PRED:	Is it lawful to Caesar , or to Caesar ?
GOLD:	Now tell us — is it right for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	5083
INPUT:	Hak'is ayóó'ájó'nínígíí éí t'áá áłahjį' hool'ingi hojílǫ́ , áko ła'da doo haniinaa didoogoh da .
PRED:	The one who loves his brother is always in light , and no one will stumble .
GOLD:	Anyone who loves a fellow believer is living in the light and does not cause others to stumble .

ID:	5084
INPUT:	Áko hódzą́ áádóó áhodiigis índa doo hóshkał shił bééhodoozįįł biniyé shijéí baa diní'ą́ , áko díí ałdó' níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalinígíí baa ákoniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And I gave my heart to know wisdom , and wisdom , that I may know that the wind also could find out .
GOLD:	So I set out to learn everything from wisdom to madness and folly . But I learned firsthand that pursuing all this is like chasing the wind .

ID:	5085
INPUT:	Kót'éego diné doo yóó'ábidi'doolnííłgóóínda diltłish doo bee bi'diilyéégóó áyósin .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says , “ He does not love anyone in death . ”
GOLD:	He protects them from the grave , from crossing over the river of death .

ID:	5086
INPUT:	Remaláíyah biye' Pííkah éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo naaki náhááh góne' Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Azáíyah biye' Jótham aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	In the second year of Uzziah the son of Amoz , king of Israel , Uzziah son of Uzziah became king of Judah .
GOLD:	Jotham son of Uzziah began to rule over Judah in the second year of King Pekah 's reign in Israel .

ID:	5087
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Ag wolyéii áádóó haye'ké índa hadine'é ałtso nideistseedgo doo ła' hináágóó ádayiilaa , áko hakéyah bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the children of Israel killed Og , and his sons , and all his people ; and they became their inheritance .
GOLD:	And Israel killed King Og , his sons , and all his subjects ; not a single survivor remained . Then Israel occupied their land .

ID:	5088
INPUT:	K'ad Jó'ash haye'ké bídadéét'i'ii áádóó ayóó át'é naanish bidziilii baa nijiyáhígíí índa Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédaalyaaígíí , jó , éí aláahgo naat'áanii danilínígíí binaaltsoos bii' baa dahane'go bik'inídaháasdzoh . Áko haye' Amazáíyah hatsásk'ehgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	Now the sons of Joash , and the mighty things he did , and the work of the Lord , are written in the book of the Kings 's house . And Amaziah his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	The account of the sons of Joash , the prophecies about him , and the record of his restoration of the Temple of God are written in The Commentary on the Book of the Kings . His son Amaziah became the next king .

ID:	5089
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bizhé'é baa bił nihoozhǫǫh doo , áádóó haye' há yizhchíinii hóyą́ągo nooséełii baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	The righteous shall rejoice in the father of his father , and the joy of his son shall be glad .
GOLD:	The father of godly children has cause for joy.What a pleasure to have children who are wise .

ID:	5090
INPUT:	Áádóó Kaldíya dine'é nídoo'néełgo díí kin haal'áhígíí deidoołnéełgo yidahodidoonił áádóó ałtso adeididoołk'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	And the Chaldeans shall come , and they shall come up against this city , and they shall burn it with fire .
GOLD:	Then the Babylonians will come back and capture this city and burn it to the ground . '

ID:	5091
INPUT:	áko dazhníł'į́į nidi doo deizdoołtséeł da , dazdiits'a' nidi doo bik'idazhdi'dootį́įł da ; doodaii' bąąhági ádadziidzaaígíí bits'ą́ąjį' ninázhdookah , áádóó há yóó'anídahididoot'ááł .
PRED:	They will see , but they will not hear , but they will not hear , but they will turn away from their sins , and they will be forgiven .
GOLD:	so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled : ‘ When they see what I do , they will learn nothing.When they hear what I say , they will not understand.Otherwise , they will turn to meand be forgiven . ' ”

ID:	5092
INPUT:	Ániid nidaakaii kót'é bidoo'niid
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	Advice for Young and Old

ID:	5093
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham t'áá íiyisí abínígo nízhdii'na'go bááh áádóó tó abid bił nízhdiinilgo Héígar baazhnínilgo nihiiníłjid , áádóó ashkii bił dashdiił'a'go dah dii'áázh , áádóó Bíyer-shííba hoolyéedi kéyah bii' doo naagháhídi niji'aash .
PRED:	And Abraham rose up early in the morning , and took the bread , and brought it to Hagar , and took the boy , and took the boy , and he took the boy , and went to Beersheba .
GOLD:	So Abraham got up early the next morning , prepared food and a container of water , and strapped them on Hagar 's shoulders . Then he sent her away with their son , and she wandered aimlessly in the wilderness of Beersheba .

ID:	5094
INPUT:	Áádóó náábík'ijį' bitsilí Éíbel jishchį́ . Éíbel éí dibé yaa áhályáanii silį́į́' , nidi Kéin éí dá'ák'ehgi naalnishii silį́į́' .
PRED:	And after these things he gave birth to his brother : but Korah became a shepherd of sheep , but he became a field .
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to his brother and named him Abel.When they grew up , Abel became a shepherd , while Cain cultivated the ground .

ID:	5095
INPUT:	Da' Christ yá nidaal'a'iísh danilį́ ? Shí lá t'ah aláhígo yá'át'éehgo éí nishłį́ ni ; naanish t'ah aláhídi ádaat'éii baa naashá , doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą'di náshidi'neesghaal , t'ah aláhídi át'éego awáalyaaí nísísdlį́į́' , índa lą'ídi k'asdą́ą́' shi'diisyį́ ( doo áhályáanii nahalingo ádíshní ) .
PRED:	Are I the servants of Christ ? I am greater than the works of the work , but more than many , but now I have been taken into prison , as a fool .
GOLD:	Are they servants of Christ ? I know I sound like a madman , but I have served him far more ! I have worked harder , been put in prison more often , been whipped times without number , and faced death again and again .

ID:	5096
INPUT:	K'os níyizgo bii'dę́ę́' bich'į' hanádzih nít'éé' . Yee hahaasdzíi'ii índa bik'eh hoogáałii yeidiní'ánígíí yik'eh dahół'į́įgo tádadookai .
PRED:	They turned from the clouds and spoke to him , and they would obey his statutes and his statutes which he gave them .
GOLD:	He spoke to Israel from the pillar of cloud , and they followed the laws and decrees he gave them .

ID:	5097
INPUT:	háálá t'ahdii ts'ísee k'ehgo ádanoht'é . Nihitahgi ła' da'ahoołch'į́į́d , ła' ahináádadoołtłi' , ła' ał<unk> kah , áko ts'ísee k'ehgo ádanoht'é . Doo da'oodláanii dayíkáhígi át'éego dayínóhkááh .
PRED:	For you are still in the flesh . There are some of you among you who are evil , so that you may go to the rest of the faith .
GOLD:	for you are still controlled by your sinful nature . You are jealous of one another and quarrel with each other . Does n't that prove you are controlled by your sinful nature ? Are n't you living like people of the world ?

ID:	5098
INPUT:	Áádóó awáalyaají éé'ę́ę háázhdii'nilgo ahóyííłką́ąjį' t'áá ákwíí jį́ aláahgo naat'áanii ná'ádį́hígi níjídį́į́h nít'éé' .
PRED:	He ate his prison and ate his life all the days of the king 's life .
GOLD:	He supplied Jehoiachin with new clothes to replace his prison garb and allowed him to dine in the king 's presence for the rest of his life .

ID:	5099
INPUT:	Bee ánísht'éii baa nitséskeesgo bee háínídzíi'ii bich'į' dah nídiisdzá .
PRED:	I went back to your ways , and I went back to you .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	5100
INPUT:	Díí tó háána'ígi Méribah hoosye' , háálá ákwii Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' saad dahasłį́į́' índa ákwii hach'į' diyingo í'diilyaa .
PRED:	This is the son of Amoz in the waters of water , because the children of Israel served the Lord , and there he appeared to him there .
GOLD:	This place was known as the waters of Meribah ( which means “ arguing ” ) because there the people of Israel argued with the Lord , and there he demonstrated his holiness among them .

ID:	5101
INPUT:	( Éí dinéhígíí kin haal'áagi hááhoniłcha'go naat'áanii yił da'ahigą́ągo , índa diné neiłtseedgo biniinaa awáalyaa góne' yah eelt'e' . )
PRED:	( for they took the princes of the city , and put them in prison because of the death of men . )
GOLD:	( Barabbas was in prison for taking part in an insurrection in Jerusalem against the government , and for murder . )

ID:	5102
INPUT:	Dooda shį́į́ , doo ákót'ée da , háálá nihits'íís bee hadadilyaii azhą́ doo hózhǫ́ bidziil da nidi éí t'áá ákónéehee ádaat'é ,
PRED:	No , it is not so , for our body is not strong , but the body is greater .
GOLD:	In fact , some parts of the body that seem weakest and least important are actually the most necessary .

ID:	5103
INPUT:	Áko hwe'asdzą́ą́ jíł'íní Shííkem kin haal'áagi haye' ła' há yishchį́ , éí Abímelek bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	And his wife had a son in Shechem , and he named him Abimelech .
GOLD:	He also had a concubine in Shechem , who gave birth to a son , whom he named Abimelech .

ID:	5104
INPUT:	Nidi díí t'áá ádzaagóó nida'nitinii t'áadoo ééhóziní ił nida'í'įįh áádóó naaldlooshii doo nitsídaakeesii nahalingo t'áadoo tsíhodeeskézí t'óó nida'ádiilchxǫǫh .
PRED:	But if they do not know a sign , they must not be put to death as the birds of wild animals .
GOLD:	But these people scoff at things they do not understand . Like unthinking animals , they do whatever their instincts tell them , and so they bring about their own destruction .

ID:	5105
INPUT:	Áádóó Péntekast beiníłką́ągo t'áá ádzíłtso [ aheełt'éego nitsídadzikeesgo] t'ááłáhígi nidzíiztą́ .
PRED:	And all sat down in the same day , and they sat down .
GOLD:	On the day of Pentecost all the believers were meeting together in one place .

ID:	5106
INPUT:	Tó éí tsé nidayii<unk> ; t'áá íiyisí nahałtį́įhgo łeezh ayiił'eeł ; t'áá ákót'éego diné bee bił chohoo'ínígíí ááłdįįł .
PRED:	They have cut down the stone , and the dust is full of dust ; so thou hast cut off the hope of men .
GOLD:	as water wears away the stonesand floods wash away the soil , so you destroy people 's hope .

ID:	5107
INPUT:	Kéyah bits'ą́ą́dóó nídahoodleełii neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' Bóhólníihii baa náhidit'aahígíí t'áá át'é , éí kéyah bits'ą́ą́dóó nídaneest'áanii , doodaii' tsin bineest'ą' ádaat'éii , éí Bóhólníihii bíí' át'é , áko Bóhólníihii bich'į'go dadílzin .
PRED:	All the fruit of the land which the Lord gave to me , of the fruit of the fruit of the land , of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the Lord , and it is holy to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ One-tenth of the produce of the land , whether grain from the fields or fruit from the trees , belongs to the Lord and must be set apart to him as holy .

ID:	5108
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí doo ła' kéyah biih doohkah da . Díí kéyah bii' kéédahoht'į́į doo , dishníigo bee ádee haasdzíí' nít'éé' ; t'áá hazhó'ó Jiifáneh biye' Kéíleb áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa t'éiyá yah adoo'ash .
PRED:	No one will enter into the land . This land I swore to you . But Caleb son of Nun , son of Nun , and Joshua the son of Nun .
GOLD:	You will not enter and occupy the land I swore to give you . The only exceptions will be Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun .

ID:	5109
INPUT:	Binááł Diyin God ts'ídá doo deidísin da .
PRED:	They do not fear God in his sight .
GOLD:	“ They have no fear of God at all . ”

ID:	5110
INPUT:	Nidi diné doo yá'ádaashóonii biye'ké t'áá ałtso ch'il ahoshí nahgóó kól'įįhígi ádabidi'doolnííł , háálá éí doo yílá bee naaljooł da .
PRED:	But all the sons of the wicked shall be taken away , for they are not taken away .
GOLD:	But the godless are like thorns to be thrown away , for they tear the hand that touches them .

ID:	5111
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é bił hojilne'go Bóhólníihii yee áhodííniidígíí t'áá át'é baa hojoolne' .
PRED:	And Moses told the people of Israel all that the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	So Moses gave all of these instructions to the people of Israel as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	5112
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'į́į́góó nináháháahii t'áá éí bik'ehgo táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiin yiską́ąjį' ákót'éego sínítį́į dooleełgo naa diní'ą́ , kót'éego Ízrel dine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii bá dah yíyéeł doo .
PRED:	And I have given thee the house of Israel a hundred and three hundred and twenty days , that they may bear their iniquity .
GOLD:	I am requiring you to bear Israel 's sins for 390 days — one day for each year of their sin .

ID:	5113
INPUT:	Éí diné ání , Kin ayóó áníłtsogo nideesh'ááł áádóó ná'ádeídi dahótsaago dahooghango ádeeshłííł , áádóó tsésǫ' dadooleełgóó bá bighádahaasdzą́ągo ádeeshłííł , índa dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' ádaał t'ą́'ígíí bii'dę́ę́' a<unk> deeshkałgo łichíi'go deeshdlish .
PRED:	The man said , “ I will make a great house , and I will make a house of death , and I will make a house of cedar , and I will put it on the edge of the stars . ”
GOLD:	He says , ‘ I will build a magnificent palacewith huge rooms and many windows.I will panel it throughout with fragrant cedarand paint it a lovely red . '

ID:	5114
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso ákóhóót'įįd nidi , Job t'áadoo ádił asziihígi da , índa t'áá áhoodzaagóó t'áadoo Diyin God yik'i hodii'ą́ą da .
PRED:	And all these things were done , but Job did not sin , neither did he pour out his hand upon him .
GOLD:	In all of this , Job did not sin by blaming God .

ID:	5115
INPUT:	T'áá áko tsxį́įłgo siláo índa siláo neeznádiingo bindanit'a'í ákóyaa yił dah diijéé' , áko éí siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í índa siláo ałdó' dayiiłtsą́ągo , Paul nídeiniłhałígíí yę́ę yik'i deeskai .
PRED:	And when the army and the captains of the army saw this , they also saw Paul and the commanders of the army who had come upon Paul .
GOLD:	He immediately called out his soldiers and officers and ran down among the crowd . When the mob saw the commander and the troops coming , they stopped beating Paul .

ID:	5116
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Tónteel bikáa'jigo dah didiilnííh , áko Ííjip dine'é áádóó bitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí índa łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii tó bik'i diilkǫǫh .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Put your hand on the sea , and on Egypt and on chariots and chariots . ”
GOLD:	When all the Israelites had reached the other side , the Lord said to Moses , “ Raise your hand over the sea again . Then the waters will rush back and cover the Egyptians and their chariots and charioteers . ”

ID:	5117
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , diné dabidósinii t'áá áyídígi bee yisdá'iildéehii bá hólǫ́ , áko nihikéyahgi bee baa ha'niihii hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Surely there is salvation for those who fear him , and the glory of our land shall be with us .
GOLD:	Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him , so our land will be filled with his glory .

ID:	5118
INPUT:	Shí Éíbraham biDiyin God áádóó Áízak biDiyin God índa Jéíkab biDiyin God nishłį́ . Diyin God éí daneeznáanii doo biDiyin God jílį́į da , nidi dahináanii biDiyin God jílį́ .
PRED:	I am the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . God is not the God of the dead , but the living God .
GOLD:	‘ I am the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . ' So he is the God of the living , not the dead . ”

ID:	5119
INPUT:	Naalye'é yaa áhályáanii bina'adlo'ii binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Parable of the Shrewd Manager

ID:	5120
INPUT:	Hasht'e'ádadołnéehgo nihílááh ; nihik'is ałdó' bił diné baa nínáánóhkááh .
PRED:	Get up and go , and go back to the people .
GOLD:	Then take your brother , and go back to the man .

ID:	5121
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go éí Daniel nídeizlóozgo náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí shijéé' góyaa adayiisxan . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí Daniel áyidííniid , NiDiyin God t'áá áłahjį' bá nanil'a'ígíí yisdánółtééł .
PRED:	Then the king answered Daniel , and cast him into the lions . Then the king said to Daniel , “ May God save your enemies always . ”
GOLD:	So at last the king gave orders for Daniel to be arrested and thrown into the den of lions . The king said to him , “ May your God , whom you serve so faithfully , rescue you . ”

ID:	5122
INPUT:	Áádóó bílátah dah si'ánígíí éí tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá áníłnééz ; béésh łitsoii naneesdizgo da'ahól<unk> go áádóó tsin pámgrenit aneest'ą' nahalingo éí bílátah dah si'ánígíí binázt'i'go ályaa ; łahjí t'áá ákót'éego béésh łitsoii bik'i naneesdizgo ałdó' ályaa .
PRED:	And the corners of the pillars were seven cubits long and twenty cubits ; and the pillars of the pillars were round about , and the pillars of the pillars were of bronze .
GOLD:	The bronze capital on top of each pillar was 71/2 feet high and was decorated with a network of bronze pomegranates all the way around .

ID:	5123
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é náádabidideeshłááł niizį́į'go Íífreiyim dine'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii áádóó Samériya bidoo yá'áshǫ' t'áadoo bahat'aadí silį́į́' ; jó , éí ayóogo binda'adlo' áádóó da'ni'įįh índa t'áá tł'óó'dóó aghada'ii'nííł .
PRED:	And I will heal Israel , and Ephraim hath sinned against Samaria , and Samaria , and they have become an abomination , a great and a thief .
GOLD:	“ I want to heal Israel , but its sins are too great.Samaria is filled with liars.Thieves are on the insideand bandits on the outside !

ID:	5124
INPUT:	Iiláíyashib , Jóíyada , Johéínan índa Jeidúwa bídayééłkaahdą́ą́' Líívai dine'é éí dabizhé'é aláahgo bídahólníhígíí dabízhi' naaltsoos bikáá' ádaalyaa ; nááda'iiłniihii ałdó' , éí Pérzha dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í Daráíyas nant'á silį́į'jį' daházhi' ádaalyaa .
PRED:	And it was written in the book of the sons of Levi , and in the days of their fathers , the priests , and the priests , and the names of Darius , king of Persia .
GOLD:	A record of the Levite families was kept during the years when Eliashib , Joiada , Johanan , and Jaddua served as high priest . Another record of the priests was kept during the reign of Darius the Persian .

ID:	5125
INPUT:	Azhą́ atídanihi'dil'į́ áádóó nihich'į' nidahwii'náa nidi hada'íínółníigo yéego nisoozį́įgo da'iinohdlą́ . Éí bąą Diyin God dayoodláanii áłah nídaadleehgóó nihaa dahwii'niih .
PRED:	But if you are afflicted and distress , you are troubled in trouble . Therefore we are in the church of God .
GOLD:	We proudly tell God 's other churches about your endurance and faithfulness in all the persecutions and hardships you are suffering .

ID:	5126
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , Bóhólníihii íinízinii bik'ehgo tízhdiilyaa ; yínííł hade át'éego áhoolaa , áádóó bąąhági át'éii biniinaa náá'ázdiisnii'go ha'áłchíní yizdoołtsééł , áádóó as'ahgóó jiináa doo , índa Bóhólníihii íinízinii yá'át'éehgo ájoolíił doo .
PRED:	But if the Lord does the will of the Lord , he has punished him , and he will see his children , and his life will live , and the Lord will do good .
GOLD:	But it was the Lord 's good plan to crush himand cause him grief.Yet when his life is made an offering for sin , he will have many descendants.He will enjoy a long life , and the Lord 's good plan will prosper in his hands .

ID:	5127
INPUT:	Áko bá nijil'a'í hwe'asdzą́ą́ dooleełii hainíłtį́įgo éí haye'ké doodago hatsi'ké há niyiishchį́įgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ áádóó ha'áłchíní éí bá nijil'a'í t'áá bídéét'i' , áko t'áá hó t'éí dah nídizh'doodááł .
PRED:	And he gave his wife to his wife , and gave him his sons , and his sons , and his children , and his children , and his children ; and he went to him .
GOLD:	“ If his master gave him a wife while he was a slave and they had sons or daughters , then only the man will be free in the seventh year , but his wife and children will still belong to his master .

ID:	5128
INPUT:	Áádóó Tónteel Dók'ǫ́ǫzhii siyį́įgo bee hoodzooígíí éí Jórdan tooh biih yílíníjį' éí ha'a'aahjígo hoodzo dooígíí át'é . Áádóó náhookǫsjí hoodzo dooígíí éí Tónteel Dók'ǫ́ǫzhii táłts'á hiníyínígi Jórdan tooh biih yílínídóó hahoodzo .
PRED:	And the border of the sea was from the east side of the Jordan to the east side of the Jordan , from the north side of the sea to the sea .
GOLD:	The eastern boundary extended along the Dead Sea to the mouth of the Jordan River.The northern boundary began at the bay where the Jordan River empties into the Dead Sea ,

ID:	5129
INPUT:	Zíklag , <unk> bath , Héí<unk> ,
PRED:	Naboth , and Naboth ,
GOLD:	Ziklag , Beth-marcaboth , Hazar-susah ,

ID:	5130
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh biniyé dooląął shį́į́ shich'į' náádahołniih ? Deenásts'aa' áádóó naaldlooshii dabinilk'ahígíí bik'ah didlidgo náádahaniihii doo binádíízįįd da ; dóola áádóó dibé yázhí índa tł'ízíchǫǫh éí dabidił doo baa shił hózhǫ́ǫ da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Why do you sacrifice to me ? You have no peace offering with the bull and the fat of the animals , and the goats , and the goats , and the goats , and the goats , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ What makes you think I want all your sacrifices ? ” says the Lord. “ I am sick of your burnt offerings of ramsand the fat of fattened cattle.I get no pleasure from the bloodof bulls and lambs and goats .

ID:	5131
INPUT:	Áłts'íísígíí éí miil nídoodleeł , áádóó a'oh áníłtsooígíí éí dine'é bidziilii dooleeł ; shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii baa hoolzhiizhgo tsxį́įłgo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	A little child will become a thousand and a strong nation ; I , the Lord , will make it quickly .
GOLD:	The smallest family will become a thousand people , and the tiniest group will become a mighty nation.At the right time , I , the Lord , will make it happen . ”

ID:	5132
INPUT:	Doo bił éédahózin da índa doo ak'ida'diitįįh da ; t'áá chahałheełgóó deíkááh ; nihokáá'góó bee dahółdzilii t'áá ałtso nídadíníizhoozh .
PRED:	They do not understand , nor understand ; they go into darkness ; all the kingdoms of the earth are covered with fear .
GOLD:	But these oppressors know nothing ; they are so ignorant ! They wander about in darkness , while the whole world is shaken to the core .

ID:	5133
INPUT:	Áko áłah silį́'ígíí biníi'gi nidahazh'eezhgo , Ha'át'íí bee adziilii shį́įshą' , índa háishą' bízhi' binahjį' díí baa nishoo'áázh ? daaníigo nidahódééłkid .
PRED:	And they brought them into the midst of the crowd , and they asked him , Who is this great power , and by name ?
GOLD:	They brought in the two disciples and demanded , “ By what power , or in whose name , have you done this ? ”

ID:	5134
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God índa Dibé Yázhí nilíinii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bits'ą́ą́dóó tooh niłtólígo tséghádi'nídínii bik'i <unk> diiłtólígi át'éego bik'i <unk> diił<unk> go iiná tó ch'ínílį́įgo shich'į' áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he sent me out of the throne of God and the Lamb , and sent me out of the waters of the river .
GOLD:	Then the angel showed me a river with the water of life , clear as crystal , flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb .

ID:	5135
INPUT:	Nił hóyée'ii , nílááh , wóláchíí' bich'į' dínáahgo yaa naagháhígíí nabik'ítsíníłkees áádóó honíyą́ą le' .
PRED:	Go , go to the desert , and see what he has done , and be wise .
GOLD:	Take a lesson from the ants , you lazybones.Learn from their ways and become wise !

ID:	5136
INPUT:	Áádóó Iiláíjah éí diné t'áá ałtso yich'į' niníyáago ání , Haa lá nízáágóó naakigo haz'ą́ bita' nidadinohdle' doo ? Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God nilį́įgo bikéé' ninohkááh . Nidi Béíyal éí diyin át'é ládą́ą́' bikéé' ninohkááh . Áko diné łá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' hach'į' haadzíi' da .
PRED:	Elijah came to all the people and said , “ How long will you read the Lord your God ? But if you follow Baal , you are gods . ” But no one answered him .
GOLD:	Then Elijah stood in front of them and said , “ How much longer will you waver , hobbling between two opinions ? If the Lord is God , follow him ! But if Baal is God , then follow him ! ” But the people were completely silent .

ID:	5137
INPUT:	Nidi damį́įgo aleeh góne' naaniiníłką́ągo , łikání halchinii spáis wolyéii hasht'edajiilaa yę́ę dajíjáahgo tséní'ootséeldi náájíkai , [ áádóó ła'ígíí ałdó'] .
PRED:	But on the first day of the first day of the first day of the first month , they came to the tomb , and the rest of them were crying .
GOLD:	But very early on Sunday morning the women went to the tomb , taking the spices they had prepared .

ID:	5138
INPUT:	Áko John bídahooł'aahii díí dayíínii'go ákwii yíkaigo bits'íís dah deidiiłtį́įgo tséní'ootséél góne' yóó'ádayiilaa .
PRED:	When John 's disciples heard this , they took the body and buried it in the tomb .
GOLD:	When John 's disciples heard what had happened , they came to get his body and buried it in a tomb .

ID:	5139
INPUT:	Béégashii éí tádiindóó ba'aan hastą́ądi miil ánéelą́ą́' , áko Bóhólníihii bich'į' nályéhígíí éí tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan naaki lá .
PRED:	And the oxen were six thousand and six thousand , and the offering of the Lord was seven hundred and two .
GOLD:	36,000 cattle , of which 72 were the Lord 's share ;

ID:	5140
INPUT:	Jiihóram bíídíiską́ą́dóó Íídam dine'é éí Júdah dine'é bee bóhólníihii yich'į' nidaastee'go yits'ą́ąjį' daazlį́į'go aláahgo naat'áanii ádá nideistį́ .
PRED:	And all the days of Jehoram , Edom rebelled against the kingdom of Judah , and set up a king .
GOLD:	During Jehoram 's reign , the Edomites revolted against Judah and crowned their own king .

ID:	5141
INPUT:	Áko nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é danilíinii índa diné t'áá ałtso bitahgi yáá'iilt'e' baa ninéiikah nít'éé' : éí bik'ehgo danihizhé'é yę́ę bada'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii a <unk> níjaa' bik'ehgo t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh nídeit'aahígíí bik'ehgo chizh bee náádi'yoonihii nihiDiyin God bikinjį' ninádayiijih doo , áko bee haz'áanii biyi' bee ak'e'ashchínígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bibikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' deidiłid doo .
PRED:	And the priests , and the Levites , and all the people , according to their families , according to the year of our fathers , according to the year of the year of our fathers , according to the law of the Lord our God , to the altar of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	“ We have cast sacred lots to determine when — at regular times each year — the families of the priests , Levites , and the common people should bring wood to God 's Temple to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God , as is written in the Law .

ID:	5142
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéfthah éí Gíliyadóó dine'é aląąjį' naazíinii yił dah diikaigo bóhólníihgo nant'áago ádayiilaa . Áko Bóhólníihii binááł Mízpeh kin haal'áagi Jéfthah hazaad t'áá át'é bee yájííłti' .
PRED:	Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead and made him king over them . Then Jephthah told them all the words of the Lord in Mizpah .
GOLD:	So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead , and the people made him their ruler and commander of the army . At Mizpah , in the presence of the Lord , Jephthah repeated what he had said to the elders .

ID:	5143
INPUT:	Ex . <unk> : <unk>
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Plans for the Lampstand

ID:	5144
INPUT:	Áko e'e'aahjí hoodzo dooígíí éí ayóó át'é tónteel siyínígíí bibąąhgóó hodeesdzo . Díí éí Júdah dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bináhásdzo .
PRED:	And the border of the sea was toward the sea . This is the border of Judah according to their families .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	5145
INPUT:	Háá'áyį́į́h jį́ éí hodílzingo íínísingo aná'át'áah doo ; jó , Bóhólníihii niDiyin God ákót'éego yee nich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	The Sabbath shall be holy and holy , as the Lord your God commanded you .
GOLD:	“ Observe the Sabbath day by keeping it holy , as the Lord your God has commanded you .

ID:	5146
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip kéyah biishdoonééł biniyé Béthlehem bíighahgóó <unk> ham hoolyéegi nidadziizná .
PRED:	And they set out at Bethlehem , to go to Bethlehem , to enter into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	They took them all to the village of Geruth-kimham near Bethlehem , where they prepared to leave for Egypt .

ID:	5147
INPUT:	Áko Iiláísha éí yiyiiłtsą́ągo hadoolghaazh , Shizhé'é , shizhé'é , tsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí Ízrel dine'é bee bich'ą́ą́h na'abaahii índa łį́į́' yee nida'ałbąąsii ! Áádóó t'áadoo náádziiłtsą́ą da . Áko t'áá hó ha'éé' dziiłtsoodgo ałts'á dzíízǫ́ǫ́z .
PRED:	When Elisha saw Elisha , he cried out , “ My father , my father , the chariots of Israel with chariots and horsemen . ” And he tore his clothes .
GOLD:	Elisha saw it and cried out , “ My father ! My father ! I see the chariots and charioteers of Israel ! ” And as they disappeared from sight , Elisha tore his clothes in distress .

ID:	5148
INPUT:	Háálá shí ánihidishní , Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó t'áá aaníinii ííshjání íidoolííł biniyé Christ éí Jew dine'é yá naal'a'í silį́į́' , ałk'idą́ą́' dabizhé'é yę́ę baa dadeest'áanii yi'doolííł biniyé ,
PRED:	For I say unto you , that Christ might show the truth of the Jews , that he might show the truth of the fathers ,
GOLD:	Remember that Christ came as a servant to the Jews to show that God is true to the promises he made to their ancestors .

ID:	5149
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go ání , Shinanit'a'í , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , t'áá ádínínígíí bik'ehgo shí áádóó shee hólónígíí t'áá ałtso ni .
PRED:	And the king of Israel answered , O king , according to all that I have , and all that I have .
GOLD:	“ All right , my lord the king , ” Israel 's king replied . “ All that I have is yours ! ”

ID:	5150
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii diné doo yá' áshóonii t'áá bił ádííłdįįłígíí éí doo ákóone' ánít'ée da ! Ákwíindzaago diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii diné doo yá'áshóonii bił aheełt'éego ákóníléehgo doo ákóone' ánít'ée da ! Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' Ánihwii'aahii nilíinii , da' éísh doo t'áá ákwii ádooníił da ?
PRED:	Do n't you want the righteous to do what is right ? Do you want to do what is right with the righteous ? Do you do what is right in all the earth ?
GOLD:	Surely you would n't do such a thing , destroying the righteous along with the wicked . Why , you would be treating the righteous and the wicked exactly the same ! Surely you would n't do that ! Should not the Judge of all the earth do what is right ? ”

ID:	5151
INPUT:	T'áá bihidijáahgo nihilą́ąjį' hahidínéeshkał ; lą'í soolį́į'go índa kéyah nihíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	I will drive them before you , and you will be many , and you will possess your land .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	5152
INPUT:	T'áá níléídę́ę́'ésh nihidááhdóó ách'ą́ą́h yéiilti' nít'ée'go baa nitsídaahkees ? Ayóó'ánihósh'níinii , Diyin God binááł Christ bił łá'í niidlį́įgo yéiilti' nít'éé' , áko danihidziil dadoohłeeł biniyé t'áá ałtsojį' nihíká aná'ahiniilchééh nít'éé' .
PRED:	Do you think about the truth in front of you ? I love you in the presence of God , so that you might be strong in every way .
GOLD:	Perhaps you think we 're saying these things just to defend ourselves . No , we tell you this as Christ 's servants , and with God as our witness . Everything we do , dear friends , is to strengthen you .

ID:	5153
INPUT:	Rebékah áyidííniid , Alą́ąjį'ígíí éí akéédę́'ígíí yá naal'a' doo .
PRED:	Rebekah said to Rebekah , “ The first will be his servant . ”
GOLD:	he calls people , but not according to their good or bad works . ) She was told , “ Your older son will serve your younger son . ”

ID:	5154
INPUT:	Bee na'abaahii niniyé ályaaígíí t'áá ałtso doo nidídóołniił da índa saad bee nahwiinít'į́įgo nik'ijį' nehe'níłígíí bá nahoyí'aah doo . Díí Bóhólníihii bá nidaal'a'í bíí' dooleełígíí át'é , áádóó bit'áá ákogi át'éii éí shits'ą́ą́dóó át'é , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And it shall be to pass , that thou shalt be taken away from all the host of war , and from the words of the Lord , and from the house of the Lord , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	But in that coming dayno weapon turned against you will succeed.You will silence every voiceraised up to accuse you.These benefits are enjoyed by the servants of the Lord ; their vindication will come from me.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5155
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iiláísha éí asdzání biyáázh hináago ánáyiidlaaígíí yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Nídiidáahgo nighandóóígíí bił dah diinéehgo háágóó shį́į́ doohnéełgo áadi nihighan doo , háálá Bóhólníihii hodidoochįįłii yee haadzíí' , áádóó tsosts'id nááhaijį' ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	Elisha spoke to the woman who had given birth to her son , saying , “ Get up and go to your house , and go to your house , for the Lord has spoken to you for seven years . ”
GOLD:	Elisha had told the woman whose son he had brought back to life , “ Take your family and move to some other place , for the Lord has called for a famine on Israel that will last for seven years . ”

ID:	5156
INPUT:	Nijéí bee yá'át'éehgo tsíńdííníkéezgoáádóó Diyin God bich'į'go dah díílnihgo
PRED:	If you turn back your heart and turn your hands toward God ,
GOLD:	“ If only you would prepare your heartand lift up your hands to him in prayer !

ID:	5157
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí níłch'i bináhoodǫ́ǫsii hatah nahale'go áyiilaa , áko adláanii názkwigo yik'i naaná'noot'ihígi át'éego Ííjip dine'é yaa nidaakaii t'áá át'é yee ádił nída'alnaadgo ádayósin nít'éé' .
PRED:	The Spirit of the Lord sent a spirit out , and he made them sin , and he made all the work of Egypt to sin .
GOLD:	The Lord has sent a spirit of foolishness on them , so all their suggestions are wrong.They cause Egypt to staggerlike a drunk in his vomit .

ID:	5158
INPUT:	Nílááh , aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah bich'į' góde dínááh , áko éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béeso yah aajaa'ígíí , yah e'etiin yaa ádahalyáanii éí dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó áłah ádayiilaaígíí yíídóołtah .
PRED:	Go up to Hilkiah the priest , and he took the money that was in the house of the Lord , which he had gathered in the house of the Lord , and read the prophets of the prophets .
GOLD:	“ Go to Hilkiah the high priest and have him count the money the gatekeepers have collected from the people at the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	5159
INPUT:	Bida'oodlą' bee sáanii danilíinii bits'ą́ą́' ádaasdįįdii náádabi'diiljée'go baa nídahaas'nil . Náádaała' éí yá'ąąshdi iiná t'ah aláhígo yá'át'éehii bee dahinii'náa dooleełgo náádidiijah danízingo , níík'eh nihe'oodlą' bee nisiidzį́ danízingo biniinaa béédahididoochiłę́ę t'óó bił nidadziisghaal .
PRED:	The women of faith have been destroyed , and they have taken hold of the dead . They have been put to death in heaven , so that we may be put to shame , because of your faith .
GOLD:	Women received their loved ones back again from death.But others were tortured , refusing to turn from God in order to be set free . They placed their hope in a better life after the resurrection .

ID:	5160
INPUT:	Áko áká anánílwo'go t'áadoo yi'niihí baa naniná , áko niTaa' t'áadoo yi'niihí ááníiłii yoo'íinii , éí na'doolééł .
PRED:	So do n't be able to help you , so that your Father who does not want you to help you .
GOLD:	Give your gifts in private , and your Father , who sees everything , will reward you .

ID:	5161
INPUT:	Diné badahojoobá'íii bide áhojósinii éí Ábiilaii doo hoł nilį́į da , nidi diné jooba' nahas'áanii baa jijooba'ii éí Áhoolaii hoł nilį́ .
PRED:	The poor is not in the hand of the poor , but he who does the poor is the one who makes the needy .
GOLD:	Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker , but helping the poor honors him .

ID:	5162
INPUT:	Tsits'aa' dílzinii álnéhígíí
PRED:	The Holy Tent
GOLD:	Building the Ark of the Covenant

ID:	5163
INPUT:	Áádóó ashdladiin náháhígíí dadíínóhsin , índa kéyahgóó kéédahat'íinii t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áhonídlee' bee bił dahołne' ; díí danihich'į'go hózhǫ́ǫ́jí náhááh át'é , áko diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo bidáda'ak'eh yich'į' nihéédahidookah áádóó bik'éí yich'į' nihéédahidookah .
PRED:	You shall be fifty years old , and tell all the inhabitants of the land , that they may go back to their enemies .
GOLD:	Set this year apart as holy , a time to proclaim freedom throughout the land for all who live there . It will be a jubilee year for you , when each of you may return to the land that belonged to your ancestors and return to your own clan .

ID:	5164
INPUT:	Éínab , Éshtii<unk> , Éínim ,
PRED:	and Buz , and Buz , saying ,
GOLD:	Anab , Eshtemoh , Anim ,

ID:	5165
INPUT:	Áko díí kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' doo naagháhí da doo , áádóó t'óó bik'ee ayói doo , índa díí dine'é dajílíinii tsosts'idiin nááhaijį' Bábilan dine'é bá nidajil'a' doo .
PRED:	And this land shall be desolate , and it shall be desolate ; and this people shall serve Babylon seven years .
GOLD:	This entire land will become a desolate wasteland . Israel and her neighboring lands will serve the king of Babylon for seventy years .

ID:	5166
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes índa Éran ákǫ́ǫ́ ííł'a' , áádóó bee até'ésh'íinii bee Ííjip dine'é atíishłaa , áádóó éí bik'ijį' áádę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezh .
PRED:	And Moses sent to Aaron and Aaron , and he said , I have cut off the Egyptians , and brought you out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Then I sent Moses and Aaron , and I brought terrible plagues on Egypt ; and afterward I brought you out as a free people .

ID:	5167
INPUT:	áko Zekaráíyah bighan góne' yah ajííyáago Elízabeth k'é bizhdííniid .
PRED:	And Zechariah went into the house of Zechariah , and called her peace .
GOLD:	where Zechariah lived . She entered the house and greeted Elizabeth .

ID:	5168
INPUT:	nahasdzáán bikáa'gi tó yaa ná'nool'ąął . Neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin yiską́ągo tó yaa aná'nool'ąąd .
PRED:	And the waters went down upon the earth , and the waters was fifty and fifty days .
GOLD:	So the floodwaters gradually receded from the earth . After 150 days ,

ID:	5169
INPUT:	Diné bidziilii éí yee naabaahii t'áá át'é bee hólǫ́ǫgo , t'áá bí bighan yich'ą́ą́h naagháago binaalye'é hazhó'ó sinil łeh ,
PRED:	If a strong man is in his own house , he makes his own wealth .
GOLD:	For when a strong man is fully armed and guards his palace , his possessions are safe —

ID:	5170
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii , Táá' yiską́ągo shaa nídoohkah , hałníigo há nihoní'áanii bik'ehgo táá' yiską́ągo Jerobówam áádóó dine'é t'áá ałtso Riihobówam yaa haaskai .
PRED:	Then King Rehoboam and all the people of Israel went to me three days , saying , “ On the third day you will return to me . ”
GOLD:	Three days later Jeroboam and all the people returned to hear Rehoboam 's decision , just as the king had ordered .

ID:	5171
INPUT:	Tséghą́ą'di tsé binída'astséélgóó kéédahoht'íinii , bee nihádahadzidii índa bee ádaa dadzíínóhdlíii nihina'azlo' ; azhą́ atsá bit'oh ííł'ínígi ánízáadi nihit'oh ádaohłaa nidi , áádę́ę́' adanihidiyeeshtł'ił , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	You have put your trust in the rock , you who dwell on the rock , and you have made you like a bird , but I will cast you down , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	You have been deceivedby the fear you inspire in othersand by your own pride.You live in a rock fortressand control the mountain heights.But even if you make your nest among the peaks with the eagles , I will bring you crashing down , ” says the Lord .

ID:	5172
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Éran éí Bóhólníihii bizaadk'ehgo Dził Hor góde haayá , índa áadi daaztsą́ ; Ízrel dine'é Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch' ínínáádóó bik'ijį' dízdiin nááhaigo ashdla' nídízííd binih ła'a jį́į́ góne' áhóót'įįd .
PRED:	And Aaron the priest went up to Mount Sinai , and he died in the fifth day of the month of the children of Israel , in the fifth month of the month of the month .
GOLD:	While they were at the foot of Mount Hor , Aaron the priest was directed by the Lord to go up the mountain , and there he died . This happened in midsummer , on the first day of the fifth month of the fortieth year after Israel 's departure from Egypt .

ID:	5173
INPUT:	Diyin God t'áadoo baa'ihgo baa yáníłti'í , doodaii' nidine'é binanit'a'í nidi doo hóyée'go bá hadíídzih da .
PRED:	You will not be cursed by God , nor by your master 's people .
GOLD:	“ You must not dishonor God or curse any of your rulers .

ID:	5174
INPUT:	Díí Éran haye'ké kódaolyé : éí nááda'iiłniihii ak'ah bik'i yadaadziidgo bee dabi'doolzį́į'ii , nidaal'a'go náá'iiłniihii danilį́į doo .
PRED:	These are the names of Aaron 's sons : These are the priests who are anointed with oil , and they shall be priests .
GOLD:	These sons of Aaron were anointed and ordained to minister as priests .

ID:	5175
INPUT:	Nihił bééhózingo t'áá bíneesh'ánígi bee nihizhé'é bá naashnish nít'éé' .
PRED:	You know that the work of your father was with you , just as he did .
GOLD:	You know how hard I have worked for your father ,

ID:	5176
INPUT:	Ákohgo <unk> gi t'áá ákwe'é Hííbran hoolyé ; Kéínan kéyah biyi'gi Sárah daaztsą́ , áko Éíbraham atínízhdindleehgo áá jiníyáago Sárah baa jííchah .
PRED:	So Sarah died in Hebron , and Sarah died in the land of Canaan ; and Abraham went to Sarah , and cried to Sarah .
GOLD:	she died at Kiriath-arba ( now called Hebron ) in the land of Canaan . There Abraham mourned and wept for her .

ID:	5177
INPUT:	Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , da' díísh ninahat'a' bik'ehgo ádzaa , áko ná naal'a'í nishłíinii éí t'áadoo bee shił hwíínílne' da ? Háishą' bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bikéé'dóó bikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá'dóó dah sidáa doo ?
PRED:	O king , did this according to thy word , and thy servant hath not spoken to me ; and who shall sit on the throne ?
GOLD:	Has my lord the king really done this without letting any of his officials know who should be the next king ? ”

ID:	5178
INPUT:	Shaa háashjée'ii ádabidi'dooldįįłígíí yiiłtsą́ ; diné doo yá'ádaashóonii shich'į' nidaabaahii bik'eh hodidoodleełii diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	I have seen the light , and I have heard the voice of the wicked .
GOLD:	My eyes have seen the downfall of my enemies ; my ears have heard the defeat of my wicked opponents .

ID:	5179
INPUT:	Nidi ch'ééh ásht'į́įgo baa bił dahóózhǫǫdgo shiniyé áłah silį́į́' ; t'áá aaníí doo ádił dandlíinii doo béédahasinígíí shiniyé áłah silį́į'go t'áadoo áádahoot'įįhí dashijoołáago shá nidahałt'i' .
PRED:	But they were filled with me , and they gathered together against me , and they hated me because they did not know the evil things they did .
GOLD:	But they are glad now that I am in trouble ; they gleefully join together against me.I am attacked by people I do n't even know ; they slander me constantly .

ID:	5180
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ádzíłtso diyingo náádajiiłniihígíí éí náá'iiłniihii bí doo ; t'áá ha'át'íhída náá'iiłniihii baazhníláhígíí t'áá bíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	All the people who belong to the priest shall receive their inheritance .
GOLD:	Each priest may keep all the sacred donations that he receives . ”

ID:	5181
INPUT:	Diné ahiní'diiltłáád yąąh ádít'íinii éí diné baa ha'niih , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii éí saad dahółǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	A rich man is blessed , but the words of fools shall be with him .
GOLD:	Avoiding a fight is a mark of honor ; only fools insist on quarreling .

ID:	5182
INPUT:	Nidi dah yiigaii yę́ę doo k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizhgóogo , nidi dinilzhingo éí ázhdoodlidígi hadzííyáhígíí át'é ; náá'iiłniihii éí , Doo ánít'éhí da , hodidooniił ; jó , ázhdoodlidgo hadzííyáhígi t'óó sid dooleeł .
PRED:	But if it is not spread in the skin , and if it is not in it , it is a priest , and the priest shall say , ‘ He is clean , ' and he shall pronounce it .
GOLD:	But if the affected area has not changed or spread on the skin and has faded , it is simply a swelling from the burn . The priest will then pronounce the person ceremonially clean , for it is only the scar from the burn .

ID:	5183
INPUT:	Éíhaz éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh áádóó David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi yóó'ádaalyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa ; nít'éé' haye' Heziikáíyah hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Ahaz slept with his fathers , and was buried in the city of David , his son Hezekiah reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Ahaz died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Hezekiah became the next king .

ID:	5184
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Shí k'ad dah diishááh , áko nihí hadashinohtáa dooleeł , ákondi t'áá ádił da'íínółzíihgo dadínóohnééł ; déyáágóó doo dadohkááh át'ée da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I am going , and you will seek me , but you will die , but you will not go . ”
GOLD:	Later Jesus said to them again , “ I am going away . You will search for me but will die in your sin . You can not come where I am going . ”

ID:	5185
INPUT:	Áko bá nidaal'a'í ádabiłní , Jó k'ad , Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii dajooba'go baa dahosidiits'ą́ą́' ; nánooshkąąh , nihíni'dii tł'oh yishbizh nihiníí' gónaa bik'ídadiiltih , índa tł'óół nihitsii' binídadiilt'ihgo Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' diikah ; néididoochiłgo da'át'é .
PRED:	And the servants said unto him , Behold , we have heard the grace of the kings of Israel , I pray thee , I pray thee , let us put on sackcloth , and put on sackcloth , and put on sackcloth , and let the head of the king of Israel go to the king of Israel .
GOLD:	Ben-hadad 's officers said to him , “ Sir , we have heard that the kings of Israel are merciful . So let 's humble ourselves by wearing burlap around our waists and putting ropes on our heads , and surrender to the king of Israel . Then perhaps he will let you live . ”

ID:	5186
INPUT:	Ch'ikéí neeznált'éego binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	The Death of the Woman
GOLD:	Parable of the Ten Bridesmaids

ID:	5187
INPUT:	áko doozhǫǫgo dah adii'ą́ągo , hadaneesánígíí yideez , índa bihétł'óól ádingo biniinaa daniiłna' .
PRED:	And when the sun came , the sun grew up , and because they had no root , because they had no root .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	5188
INPUT:	Jerúsalem biná'áznáago hanááł ályaa
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	A Sign of the Coming Siege

ID:	5189
INPUT:	Áko Mózes ádayidííniid , Da' Ííjip kéyahdiísh łeehwii'nííł ádaadingo honoojíidi dadíníi'nééł biniyé nihíí'ish ? Ha'át'éegoshą' Ííjip kéyahdóó hanihííní'eezhgo doodahági ánihiinilaa ?
PRED:	They said to Moses , “ Have you brought us into the wilderness of Egypt ? Why have you brought us out of Egypt ? Why have you brought us out of Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	and they said to Moses , “ Why did you bring us out here to die in the wilderness ? Were n't there enough graves for us in Egypt ? What have you done to us ? Why did you make us leave Egypt ?

ID:	5190
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasin índa t'áá aaníinii ahidii'áázh ; t'áá ákogi át'éii índa bee asht'ehodít'éii ahizts'ǫs .
PRED:	He has mercy and truth ; He has kissed righteousness and truth .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and truth have met together.Righteousness and peace have kissed !

ID:	5191
INPUT:	Ákódzaago yéego hadeeshghaazhgo bi'éé' t'áá ákǫ́ǫgo ch'élwod .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he cried out , he cried out with a loud voice ; and he cried out with a loud voice .
GOLD:	“ But when I screamed , he ran outside , leaving his cloak with me ! ”

ID:	5192
INPUT:	Áádóó hwe'ana'í honáshzhiizhgo bik'ee nitsijikaigo ádahoolaago índa hazéé' nidei'áhígíí hach'į' nidahwiiłnáago haye'ké áádóó hatsi'ké dabits'íís dahodiyeesį́į́ł índa kwá'ásiní da<unk> níinii dabits'íís nídazhdoolghał .
PRED:	And it came to pass at the time of his enemies , when they were afraid of his mouth , that they may eat their children , and their sons , and their flesh shall eat their flesh .
GOLD:	I will see to it that your enemies lay siege to the city until all the food is gone . Then those trapped inside will eat their own sons and daughters and friends . They will be driven to utter despair . '

ID:	5193
INPUT:	éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Íídam dine'é hak'ijigo k'ídideeshnihgo diné áádóó naaldlooshii nideestsiłgo doo naagháhígóó haz'ą́ągo ádeeshłííł ; Tííman hoolyéédóó níléí Díídan hoolyéejį' diltłish bee dazhdínóonééł .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : I will stretch out my hand upon Edom , and I will cut off the beasts of Edom , and the beasts thereof , and the beasts thereof shall fall by the sword of Ethiopia .
GOLD:	Therefore , says the Sovereign Lord , I will raise my fist of judgment against Edom . I will wipe out its people and animals with the sword . I will make a wasteland of everything from Teman to Dedan .

ID:	5194
INPUT:	Áko Réíchel índa Líyah éí Jéíkab yich'į' haadzíi'go áyidííniid , Nihizhé'é bighandi ha'át'íhída nihíí' dooleełii ádin .
PRED:	And Rachel and Leah said unto Jacob , We have no inheritance in our father 's house .
GOLD:	Rachel and Leah responded , “ That 's fine with us ! We wo n't inherit any of our father 's wealth anyway .

ID:	5195
INPUT:	Áko bida'oodlą' yee aa dadzólíii jiiłtsą́ągo diné bitah doo nahwii'nánígíí ábizhdííniid , Shiye' , ádił ni'iyínílzí'ígíí ná yóó'adoot'ą́ .
PRED:	And when they saw faith , he said unto the sick , My son , thy sins are forgiven .
GOLD:	Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the paralyzed man , “ My child , your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	5196
INPUT:	Áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii náádahizhdoołnih biniyé yah ajookaigo Jííhu éí tł'óó'dę́ę́' diné tseebídiingo niinínilgo ání , Díí diné nihaa diní'ánígíí ła' t'óó bi'noołnii'go t'áá nihí bá ninádoohtłish .
PRED:	So Jehu went in to offer burnt offering , and said , “ This man is able to kill you . ”
GOLD:	So they were all inside the temple to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings . Now Jehu had stationed eighty of his men outside the building and had warned them , “ If you let anyone escape , you will pay for it with your own life . ”

ID:	5197
INPUT:	Doo t'áá aaníí na'iisgeelii yaa dahalne'ii , éí dabiyooch'íidgo áádóó t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee ádaa daha'niihgo yee shidine'é ádił nida'iilzíihgo ádeile'ii éí bik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon , ní Bóhólníihii . Nidi éí t'áadoo dahóół'aad da , áádóó kódadohníi dooleeł t'áadoo hodííniid da , índa díí dine'é t'áadoo bee bá chodajoo'įįhí da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Behold , I am against my people a false prophet , a false witness , and a false witness against my people , saying , I am against my people , ' says the Lord , ‘ I am against them , ' says the Lord . “ You will not say , ‘ You will not trust . ' ”
GOLD:	I am against these false prophets . Their imaginary dreams are flagrant lies that lead my people into sin . I did not send or appoint them , and they have no message at all for my people . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5198
INPUT:	Áko áshidííniid , Daniel , diné ayóó'óó'níinii nílíinii , yiizįįh , áko saad bee nich'į' yáshti'ígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą'go bik'i'diitįįh , háálá Diyin God naa shiníł'a' . Áko t'ahdii díí saad yee shich'į' yáłti'go shitah hoditłidgo yiizį' .
PRED:	And he said unto me , O Daniel , hear the words of my mouth , and hear the words of my mouth : for God sent me to thee , because he spake with me , and he stood in my mouth .
GOLD:	And the man said to me , “ Daniel , you are very precious to God , so listen carefully to what I have to say to you . Stand up , for I have been sent to you. ” When he said this to me , I stood up , still trembling .

ID:	5199
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ash t'áá ákogi ájít'į́įgo Bóhólníihii binááł joogáałgo náá'iiłniihii Jiihóíyada nibíiníłką́ .
PRED:	And Joash did what was right in the sight of the Lord , and Jehoiada the priest all the days of Jehoiada .
GOLD:	Joash did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight throughout the lifetime of Jehoiada the priest .

ID:	5200
INPUT:	Áádóó ádaałts'óózígíí éí tsosts'idgo yá'ádaat'ééh yę́ę adayiisna' , áko déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii bee bił hweeshne' nidi doo bił béédahózingóó t'áadoo ła' yee shił náhoolne'í da .
PRED:	And they found seven good things , and I told them , but they did not tell me any of them .
GOLD:	And the shriveled heads swallowed the seven healthy heads . I told these dreams to the magicians , but no one could tell me what they mean . ”

ID:	5201
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá biniyé shits'ąą nanít'á , áádóó ha'át'íí lá biniyé ni'ana'í nishłį́įgo shaa nitsíníkees ?
PRED:	Why do you hide me from me ? Why do you think that I am your enemy ?
GOLD:	Why do you turn away from me ? Why do you treat me as your enemy ?

ID:	5202
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó Jiifáneh éí Kíínez diné nilíinii biye' Kéíleb áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa t'éiyá kéyah yiih doo'ash , háálá t'áá dzizį́į́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii bik'ehgo joo'ash nít'éé' .
PRED:	But Caleb the son of Caleb , the son of Nun , the son of Nun , and Joshua the son of Nun , shall enter into the land of the Lord , because he walked in the way of the Lord .
GOLD:	The only exceptions are Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua son of Nun , for they have wholeheartedly followed the Lord . '

ID:	5203
INPUT:	Áádóó ałtso hats'á'iizdéél . Nít'éé' éí kéyahígi t'áá íiyisí hodííchįįd , áko hahojoobá'ígo t'áá ałtsoní bídin jílį́ dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	And he left them , and he was very angry in the land ; and he was poor in all things .
GOLD:	About the time his money ran out , a great famine swept over the land , and he began to starve .

ID:	5204
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , T'áá aaníí nidine'é bich'į' nił néiikah doo .
PRED:	He said to them , “ We will go with your people . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” they said . “ We want to go with you to your people . ”

ID:	5205
INPUT:	Géíyas éí baa ha'niih
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Caring for the Lord 's Workers

ID:	5206
INPUT:	Jótham éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh , áádóó hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádabi'diilyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áko haye' Éíhaz hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Jotham slept with his fathers , and was buried in the city of David his father , and Ahaz his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . And his son Ahaz became the next king .

ID:	5207
INPUT:	Ákohgo naaltsoos ííł'íní Shéífan éí aláahgo naat'áanii yił hoolne'go ání , Aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah éí naaltsoos léi' sheiní'ą́ . Áko Shéífan éí aláahgo naat'áanii yinááł yiyííłta' .
PRED:	Then Shaphan said to the king , “ I have given me a book of the high priest Hilkiah . ” So Shaphan read in the presence of the king .
GOLD:	Shaphan also told the king , “ Hilkiah the priest has given me a scroll. ” So Shaphan read it to the king .

ID:	5208
INPUT:	Gídiyan náásgóó áát'įįdii índa daaztsánígíí
PRED:	Gideon and Gideon
GOLD:	Gideon 's Sacred Ephod

ID:	5209
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Heziikáíyah éí Aizéíyah ábizhdííniid , Bóhólníihii áníinii bee háínídzí'ígíí éí yá'át'ééh . Shíyoołkáłígíí biyi' hasht'ehodít'é áádóó t'áá aaníinii hólónígíí éí yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ The word of the Lord is good . It is good in the days of my life and truth . ”
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ This message you have given me from the Lord is good. ” For the king was thinking , “ At least there will be peace and security during my lifetime . ”

ID:	5210
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go bąąh nahókaadgo bigaan bąąh naníídee' ; nitseedzá áádóó asdzání awéé' bídii'na'ígi át'éego bił honiigaii .
PRED:	When the king of Babylon heard it , he was broken with his hands , and his arm was broken , and as a woman was in her hand .
GOLD:	The king of Babylon has heard reports about the enemy , and he is weak with fright.Pangs of anguish have gripped him , like those of a woman in labor .

ID:	5211
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , nihitahgi ła'da hane' t'áá aaníinii bits'ánooyáago , nít'éé' éí ła'da bił nánooht'áazhgo
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , if you had gone out of the truth , you took him and brought him to him .
GOLD:	My dear brothers and sisters , if someone among you wanders away from the truth and is brought back ,

ID:	5212
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Jesus binahjį' doo shił naaki nilį́į́góó díí shił bééhoozin , t'áá ałtso yá'ádaat'éeh nidi doo yá'ádaat'éeh da jinízinígíí éí t'áá ádííghahígo doo hoł yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	I know that the two things of the Lord Jesus is good , but it is better to do good .
GOLD:	I know and am convinced on the authority of the Lord Jesus that no food , in and of itself , is wrong to eat . But if someone believes it is wrong , then for that person it is wrong .

ID:	5213
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ánółtso t'ááłá'í nootínígo Diyin God bá dahołne' doo , áko t'áá ałtso bił éédahodoozįįł , áádóó t'áá ałtso chánah dadooleeł .
PRED:	And every one shall declare unto God , and every man shall know , and all shall be established .
GOLD:	In this way , all who prophesy will have a turn to speak , one after the other , so that everyone will learn and be encouraged .

ID:	5214
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad yich'į' naastee' , áádóó Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii binahat'a' doo deiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	For they have rebelled against God , and have rejected the wings of the Most High .
GOLD:	They rebelled against the words of God , scorning the counsel of the Most High .

ID:	5215
INPUT:	Tooh dahináanii
PRED:	The rivers of the
GOLD:	Division and Unbelief

ID:	5216
INPUT:	Áko hódzą́ áádóó na'nitin bił béédahodoozįįł áádóó saad bik'idi'dootį́įłii yaa ákodadínóozįįł .
PRED:	And they shall know wisdom and understanding , and they shall know the words of understanding .
GOLD:	Their purpose is to teach people wisdom and discipline , to help them understand the insights of the wise .

ID:	5217
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí bá nidaal'a'ígíí yich' į' haadzíi'go ání , T'áá nant'inee hazhó'ó David bił ahił dahodoołnihgo ádabididoohniił , Aláahgo naat'áanii naa bił nihoozhǫǫh , áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso ayóó'ádanó'ní , éí bąą k'ad aláahgo naat'áanii baadaaní dííleeł .
PRED:	Saul said to his servants , “ If you are in peace , tell David , ‘ The king is pleased with you , ' and all his servants love you . Now therefore let the king go . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul told his men to say to David , “ The king really likes you , and so do we . Why do n't you accept the king 's offer and become his son-in-law ? ”

ID:	5218
INPUT:	Éí bąą haa'íshą' aláahgo bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii niłdzilgo doo hizh<unk> nááł át'éii nihee dahazlį́'ígíí baa ahééh daniidzin doo , áko haa'íshą' baa hasti'go dílzingo baa bił hózhǫ́ǫgo Diyin God bich'į' nidahwiidláa doo ,
PRED:	So we will give thanks to God , and we will give thanks to him in the presence of the kingdom , so that we may give thanks to God .
GOLD:	Since we are receiving a Kingdom that is unshakable , let us be thankful and please God by worshiping him with holy fear and awe .

ID:	5219
INPUT:	Áádóó íídą́ą́' diné éí kin haal'áá góne' yah anídahineest'į́į́' ; éí anaa'dę́ę́' yóó'anídahaazhjé'ígíí t'óó ádaa yádandzingo ninádahineest'į́'ígíigi át'éego ninádahineest'į́į́' .
PRED:	And we are seen in that day in the city , as we are driven out of the battle .
GOLD:	They crept back into the town that day as though they were ashamed and had deserted in battle .

ID:	5220
INPUT:	áádóó yíldzisgóó <unk> kin shijaa'ígíí , Beth-nímrah kin haal'áii , Sákath kin shijaa'ígíí áádóó Zéífan kéyahígíí áádóó Héshban kin haal'áii aláahgo binanit'a'í Sáíhan wolyéii bee bóhólnííh nít'éé' yę́ę łahjį' yidziihígíí , éí Jórdan tooh bee hoodzooígíí , Kíniireth tó siyíníjį' nihoodzo áádóó ha'a'aahjigo t'áá át'é baa hodeet'ą́ .
PRED:	and its border , and its border , and its border , and Heshbon , and all the rest of Sihon king of Heshbon , and all the other side of the Jordan , to the east side of the Jordan .
GOLD:	In the valley were Beth-haram , Beth-nimrah , Succoth , Zaphon , and the rest of the kingdom of King Sihon of Heshbon . The western boundary ran along the Jordan River , extended as far north as the tip of the Sea of Galilee , and then turned eastward .

ID:	5221
INPUT:	Oodlání Níłch'i Diyinii bee łá'í danilį́
PRED:	The Holy Spirit
GOLD:	Unity in the Body

ID:	5222
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bikáa'di tsé ílíinii bída'néél'ąądígíí bik'ehgo hasht'e'nibída' astsélígíí ahidaneeznil índa éí bikáá' dilk'is bídáátsélígíí ha'naa nidaaz'ą́ .
PRED:	And these stones were covered with stones , according to their kind , and they set on the stones of their brother .
GOLD:	The blocks of high-quality stone used in the walls were also cut to measure , and cedar beams were also used .

ID:	5223
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éego yigáałii Bóhólníihii yidósin , nidi diné nahagizgo hináanii éí Bóhólníihii yik'ee diniih .
PRED:	The righteous fear the Lord , but the living person who does wrong hate the Lord .
GOLD:	Those who follow the right path fear the Lord ; those who take the wrong path despise him .

ID:	5224
INPUT:	Asdzání t'áá ałtso adiz yéédahósinii adiih ádaat'į́įgo tł'ízí bighaa' hadayiizdiz .
PRED:	All the women put their hands on their feet , and they put their hair on their hair .
GOLD:	All the women who were willing used their skills to spin the goat hair into yarn .

ID:	5225
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí bizhé'é Jéíkab , Féro yich'į' yił yah íí'áázh , áádóó Jéíkab éí Féro yik'ijisdli' .
PRED:	Joseph brought Joseph to his father Jacob , and Jacob blessed Pharaoh .
GOLD:	Then Joseph brought in his father , Jacob , and presented him to Pharaoh . And Jacob blessed Pharaoh .

ID:	5226
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóí bee ade áhólzinii biniinaa diné saał hahóół'á ; Ayóó ádabóodziilii hach'į' nidahwiiłnánígíí bąą nihíká oohjeeh , daaní .
PRED:	Many of the mighty men were filled with water , and they cried out to help you because of the mighty hand of the mighty .
GOLD:	“ People cry out when they are oppressed.They groan beneath the power of the mighty .

ID:	5227
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa hane'
PRED:	A message against the Philistines
GOLD:	A Message about Philistia

ID:	5228
INPUT:	Honíts'aa' góyaa ts'in nídááltseigo yíl'á
PRED:	Jesus and the ram
GOLD:	A Valley of Dry Bones

ID:	5229
INPUT:	Aláahgo nihinanit'a'í áádóó nihinaat'áanii danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę áádóó nihizhé'é danilíinii índa kéyahgóó diné kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso éí ninaal'a'í ná dahalne'ii nízhi' yee nihił dahoolne' nidi , doo deísíníilts'ą́ą' da nít'éé' .
PRED:	our king , our princes , and our princes , and all the inhabitants of the land , and all the inhabitants of the land , and all the inhabitants of the land , and we did not listen to you .
GOLD:	We have refused to listen to your servants the prophets , who spoke on your authority to our kings and princes and ancestors and to all the people of the land .

ID:	5230
INPUT:	Doo yá'áshóonii yiniyé ádaat'íinii yéego yąąh dashijéé' . T'áá nahont'inee łoh nidadii'nił , daaníigo yaa yádaałti' . Ádeinízin , Háísh deidoołtsééł ?
PRED:	The wicked are turned away from me ; they say , “ Who will see us ? ”
GOLD:	They encourage each other to do eviland plan how to set their traps in secret. “ Who will ever notice ? ” they ask .

ID:	5231
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é daadzí'ígíí
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Hope for the

ID:	5232
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Heziikáíyah éí diné bá nidaashnishii díí ałdó' saad bee dahodoodząąłii Sálaman yee ak'e'ashchínígíí yééda'iidlaa .
PRED:	These are the words that Hezekiah king of Judah wrote in the ears of the people .
GOLD:	These are more proverbs of Solomon , collected by the advisers of King Hezekiah of Judah .

ID:	5233
INPUT:	Áko Jesus dah daask'id ła' bąąh híjiiyáago ákwii hódahooł'aahii bił nidzíiztą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Jesus had gone to the hill , his disciples stayed there .
GOLD:	Then Jesus climbed a hill and sat down with his disciples around him .

ID:	5234
INPUT:	Áádóó hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee hach'į' hadzoodzíí' , Da' doo oo'íiniísh t'áá bí na'ahidlóozgo bíighah ? Da' doósh t'áá áłah <unk> 'ádínóodah da ?
PRED:	And he spake unto them a parable , saying , Is not the blind come to his own own place ?
GOLD:	Then Jesus gave the following illustration : “ Can one blind person lead another ? Wo n't they both fall into a ditch ?

ID:	5235
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é dabidiyinígíísh ła' dahakéyah Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yighadahodeest'ą́ ?
PRED:	Have they taken away from the nations of the nations ? Have they taken away the land of Assyria ?
GOLD:	Have the gods of any other nations ever saved their people from the king of Assyria ?

ID:	5236
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	Many Disciples Desert Jesus

ID:	5237
INPUT:	índa halah t'ah ch'ikę́ę́h nilį́įgo áhánígo hak'éígíí éí t'ah doo bahastiin haleehígíí éí t'éí bee ázhdidoolchxǫǫł .
PRED:	and if her sister is yet yet yet , then her husband is not yet called , she shall be unclean .
GOLD:	or his virgin sister who depends on him because she has no husband .

ID:	5238
INPUT:	Kííras , Sáíyah índa Péídan bada'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii ,
PRED:	the sons of Sidon , the sons of Sidon , the sons of Sidon ,
GOLD:	Keros , Siaha , Padon ,

ID:	5239
INPUT:	Naat'áanii bił adííyį́į́ł biniyé bił dah níkeehgo nidááhgóó naazkáanii hanisíidgo hazhó'ó baa nitsíníkees doo .
PRED:	And the prince shall know that the prince shall be filled with him , that he may be filled with him .
GOLD:	While dining with a ruler , pay attention to what is put before you .

ID:	5240
INPUT:	Kót'éego Saul daaztsą́ , áádóó haye'ké tált'éego ałdó' naaztseed ; habee na'abaahí há neijaahii áádóó diné hoł naakai yę́ę t'áá ałtso ałdó' t'áá éí bijį́ t'áá łahjį' nidabi'diztseed .
PRED:	So Saul died , and his three sons were killed , and all the men who were with him were killed on that day .
GOLD:	So Saul , his three sons , his armor bearer , and his troops all died together that same day .

ID:	5241
INPUT:	Ana'í nidahałáhígi át'éego nihí éí t'áá ádzaagóó t'áadoo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' nidahohłáhí .
PRED:	You shall not go to the Lord your God as one enemy , and you shall not worship the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not worship the Lord your God in the way these pagan peoples worship their gods .

ID:	5242
INPUT:	Mt . 4 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Casts Out a Demon

ID:	5243
INPUT:	ATaa' nilíinii bich'į' ahééh danohsingo bidiyį́į́' adinídíín yii' deíkáahii bíí' dooleełii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz dooígíí bą́ą́h da'niidlį́įgo ánihiilaa .
PRED:	You have given thanks to the Father , who has given thanks to the holy ones who live in it .
GOLD:	always thanking the Father . He has enabled you to share in the inheritance that belongs to his people , who live in the light .

ID:	5244
INPUT:	Nít'éé' yá'ąąshii ąą ádzaago , jó'akon , łį́į́łgaii léi' yiiłtsą́ ! Yik'i dah sidáii éí Ba'ahódlíii índa T'áá Aaníinii wolyé , áádóó ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego ánihodoo'ááł índa anaa' ííł'į́ .
PRED:	And behold , the heavens opened , and behold , there is a young man , and a faithful man called him , and the righteous shall come , and the battle shall come .
GOLD:	Then I saw heaven opened , and a white horse was standing there . Its rider was named Faithful and True , for he judges fairly and wages a righteous war .

ID:	5245
INPUT:	Áádóó díí bik'ijį' David éí Filístiya dine'é yik'eh deesdlį́į'go yee ádíhoos'níí' índa David éí <unk> <unk> mah hoolyéego Filístiya dine'é bikin haal'áhígíí yighaideet'ą́ .
PRED:	After these things David attacked the Philistines , and David took away the city of the Philistines .
GOLD:	After this , David defeated and subdued the Philistines by conquering Gath , their largest town .

ID:	5246
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́į́ góne' naat'áanii jílíinii áádóó diné t'áá kééhat'į́į́ nít'éé' ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii dóola yáázh t'ááłá'í ádá shódeizhdoołt'eełgo há nááhidoonih .
PRED:	On that day the prince and all the people of the people shall offer a young bull for a sin offering .
GOLD:	On the day of Passover the prince will provide a young bull as a sin offering for himself and the people of Israel .

ID:	5247
INPUT:	Nináá'ídíshkid : Da' Ízrel dine'ésh t'áadoo bił éédahoozin da ? Átséedi Mózes kódííniid : Ła' dine'é doo t'áá aaníí t'ááłá'í dine'é danilíinii deinołch'į́įdgo ánihideeshłííł . Doo ádahalyáanii dine'é bee nihá dahodeeshchįįł .
PRED:	I asked you , “ Do n't you know ? ” Moses said , “ I will make you a people of each tribe , and I will make you angry with the prophets . ”
GOLD:	But I ask , did the people of Israel really understand ? Yes , they did , for even in the time of Moses , God said , “ I will rouse your jealousy through people who are not even a nation.I will provoke your anger through the foolish Gentiles . ”

ID:	5248
INPUT:	jó , ayóó át'éego nahałniih yee Bóhólníihii éí nidine'é áádóó na' áłchíní áádóó nida'asdzą́ą́ índa nee hólónígíí t'áá át'é yee atíidoolííł .
PRED:	For the Lord will give you great rain , children , children , children , and everything you have .
GOLD:	So now the Lord is about to strike you , your people , your children , your wives , and all that is yours with a heavy blow .

ID:	5249
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii yich'į' dah nídiikaigo dabintsíkees bik'ésti' yę́ę nahgóó iiltsos .
PRED:	But they went to the Lord , and put them in the heart of their heart .
GOLD:	But whenever someone turns to the Lord , the veil is taken away .

ID:	5250
INPUT:	Áko hatsi' dziiłtsą́ągo ha'éé' ák'i nijooldláadgo ájíní , Héi' , shitsi' nílíinii , ayáhígo áshiinilaago biniinaa t'áá íiyisí shich'į' hodiiznáá' , háálá Bóhólníihii bich'į' ádee hadeesdzíi'go k'ad doo łahgo ánáoshdle' át'ée da .
PRED:	When she saw his daughter , she tore his clothes , and said , “ Look , my daughter , my daughter , because I have made a vow to the Lord , because I would not speak to him . ”
GOLD:	When he saw her , he tore his clothes in anguish . “ Oh , my daughter ! ” he cried out . “ You have completely destroyed me ! You 've brought disaster on me ! For I have made a vow to the Lord , and I can not take it back . ”

ID:	5251
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniinaanígóó shi'ana'í danilíinii doo shaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫ da le' ; t'áadoo baanígóó shik'ee dadiniihii t'áadoo bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dashidi'niihí le' .
PRED:	Let my enemies rejoice in me , and let them rejoice with joy ; let not those who hate me rejoice .
GOLD:	Do n't let my treacherous enemies rejoice over my defeat.Do n't let those who hate me without cause gloat over my sorrow .

ID:	5252
INPUT:	Áko Peter ayá'niiłti'go ání : K'ad t'áá aaníí shił bééhoozin , Diyin God doo ał'ohgo diné yaa nitsíkees da .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ I know that God does not know . ”
GOLD:	Then Peter replied , “ I see very clearly that God shows no favoritism .

ID:	5253
INPUT:	Doo yá'ádaashóonii haa bidi'doolníłígíí
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Book Three

ID:	5254
INPUT:	Azhą́ kóhóót'įįd nidi , t'áá ádił da'ílzííh nít'éé' ; azhą́ t'óó bik'eda'ayóii áyiilaa nidi , t'áadoo dahoosdląąd da .
PRED:	But they have sinned , and have done many works , but they did not believe .
GOLD:	But in spite of this , the people kept sinning.Despite his wonders , they refused to trust him .

ID:	5255
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Jó'ab áyidííniid , Shoo , k'ad díí baa niséyá ; éí bąą nílááh , dinééh Ábsalam bił nánít'aash .
PRED:	Then the king said to Joab , “ Behold , I have come to you . Now take the young men with Absalom . ”
GOLD:	So the king sent for Joab and told him , “ All right , go and bring back the young man Absalom . ”

ID:	5256
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go Zárefathgóó dashdiiyá . Nít' éé' kin haal'á bidáń'dítį́įhgi jiníyáago ; jó , ákwe'é asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii léi' chizh náyiilááh , áádóó bich'į' ázhdííniidgo ábijiní , Nánooshkąąh , ásaa' bee tó áłch'į́į́dígo shá nídiikaahgo deeshdlį́į́ł .
PRED:	So he rose up and went to the gate . He went to the gate . He said to the woman , “ Please let me drink a little water . ”
GOLD:	So he went to Zarephath . As he arrived at the gates of the village , he saw a widow gathering sticks , and he asked her , “ Would you please bring me a little water in a cup ? ”

ID:	5257
INPUT:	Áko Jéíkab áháłní , Shik'isóó , háádę́ę'shą' ádaaht'į́ ? Áko ádaaní , Héírandę́ę́' ádeiit'į́ .
PRED:	Jacob said to them , “ My brothers , what are you ? ” And he said , “ We are Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Jacob went over to the shepherds and asked , “ Where are you from , my friends ? ” “ We are from Haran , ” they answered .

ID:	5258
INPUT:	Áko John baa jíkaigo ádabizhdííniid , Na'nitiní , Jórdan biláahdi bił nani'aashgo baa hwíínílne'ígíí , jó'akon , t'áá éí tó yee asį́įhgo diné t'áá ałtso baa hakááh .
PRED:	When they came to John , they said to him , “ Teacher , you are going to the king of the Jordan , behold , all the people come to him . ”
GOLD:	So John 's disciples came to him and said , “ Rabbi , the man you met on the other side of the Jordan River , the one you identified as the Messiah , is also baptizing people . And everybody is going to him instead of coming to us . ”

ID:	5259
INPUT:	Zedekáíyah nant'áii
PRED:	Zedekiah 's King Zedekiah
GOLD:	The Fall of Jerusalem

ID:	5260
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Yuráíyah éí David áyidííniid , Jó , níbaal biyi'di tsits'aa' dílzinii si'ą́ áádóó Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é níbaal yii' nidaháaztą́ , áádóó bóhonishníihii Jó'ab índa shinanit'a'í bá nidaal'a'í éí t'áá halgaigi nidahaazná . Ákoósh shí t'óó shighangóó nídeeshdáałgo áadi t'óó ashą́ągo áádóó t'óó ashdlą́ągo she'asdzą́ą́ bił shiiłkáah doo ? Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hiníná áádóó nii' sizíinii hiná ; shí ałdó' ts'ídá t'áá aaníí doo ákódeeshníił da .
PRED:	Then Uriah said to David , “ Behold , I have taken the ark of the ark of the covenant of Israel , and Judah , and my lord , and my lord , and my lord , and my lord , and my lord , and I will not return to my house , and I will live in the field . ”
GOLD:	Uriah replied , “ The Ark and the armies of Israel and Judah are living in tents , and Joab and my master 's men are camping in the open fields . How could I go home to wine and dine and sleep with my wife ? I swear that I would never do such a thing . ”

ID:	5261
INPUT:	Áko k'é bee nihaazhníyá yę́ędą́ą́' nitsidaahkaigo , áádóó ádił nídahodoołchiłgo t'áá ánółtso ak'eh dahonoł'į́į́ nít'ée'ii bééjílniihgo ayóó'ánihijó'níigo t'ah aláhídi át'éego nihaa nitsídzíkees .
PRED:	And if you were in peace , then , if you have received the gift of peace , you will be able to obey all your sins .
GOLD:	Now he cares for you more than ever when he remembers the way all of you obeyed him and welcomed him with such fear and deep respect .

ID:	5262
INPUT:	E'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáhígíí bich'į' nidahojiłáago éí biniinaa łoh biih jííyá nahalingo azajookai .
PRED:	And they went into a net , as they served their idols , and they went into a net .
GOLD:	They worshiped their idols , which led to their downfall .

ID:	5263
INPUT:	Tsé ílíinii ániks wolyéii hasht'e'niyída'ak'aashii ál'ínígi át'éego tsé yinída'ak'aashgo yízhí bik'i naaznilgo bibąąhgóó óola bee ahéédeelghasgo Ízrel biye'ké dabízhi' bik'i sinilgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And they made two stones of stones , and put them on the sides of the sons of Israel .
GOLD:	They mounted the two onyx stones in settings of gold filigree . The stones were engraved with the names of the tribes of Israel , just as a seal is engraved .

ID:	5264
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman sodizin niiníłti'go yá'ąąshdę́ę́' kǫ' bidadíínáadgo didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó náádahaniihígíí iidííłk'ą́ą́' , áko Bóhólníihii bee bi'oh hodidilyéehii kin bii' sohodizin bii' hadéébįįd .
PRED:	When Solomon finished praying , fire came down from heaven and burnt incense and burnt offering and burnt offering , and the glory of the Lord filled the temple .
GOLD:	When Solomon finished praying , fire flashed down from heaven and burned up the burnt offerings and sacrifices , and the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple .

ID:	5265
INPUT:	T'áá áníiltso , Jew dine'é índa doo Jew dine'é daniidlį́į da nidi , naalte' índa doo naalte' daniidlį́į da nidi t'ááłá'í niidlį́į dooleełgo Níłch'i Diyinii t'ááłá'íígíí bee danihi'doolzį́į́' , áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii t'ááłá'íígíí nihiih dahwiizle'go bee dahinii'ná .
PRED:	We are all Jews and Greeks , but we are not slaves and slaves , but we are one Spirit , and we are one Spirit .
GOLD:	Some of us are Jews , some are Gentiles , some are slaves , and some are free . But we have all been baptized into one body by one Spirit , and we all share the same Spirit .

ID:	5266
INPUT:	Bénjamin dine'é kéyah baa deet'ą́
PRED:	The tribe of Benjamin
GOLD:	The Land Given to Benjamin

ID:	5267
INPUT:	Jó , yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii , éí díí nahalin : diné léi' kéyah bił haz'ą́ągi bee bóhólníihii bich'il na'atł'o'ii bitahgóó bá nidadoolnishii ła' t'ah abínídą́ą́' yíká dah diiyá .
PRED:	Behold , the kingdom of heaven is like a man who has gone out in the field , and there was none of them in the morning .
GOLD:	“ For the Kingdom of Heaven is like the landowner who went out early one morning to hire workers for his vineyard .

ID:	5268
INPUT:	Nihik'isóó danohłíinii , nihíyee' azhą́ t'óó kónízahíjį' ałts'áhaakai nidi , t'áá áłahjį' nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' nihaa nitsídeiikees . Dooládó' nihídin dasiidlį́į' da ! Náádanihiidiiltséełgi haleebee bindahosiit'ą́ !
PRED:	Our brothers and sisters , even though we are always far away from you , we are always able to see what we have done .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , after we were separated from you for a little while ( though our hearts never left you ) , we tried very hard to come back because of our intense longing to see you again .

ID:	5269
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Abímelek daaztsą́ągo dayiiłtsą́ , índa t'áá ałtso bighangóó anídahaaskai .
PRED:	When the Israelites saw Abimelech , they returned to his house .
GOLD:	When Abimelech 's men saw that he was dead , they disbanded and returned to their homes .

ID:	5270
INPUT:	yéego hadoolghaazhgo ání , Jesus , Diyin God Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii biYe' nílíinii , haashą' shíléehgo ánít'į́ ? Diyin God binahjį' nánooshkąąh , atíshóólééh lágo .
PRED:	He cried out with a loud voice , “ Jesus , the Most High God , why do you want me to do with me ? Please do n't punish me . ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	5271
INPUT:	Éí bąą shik'isóó , Bóhólníihii nádzáajį' hada'íínółní . Jó'akon , k'éé'dídléehii ni' bits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' ílíinii yiba' át'éego , áłtséedi índa akée'di bik'i nahałtį́įhjį' ha'ólníi łeh .
PRED:	Therefore , brothers and sisters , come to the end of the Lord . Behold , the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the harvest , and the end of the end .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , be patient as you wait for the Lord 's return . Consider the farmers who patiently wait for the rains in the fall and in the spring . They eagerly look for the valuable harvest to ripen .

ID:	5272
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání , Dahóyą́ dabidó'níinii éí doo dahóyą́ą́góó ádadeeshłííł , Áádóó nidahazyąądii éí bibee hódzą' t'áadoo nánídlínígóó ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	For it is written , “ I will make you wise , and I will make the wisdom of the wise . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ I will destroy the wisdom of the wiseand discard the intelligence of the intelligent . ”

ID:	5273
INPUT:	Áádę́ę́' yee át'éii yee níni' ná'áhólééh lágo ; bikék'edóoya' lágo .
PRED:	Do n't let him make his ways pure ; do n't let him go out to the land .
GOLD:	Do n't let your hearts stray away toward her.Do n't wander down her wayward path .

ID:	5274
INPUT:	Háálá átséedi da'iisiidląądgo t'áá nidasiildįįdjį' baa da'iisiidlí'ígíí yéego dayíníitą'go Christ bił da'ahííníitą' doo .
PRED:	For we will keep our faith in Christ , that we may keep our faith until we have been destroyed .
GOLD:	For if we are faithful to the end , trusting God just as firmly as when we first believed , we will share in all that belongs to Christ .

ID:	5275
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego Bóhólníihii hak'ijį' dooleeł , áko nahasdzáán bikáá' diyin dabidi'níinii t'áá ałtso yaa nididoodaał , áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bił nahaz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' t'áá ałtso hach'į' nidahałáa doo .
PRED:	And the Lord shall come against him , and he shall come upon all the kingdoms of the earth , and all the nations shall worship him .
GOLD:	The Lord will terrify themas he destroys all the gods in the land.Then nations around the world will worship the Lord , each in their own land .

ID:	5276
INPUT:	Nídideesh'nahgo shizhé'é bich'į' nídeeshdáałgo kóbidideeshniił , Shizhé'é , yá'ąąshii bich'į' índa ni nich'į' bąąhági ásdzaa ;
PRED:	I will return to my father and say , ‘ My father , I have sinned against heaven and heaven . '
GOLD:	I will go home to my father and say , “ Father , I have sinned against both heaven and you ,

ID:	5277
INPUT:	Nidi íídą́ą́' Éíhab daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Mó'ab dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' nidaastee' .
PRED:	But after that Ahab died , the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel .
GOLD:	But after Ahab 's death , the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel .

ID:	5278
INPUT:	Áko siláo danilínígíí tsin ałnáoszid yikáa'jį' Jesus yił ada'askaalgo bee hazhdít'éé nít'é'ígíí siláo dį́lt'éego ałtaadeisnii' ; ayaadi ha'éé' ałdó' . Nidi ayaadi ha'éé' éí doo ahídadiilkad da , éí t'áá bílátahdę́ę́' yaago t'áá ła' bizhi'ee yistł'ǫ́ ,
PRED:	Then the soldiers took Jesus on the cross and put four men on the cross . But they put their clothes on the head of the robe . But they did not put their hands on the head of one foot .
GOLD:	When the soldiers had crucified Jesus , they divided his clothes among the four of them . They also took his robe , but it was seamless , woven in one piece from top to bottom .

ID:	5279
INPUT:	Shá oo'íinii danohłį́ , ní Bóhólníihii , áádóó shá naal'a'í éí nídiiłtíinii nílį́ ; shééhonísin áádóó shiinídlą́ą doo índa Diyin God nishłį́įgo bik'idi'díítį́į́ł biniyé nándiiłtį́ ; shítséedi doo diyin ła' hólǫ́ǫgo ályaa da , doo shikéédę́ę́' ła' hólǫ́ǫ da doo .
PRED:	“ You are my witnesses , ” says the Lord , “ You are my servant , my servant , and you know me , and I have chosen you , and I have chosen you to understand ; there is no other god in me .
GOLD:	“ But you are my witnesses , O Israel ! ” says the Lord. “ You are my servant.You have been chosen to know me , believe in me , and understand that I alone am God.There is no other God — there never has been , and there never will be .

ID:	5280
INPUT:	Nihitahdóoshą' háí hóyą́ áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįh ? Háni'dii yá'át'éehgo jiinánígíí áádóó baa hojíyą́ągo a'ohgo íz'dólzingo ájooníłígíí ííshjání ádzósin le' .
PRED:	Who are you wise and understanding ? Let him know that he is good and faithful to his friend , and let him know that he is a friend .
GOLD:	If you are wise and understand God 's ways , prove it by living an honorable life , doing good works with the humility that comes from wisdom .

ID:	5281
INPUT:	Ch'ééh dadeeskaii díí yee háádadoołyįh , yidííniidii ; díí háá'áyį́į́h baa dahidooh'aah ; ákondi t'áadoo dabidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	They have no rest in them , and they have no rest . Do n't listen to them .
GOLD:	God has told his people , “ Here is a place of rest ; let the weary rest here.This is a place of quiet rest. ” But they would not listen .

ID:	5282
INPUT:	Doo nihik'édí nishłį́įgo nihidínéesh'įįł da ; doo yildinígi ádaot'įįdii t'ahdii nihitah hólǫ́ǫgo ádanoht'éii bik'ehgo k'éédanihidideeshdlííł , áko shí Bóhólníihii nihik'í'ołhaałgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will not look on you , but I will punish you according to your abominations , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will turn my eyes away and show no pity.I will repay you for all your detestable sins.Then you will know that it is I , the Lord , who is striking the blow .

ID:	5283
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Josáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah díí naaltsoos yik'íníyáhígíí bee haz'áanii biyi' bee ak'e'ashchínígíí bizh'doolííł biniyé ch'į́įdii yábiiłti'ii áádóó da'diłgąshii áádóó dinéshchíín áádóó eda'alyaii índa doo daaldinii éí Júdah kéyahgi índa Jerúsalemgi hadadees'į́'ígíí ałtso nahjį' kójiilaa .
PRED:	And Josiah did this in the book of the priest Hilkiah the priest , who had written in the book of the law of the Lord , that he might take away the idols and the idols that he had written in the house of the Lord , and in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Josiah also got rid of the mediums and psychics , the household gods , the idols , and every other kind of detestable practice , both in Jerusalem and throughout the land of Judah . He did this in obedience to the laws written in the scroll that Hilkiah the priest had found in the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	5284
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi diné bee ádaa dahodzódli'ii a'ohgo ábidi'doolnííł áádóó ayóó át'éego ádaa deidzódli'ii wóyahgo ádahodi'doolnííł índa Bóhólníihii t'éiyá ayóó át'éego baa ha'niih dooleeł .
PRED:	In that day the proud shall be brought down , and the proud shall be exalted , and the glory of the Lord shall be exalted .
GOLD:	Human pride will be humbled , and human arrogance will be brought down.Only the Lord will be exaltedon that day of judgment .

ID:	5285
INPUT:	Ayóó át'éego doo yá'áshónígi yee' íínít'įįdáádóó doo ákwii ááníłígíí yee' t'áá náás yíłt'ih .
PRED:	You have done evil things , and your iniquity are on your side .
GOLD:	No , it 's because of your wickedness ! There 's no limit to your sins .

ID:	5286
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihibąąhági ádaat'éii nihá k'ééda'doolchǫǫł biniyé łahgo át'éego tsíńdahidohkeesgo Diyin God bich'į' dah nídahidoohkááh , áko Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó bee ák'ééhwiitáadii nihee náhoodleeł doo .
PRED:	Therefore turn back to your God , and turn back to the Lord your God , that it may be given to you .
GOLD:	Now repent of your sins and turn to God , so that your sins may be wiped away .

ID:	5287
INPUT:	Áko díí t'áá ałtso yaa naayáago , Shaa nídoodááł , dííniid . Nidi t'áadoo nádzáa da áádóó hádí Júdah dine'é doo bazh'dí'nóodlíí át'éii hoołtsą́ .
PRED:	And all these things came to pass , and he said , He will return to me . But she did not come to her . And Judah saw that she was not faithful to her .
GOLD:	I thought , ‘ After she has done all this , she will return to me . ' But she did not return , and her faithless sister Judah saw this .

ID:	5288
INPUT:	Asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii , doodaii' dé'éyóní danilíinii , doodaii' badahojoobá'íii t'áadoo bide ádahwíínóhsiní . Índa nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' t'áadoo nichxǫ́'ígo nihik'is bich'į' nitsídaohkeesí .
PRED:	Do n't think about the widow or the fatherless , or the fatherless , or the poor , or the poor , or the poor ; and do not think that you are evil .
GOLD:	Do not oppress widows , orphans , foreigners , and the poor . And do not scheme against each other .

ID:	5289
INPUT:	kóbijiníigo , Nihílááh , náwónaanídi nihidááhjí kin sinilíjį' doh'aash , t'áá áko ákwii télii ła' biyázhí bił dahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo bik'ídooh'ash ; éí k'e'dooh'ałgo shaa nídooh'ish .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Go to the high places , and find a young donkey , and bring it to me . ”
GOLD:	“ Go into the village over there , ” he said . “ As soon as you enter it , you will see a donkey tied there , with its colt beside it . Untie them and bring them to me .

ID:	5290
INPUT:	1Kgs . 10 : <unk>
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Summary of Solomon 's Reign

ID:	5291
INPUT:	Lk . 6 : 1-5
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Sign of Jonah

ID:	5292
INPUT:	Júdah biye' Zíírah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ła' Miishézabiil biye' Pethaháíyah éí diné bídadéét'i'ii t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii bee bił hojilne' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And of the sons of Judah , son of Zerah , the son of Zerah , told all the people .
GOLD:	Pethahiah son of Meshezabel , a descendant of Zerah son of Judah , was the royal adviser in all matters of public administration .

ID:	5293
INPUT:	Éí Bóhólníihii binááł ayóó át'éego naalzheehii dzizlį́į́' , éí bąą Nímrad áát'įįdígi át'éego Bóhólníihii binááł ayóó át'éego nijilzheeh , hodi'ní .
PRED:	Therefore he became great in the sight of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ] , and cried out in the presence of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ Messiah Pre-Incarnate ] , as he did in the sight of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) .
GOLD:	Since he was the greatest hunter in the world , his name became proverbial . People would say , “ This man is like Nimrod , the greatest hunter in the world . ”

ID:	5294
INPUT:	Jesus díí saad ałtso bee hadziisdzíi'go , Gálilii kéyahdóó dashdiiyáago Jórdan tooh wónaanídi Judíya nahós'a'di jiníyá ;
PRED:	When Jesus had finished these words , he went out of Galilee , and went to the region of the Jordan .
GOLD:	When Jesus had finished saying these things , he left Galilee and went down to the region of Judea east of the Jordan River .

ID:	5295
INPUT:	Anaa' bideezla' chodeiil'ínígíí éí doo ats'íís k'ehgo nidahazt'i'ii bik'ehgo da , nidi bidziilgo bąąhági át'éii yee bidziilii bił nahazhóodii Diyin God bibee adziilii bee íildįįł .
PRED:	We are not able to fight against the flesh , but by the power of the power of God .
GOLD:	We use God 's mighty weapons , not worldly weapons , to knock down the strongholds of human reasoning and to destroy false arguments .

ID:	5296
INPUT:	Díí bee hool'iní bá yada'ii'áhígíí bee ályaii éí óola t'áá bízhání t'áá bitł'ááhdę́ę́' bich'ilátah hózhóón nahalingo naashch'ąą'íjį' óola yitseedgo bee ályaa ; bee hool'iní bá yada'ii'áhígíí ádoolníiłgi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yit'íní áyiilaa yę́ę bik'ehgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	This is the lampstand of pure gold , of pure gold , and of pure gold , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The entire lampstand , from its base to its decorative blossoms , was made of beaten gold . It was built according to the exact design the Lord had shown Moses .

ID:	5297
INPUT:	Áko bikee' áádóó bikédiníbiní éí łeets'aa' ííł'íní hashtł'ish choyooł'íinii áádóó béésh nitł'izii bee ályaago yiniłtsáanii éí náásgóó aláahgo bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ahádahidoodzohii át'é . Béésh nitł'izii bidziilígi át'éego ła' bidziilgo bił nahaz'ą́ą doo ; hashtł'ishgi át'éego ła' doo dabidziilgóó bił nahaz'ą́ą dooleeł .
PRED:	And to his feet and to his land , and to the clay , and to the clay , and to the end of the kingdom shall be like iron ; and there shall be none like iron .
GOLD:	The feet and toes you saw were a combination of iron and baked clay , showing that this kingdom will be divided . Like iron mixed with clay , it will have some of the strength of iron .

ID:	5298
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá ni nidine'é Ízrel chánah ádá íinilaago t'áá ni nidine'é danilį́įgo ahóyéel'áa doo , áádóó ni Bóhólníihii nílíinii , bí biDiyin God sínílį́į́' .
PRED:	For you have established the house of Israel for ever and ever , and you have become your people , O Lord God .
GOLD:	You made Israel your very own people forever , and you , O Lord , became their God .

ID:	5299
INPUT:	T'ah doo shich'į' nahwii'naah yę́ędą́ą́' yóó'ííyáá nít'éé' , nidi k'ad nizaad bik'eh honish'į́ .
PRED:	While I was in trouble , I was still alive , but now I obey your word .
GOLD:	I used to wander off until you disciplined me ; but now I closely follow your word .

ID:	5300
INPUT:	ShiDiyin God , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , t'áá íiyisí naa hashniih doo , áádóó hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áágóó nízhi' baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	My God , I will praise you , and I will praise your name forever .
GOLD:	I will exalt you , my God and King , and praise your name forever and ever .

ID:	5301
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii na'adlo' yindayiiłdeełgo dahináá nít'éé' ; jó , wótashki' nidajiishchį́ . Índa lą́ą dah néitį́įhgo dá'ák'ehgóó nidazhniłt'ą'ii t'áá bił hó ałdó' haa nahodidoodaał .
PRED:	And when they were born to the Lord , they were born to him , and he shall also give him the fruit of the field .
GOLD:	They have betrayed the honor of the Lord , bearing children that are not his.Now their false religion will devour themalong with their wealth .

ID:	5302
INPUT:	áko t'áadoo bee nihik'ídahót'ahígóó índa niha'át'e' ádaadingo Diyin God ba'áłchíní doo ádąąh dahat'aahii dadoohłeeł , áko díí binda'adlo'go doo ts'ííd át'éégóó ahoolchíłígíí bitahdi nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' adiníłdíinii nahalingo da'díínółdíín ,
PRED:	so that you may be pure and pure , and be pure in the sight of God , so that you may have light on the earth as light in the world .
GOLD:	so that no one can criticize you . Live clean , innocent lives as children of God , shining like bright lights in a world full of crooked and perverse people .

ID:	5303
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́įdi díí baa hodoolzhish : Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ts'ídá ayóó át'éego bik'ee ił áhodoodįįłii bik'i hwiidooleełgo t'ááłá'í nítínígo yił kééhat'íinii deidoosiłgo yił nida'ahilbaałgo da'ahidoogą́ą́ł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that the glory of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) shall come upon his neighbor , that every man may take his neighbor , and have mercy upon his neighbor .
GOLD:	On that day they will be terrified , stricken by the Lord with great panic . They will fight their neighbors hand to hand .

ID:	5304
INPUT:	Áko t'áá bee hahideesdzih dooleeł nít'é'ígi át'éego Christ baa hane' ííshjání ádeeshłíłígíí bíká sodadołzin .
PRED:	So I pray that I will speak to you , just as I will speak to you .
GOLD:	Pray that I will proclaim this message as clearly as I should .

ID:	5305
INPUT:	Doo nidi bił aháda'doohheh da : t'ááká nihitsi'ké éí biye'ké bił ahaa dahohnííł lágo , doodaii' t'ááká bitsi'ké éí nihiye'ké yił ahaa dahakááh lágo .
PRED:	But you shall not marry with you ; you shall not take your daughters with you , nor with your daughters , nor with your daughters .
GOLD:	You must not intermarry with them . Do not let your daughters and sons marry their sons and daughters ,

ID:	5306
INPUT:	Ts'ídá doo t'óó shaa yáhodoosįįł daígíí t'áá awołí bee bíká shił chohoo'į́įgo neíníshłí , nidi ts'ídá t'áadoosti'ee k'ad hinishná índa t'áá át'é yę́ęgi át'éego hinishnáá léi' , doodago éí dasétsą́ą́ léi' , t'áá sézį́į́ nít'éé' shee Christ baa ha'niih doo .
PRED:	I have hope for myself , but if I have not been ashamed , I have not been ashamed , but now , I have been glory , or as I am dead , or as I am dead .
GOLD:	For I fully expect and hope that I will never be ashamed , but that I will continue to be bold for Christ , as I have been in the past . And I trust that my life will bring honor to Christ , whether I live or die .

ID:	5307
INPUT:	Áádóó eda'alyaii t'áá ałtso hasht'e'nidaashk'aazhii dadidoolzéí , áádóó bik'é nijishnishii t'áá ałtso adidoolk'ą́ą́ł , índa eda'alyaii daahóhígíí nideeshbéezhgo ádeeshłííł , áko ałjiłnii baa daha'níiłgo bee shódaozt'e'ii náánáła' chonáádayooł'į́į doo .
PRED:	And I will burn all the idols of idols , and will burn them with fire , and I will burn them with fire , and I will burn them with fire , and they will make a covenant for them .
GOLD:	All her carved images will be smashed.All her sacred treasures will be burned.These things were bought with the moneyearned by her prostitution , and they will now be carried awayto pay prostitutes elsewhere . ”

ID:	5308
INPUT:	Mó'ab át'ée dooleełii
PRED:	Moab and Moab
GOLD:	A Message about Moab

ID:	5309
INPUT:	Danisiłgo nihíníltǫ' áádóó t'áá biwosjį' baa adashínízhoozh ; nik'ijį' híniijéé' silį́į'go nihíníltǫ'go t'áá ałtso nida'nt'i'go íinilaa .
PRED:	You took hold of you , and put your shoulder on your shoulder , and you put your hands on your shoulder , and you put all around you .
GOLD:	When Israel leaned on you , you splintered and brokeand stabbed her in the armpit.When she put her weight on you , you collapsed , and her legs gave way .

ID:	5310
INPUT:	<unk> 'ísh bidziilgo ádanile' ? Bik'osísh ayóó ábóodziilgo ádanile' ?
PRED:	Can they make them strong ? Can their flesh be strong ?
GOLD:	“ Have you given the horse its strengthor clothed its neck with a flowing mane ?

ID:	5311
INPUT:	hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , nihíká oohjeeh ! Díí hastiin t'áá ałtsogóó diné kéédahat'íinii éí nihidine'é áádóó bee haz'áanii índa kwe'é haz'ánígíí yik'ijį' yáłti'go na'nitin . T'ah nááyówehgo , Gríik dine'é kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah ayíí'eezhgo , díí hodiyingo haz'áanii yiyííłchxǫ' .
PRED:	They cried out , “ O Israel , call out ! This man who lives in all the places and in this place , how much more he has spoken against us and teaching in the temple . ”
GOLD:	yelling , “ Men of Israel , help us ! This is the man who preaches against our people everywhere and tells everybody to disobey the Jewish laws . He speaks against the Temple — and even defiles this holy place by bringing in Gentiles . ”

ID:	5312
INPUT:	Mózes saad yee haadzíi'ii t'áadoo doodaí t'áá át'é Ízrel dine'é áłah nilínígíí t'áá ałtso binááł Jáshowa saad jííłta' ; éí asdzánída áádóó á <unk> ní t'áá ádaałts'íísíjį' índa dé'éyóní danilíinii hatahgóó kéédahat'ínígíí da'íists'ą́ą́' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Moses read all the words of Moses , before all the assembly of Israel ; and Joshua read in the presence of all the congregation , and the foreigners that dwell among them .
GOLD:	Every word of every command that Moses had ever given was read to the entire assembly of Israel , including the women and children and the foreigners who lived among them .

ID:	5313
INPUT:	Jew dine'é éí nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é ła' Jerúsalemdóó John yich'į' ada'as'a'go , Háishą' ánít'į́ ? daaníigo nidahódééłkid yę́ędą́ą́' , kót'éego John ch'íhoní'ą́ ,
PRED:	The Jews sent to John the priests and Levites from Jerusalem , saying , “ Who is this ? ”
GOLD:	This was John 's testimony when the Jewish leaders sent priests and Temple assistants from Jerusalem to ask John , “ Who are you ? ”

ID:	5314
INPUT:	Diné ayóó ádaat'éii doo áłahjį' dahóyą́ą da , índa hadaastihii daats'í t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii doo yik'idadi'yiitįįh da .
PRED:	You are always wise , and you do n't understand what is right .
GOLD:	Sometimes the elders are not wise.Sometimes the aged do not understand justice .

ID:	5315
INPUT:	Azhą́ ats'íís bee ániit'éii yi<unk> nidi , doo nihąąh nahakaad da , háálá nihiyi'di bee ániit'éii éí t'áá ákwíí jį́ ániidí ánáálnííł .
PRED:	Even though his body does not drive out his body , for his flesh is a few days .
GOLD:	That is why we never give up . Though our bodies are dying , our spirits are being renewed every day .

ID:	5316
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Once again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5317
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii áádóó yaa ádahalyáanii binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	5318
INPUT:	<unk> xił ; ahíínígą́'ígíí béénílniih ; ts'ídá doo ákónáádíí'níił da .
PRED:	Remember the number of them , and do not do so .
GOLD:	If you lay a hand on it , you will certainly remember the battle that follows.You wo n't try that again !

ID:	5319
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Líyah ináá'niiltsąądgo Jéíkab bá ashkii náájíshchį́ ; éí bił hastą́ądi ajishchį́ .
PRED:	Then Leah conceived and bore Jacob a son , and she bore him six sons .
GOLD:	Then Leah became pregnant again and gave birth to a sixth son for Jacob .

ID:	5320
INPUT:	áko éí bą́ą́h azlį́'ígíí hwe'asdzą́ą́ t'áá bił bééhózingo ła'jį' ádá áádzísįįd , ła'jį' éí jiníjaa'go daal'aadii biyaajį' nizhnínil .
PRED:	And when he saw that his wife had been sold , he set it before the apostles .
GOLD:	He brought part of the money to the apostles , claiming it was the full amount . With his wife 's consent , he kept the rest .

ID:	5321
INPUT:	níbaal yii' kéédahat'íinii éí Íídam dine'é áádóó Íshmeiyel dine'é , Mó'ab dine'é índa Héígar dine'é ;
PRED:	And the inhabitants of Edom , Edom , Edom , and Sidon , and Sidon ,
GOLD:	these Edomites and Ishmaelites ; Moabites and Hagrites ;

ID:	5322
INPUT:	Hódzą́ kóbidiní , Shilah nílį́ , áádóó bee ak'i'diitįįhii éí asdzání nik'éí nilį́įgo yínízhí .
PRED:	She says to her , “ You are my sister , and you are a daughter of a woman .
GOLD:	Love wisdom like a sister ; make insight a beloved member of your family .

ID:	5323
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih , háálá biwoo' yee nihidoolghał nít'ée'ii doo yaa nihidiní'ą́ą da !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , because he has not given us his teeth to eat .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , who did not let their teeth tear us apart !

ID:	5324
INPUT:	nidi Lat éí Sádam kin haal'áádóó ch'íníyá bijį́įdi yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' kǫ' índa tsékǫ' łitsoígíí nááłtą́ągo diné ałtso íísdįįd ;
PRED:	But Lot went out of Sodom , and destroyed all the people from heaven and fire .
GOLD:	until the morning Lot left Sodom . Then fire and burning sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all .

ID:	5325
INPUT:	T'áá tooh nílį́į́góó dahináanii dah nida'asołgo kéédahat'į́į́góó éí dahináa doo áádóó łóó' t'óó ahayóí nídínóot'į́į́ł , háálá díí tooh áajį' íílį́ índa éí tónteel łikan dooleeł , áko tooh t'áá nílį́į́góó t'áá ałtsoní dahináa doo .
PRED:	And they shall fall upon the rivers of the river , and shall live ; for there shall be a great fish , and a great sea , and the sea shall live in all things .
GOLD:	There will be swarms of living things wherever the water of this river flows . Fish will abound in the Dead Sea , for its waters will become fresh . Life will flourish wherever this water flows .

ID:	5326
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Baptism of Jesus

ID:	5327
INPUT:	Binááł ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ádzíłtso t'áadoo dajílíní da ; t'áadoo dajílínígóó índa t'áadoo nídazhdoodleełígóó haa nitsíkees .
PRED:	All the nations are without fear , and they are not in their sight , nor in their ways .
GOLD:	The nations of the world are worth nothing to him.In his eyes they count for less than nothing — mere emptiness and froth .

ID:	5328
INPUT:	Tsin neheeshjíí' éí óola bik'ídaasti'go ádadoohłííł , áádóó óola názbąsgo bąąh yí'nilgo tsin níyizii naaniigo bąąh daní'áa dooígíí bii' nídaditsih dooígíí ałdó' ádadoohłííł , índa tsin níyizgo ii' nídaditsih dooígíí ałdó' óola bik'ídaasti'go ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	You shall make two rings of gold , and put them on the two sides of acacia wood , and make them of gold .
GOLD:	Overlay the frames with gold , and make gold rings to hold the crossbars . Overlay the crossbars with gold as well .

ID:	5329
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Shoo , náhookǫsdi ał'ąą dine'é bídahólníihgo bił nahaz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' t'áá ałtso , Wóshdę́ę́' , dabidishní , áko nidahidoonéełgo t'ááłá'í níjaa'ígo Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó bídahólníih doo , índa tsé bee binaa ahééda'astł'inígíí t'áá át'é yik'ijį' danilį́į doo , áádóó Júdah dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígíí t'áá ałtso yik'ijį' danilį́į doo .
PRED:	And the Lord said , Behold , I say unto all the kingdoms of the north , Come up , and I say unto you , and they shall come , and they shall come to Jerusalem , and shall be against all the cities of Judah , and upon all the cities of Judah .
GOLD:	Listen ! I am calling the armies of the kingdoms of the north to come to Jerusalem . I , the Lord , have spoken ! “ They will set their thronesat the gates of the city.They will attack its wallsand all the other towns of Judah .

ID:	5330
INPUT:	Jó , Jesus éí Martha áádóó bideezhí índa Lázaras ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	Jesus loved Mary and sister , and Lazarus .
GOLD:	So although Jesus loved Martha , Mary , and Lazarus ,

ID:	5331
INPUT:	Áko diné ákǫ́ǫ́ eekaigo kéyah t'áá át'é yii' tádookai áádóó kéyah tsosts'idgo ałts'ádaasdzooígíí biyi' kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí bik'ehgo át'éhígíí naaltsoos bikáá' ádajiilaa , áko dah da'ínéhígóó dah nízhdiikaigo Sháílohgi Jáshowa baa níjíkai ,
PRED:	So the people went to Shiloh , and they wrote it in the land seven cities , according to their villages , according to their villages , and they went to Joshua .
GOLD:	The men did as they were told and mapped the entire territory into seven sections , listing the towns in each section . They made a written record and then returned to Joshua in the camp at Shiloh .

ID:	5332
INPUT:	Hágo , sha'áłchíní , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' ; Bóhólníihii dólzingi bínanihinishtin doo .
PRED:	Come , my children , listen to me ; I will teach you the fear of the Lord .
GOLD:	Come , my children , and listen to me , and I will teach you to fear the Lord .

ID:	5333
INPUT:	Áko siláo tł'óół k'ídayiizhgizhgo tsinaa'eeł yázhí bidah aalts'id .
PRED:	And when the soldiers had cut off the boat , the little sister came out of the boat .
GOLD:	So the soldiers cut the ropes to the lifeboat and let it drift away .

ID:	5334
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bik'ehgo deínóhkáah doo , áko dahinohnáa doo , áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	You shall walk in the way of righteousness , and you shall live , and the Lord your God shall possess the land which he has given you .
GOLD:	Let true justice prevail , so you may live and occupy the land that the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	5335
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Zííbah áádóó Zalmóna hasiláo <unk> kin haal'áagi bił nijikai ; éí diné danilíinii ashdla'áadahdi mííl ánéelą́ą'go ha'a'aahdę́ę́' dine'é kónéelt'e' nidahaasdzíí' lá , háálá t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi mííl ánéelą́ą'go diltłish yee nidaabaahii ałtso ábi'disdįįd .
PRED:	And he went with him with his army : and the number of the men of the east were of thousands , and of the men of the east ; for the sword was destroyed by the sword .
GOLD:	By this time Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with about 15,000 warriors — all that remained of the allied armies of the east , for 120,000 had already been killed .

ID:	5336
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad nihílááh , háálá tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz doo ła' nihaa náádadooljoł da , nidi bis t'áá ákódanéelt'e'go ádaahłe' .
PRED:	But now , go , for they have not brought them to you , but make them drink . ”
GOLD:	Now get back to work ! No straw will be given to you , but you must still produce the full quota of bricks . ”

ID:	5337
INPUT:	Éí yaa ánát'įįhgo yádiłhił áádóó nahasdzáán yinéł'į́ .
PRED:	It is a little while he sees heaven and earth .
GOLD:	He stoops to look downon heaven and on earth .

ID:	5338
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bąąh dahólónígíí yah a'atiingi naháaztą́ , áko áda'ahidi'níigo , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé t'áá daats'í kǫ́ǫ́ dadíníi'néełgo nahísíitą́ ?
PRED:	And the man sat in the gate gate , and they said unto one another , What is it that thou hast done to us ?
GOLD:	Now there were four men with leprosy sitting at the entrance of the city gates . “ Why should we sit here waiting to die ? ” they asked each other .

ID:	5339
INPUT:	Ajooba' nitsiinázt'i'go ándoolííł ; naat'á ch'ah ayóó ánóolninii neidoo'ááł .
PRED:	He will lay your head on your head , and he will put a crown on your head .
GOLD:	She will place a lovely wreath on your head ; she will present you with a beautiful crown . ”

ID:	5340
INPUT:	dahaghą́ą́'ask'idii éí dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' , dahatélii éí hastą́ądi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	The camels were four hundred and four thousand and six thousand and six thousand and six thousand .
GOLD:	435 camels , and 6,720 donkeys .

ID:	5341
INPUT:	Da' tsídiiłbáhísh ashdla'go doo naaki sindáo bą́ą́h ílį́įgo nahaniih da ? Ákondi éí Diyin God t'ááłá'í nidi doo yaa yoonéeh da .
PRED:	Is it not in the heart of five shekels of silver ? But God does not give them one tenth .
GOLD:	“ What is the price of five sparrows — two copper coins ? Yet God does not forget a single one of them .

ID:	5342
INPUT:	Doo dichin áádóó dibáá' danilį́į da doo , doo nidi hadoh áádóó jį́honaa'éí bee bił nidadoołdoh da , háálá baa a'ááh nízinii éí boo'ish doo ; t'áá éí tó hadaazlį́į́góó bá yigáał doo .
PRED:	They will not be hungry and thirsty , but the sun will not give them mercy to the sun , because they will bring them back to the waters .
GOLD:	They will neither hunger nor thirst.The searing sun will not reach them anymore.For the Lord in his mercy will lead them ; he will lead them beside cool waters .

ID:	5343
INPUT:	Áko ch'il na'atł'o'ii bee hóhólníhígíí jiníyáago , ch'il na'atł'o'ii yaa ádahalyánígíí lá haazhdoolííł lá ?
PRED:	When he came to the vineyard , what shall he do to the vine ?
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	5344
INPUT:	Kót'éego níinii ádingi biniyé ádahat'íinii t'óó ąąh nidahwiiłkaad , nidi kót'éego daaníinii t'óó adahayóigi biniyé ádahat'íinii dabidziilgo hasht'edaalne' .
PRED:	So the rich men are weak , but the rich are ready for many things .
GOLD:	Plans go wrong for lack of advice ; many advisers bring success .

ID:	5345
INPUT:	Áko nihizh'nínáago ha'át'íhída hwee hólónígíí bił dashdíníichą́ą́' , áádóó tooh ha'naa nizh'nínáago Dził Gíliyad bich'į' nihizh'níná .
PRED:	So he rose up early and fled with him ; and he went over the river , and went up to Mount Gilead .
GOLD:	So Jacob took all his possessions with him and crossed the Euphrates River , heading for the hill country of Gilead .

ID:	5346
INPUT:	Azáíyah áádóó Jótham áádóó Éíhaz índa Heziikáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nidahaleehgo yoołkááłdą́ą́' éí Júdah kéyahgi áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi át'ée dooleełgi Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah éí bił ádzaa .
PRED:	This is what Isaiah the son of Isaiah did in the days of Uzziah , Ahaz , Ahaz , Ahaz , and Hezekiah , and Hezekiah , and Hezekiah , and Hezekiah , in the days of the kings of Judah , in the days of Judah .
GOLD:	These are the visions that Isaiah son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem . He saw these visions during the years when Uzziah , Jotham , Ahaz , and Hezekiah were kings of Judah .

ID:	5347
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus áhodííniid , Łahgo haz'ą́ nanihídíshkid , Háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' daats'í yá'át'éehgo ázhdooníiłgo bee haz'ą́ , éí doodaii' atízh'doolííł daats'í ; hináanii yisdázhdoołtééł , éí doodaii' azhdiyoołhéełgo daats'í bee haz'ą́ ?
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I want you to do good on the Sabbath , or to do evil , or to do evil , or to kill life ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his critics , “ I have a question for you . Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ”

ID:	5348
INPUT:	háálá t'óó shi'dizhchį́ yę́ędą́ą́' t'áadoo shiisxį́į da , éí doodaii' shimá biishch'id bii'di dasétsą́ągo shimá bii' shijish<unk> doo nít'éé' , áko hool'áágóó shee bibid nitsaa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	For when I was born , I would not have found me in my mother 's womb , and I would have been born in my mother 's womb for ever .
GOLD:	because he did not kill me at birth.Oh , that I had died in my mother 's womb , that her body had been my grave !

ID:	5349
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , shaa jiiníbaah , háálá diné t'áá adashółneehgo shaa nitsídaakees . Shá bíighah shi'ana'í danilíinii shide ádahósin .
PRED:	Be merciful to me , O God , for he causes me to destroy my enemies all day .
GOLD:	O God , have mercy on me , for people are hounding me.My foes attack me all day long .

ID:	5350
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii índa diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii lą'í yilt'éego daah'ínígíí k'adę́ę dayiiłtsééh , nít'éé' t'áadoo dayiiłtsą́ą da , áádóó dadoohts'a'ígíí k'adę́ę deidiits'į́į́h , nít'éé' t'áadoo deidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	I say to you , “ I tell you , you see many prophets and righteous people , and you have not seen ; you have not listened to their ears .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see , but they did n't see it . And they longed to hear what you hear , but they did n't hear it .

ID:	5351
INPUT:	ákwii ajiyą́ągo asdzání léi' tsé alabáster wolyéhígíí bee tózis ályaago ak'ah t'áá íiyisí ílínígíí yee yah ayíí'ą́ągo hatsiits'iin yik'i yayiiziid .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when she was eating , a woman came in , and anointed her head with oil , and anointed her head .
GOLD:	While he was eating , a woman came in with a beautiful alabaster jar of expensive perfume and poured it over his head .

ID:	5352
INPUT:	Jit'íinii t'áadoo bik'éna'azhnishí shóozt'e'ii t'áá áko ábi'niidįįh , nidi diné naalnishgo áłah é'éléehii éí t'ah yówehgo bá bilááh yileeh .
PRED:	A person who does not have a gift will be cut off . But a man who does not have a gift more than a servant .
GOLD:	Wealth from get-rich-quick schemes quickly disappears ; wealth from hard work grows over time .

ID:	5353
INPUT:	Áko Job t'áá ákogi ánísht'é nízinígíí bąą díí diné tált'éego t'áadoo hanáádaasdzíi' da .
PRED:	And Job did not answer these three men because of my righteousness .
GOLD:	Job 's three friends refused to reply further to him because he kept insisting on his innocence .

ID:	5354
INPUT:	Diné yíl'áhígíí haa áłah náánásdlį́į'go doo da'jóyą́ą́' ádzaa da .
PRED:	The crowd gathered together , and they did not eat .
GOLD:	One time Jesus entered a house , and the crowds began to gather again . Soon he and his disciples could n't even find time to eat .

ID:	5355
INPUT:	Áko níníł'į́įgo ná naal'a'í índa nidine'é Ízrel yaa nídanookąąhii yee nich'į' ádaaní bá yísíníłts'ą́ą'go biná'ookąąhígíí t'áá ałtso baa ákonínízin doo .
PRED:	When you see , your servant and your people Israel cried out to you , “ Listen to all your prayer . ”
GOLD:	“ May your eyes be open to my requests and to the requests of your people Israel . May you hear and answer them whenever they cry out to you .

ID:	5356
INPUT:	T'áá áko dił haghánílínígíí ásdįįd , áko hąąh dah haz'ánígíí náázdiidzáago hoł bééhoozin .
PRED:	And the sins of his sin was taken away , and he knew that he was healed .
GOLD:	Immediately the bleeding stopped , and she could feel in her body that she had been healed of her terrible condition .

ID:	5357
INPUT:	Áádóó hwe'eda'alyaii áádóó bik'ee dazhdiniihii índa bee haz'áanii doo bik'eh dahojííł'įįdii éí doo ła' bee ánáádazhdidoolchxǫǫł da ; kéédahojit'ínígóó ádił nida'dziiszíi'ii éí bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáhodiyeeshniłgo , t'óó badaa'ihii hwee dahólóonii hąąh dadeeshdahgo shidine'é dajílį́į doo áádóó haDiyin God nishłį́į doo .
PRED:	And they shall not defile their idols and their idols , nor shall they make them unclean ; I will deliver them from their sins , and I will deliver them from their sins , and they shall be my people , and I will be their God .
GOLD:	They will never again pollute themselves with their idols and vile images and rebellion , for I will save them from their sinful apostasy . I will cleanse them . Then they will truly be my people , and I will be their God .

ID:	5358
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí dził ayóó ádaat'éii nidahalin ; bee ánihoyí'aahii tónteel ayóó íídéetą́'ígíí nidahalin ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ni éí diné índa naaldlooshii baa áhólyą́ .
PRED:	Your righteousness is like the mountains ; Your judgments are like the sea , O Lord , keep over people and animals .
GOLD:	Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains , your justice like the ocean depths.You care for people and animals alike , O Lord .

ID:	5359
INPUT:	Nihí ałdó' hada'íínółní . Nihijéí bidziilgo ádeínóhsin , háálá Bóhólníihii nídoodáłígíí koshídę́ę́' hadziih .
PRED:	Be strong , and be strong ; for the Lord is near .
GOLD:	You , too , must be patient . Take courage , for the coming of the Lord is near .

ID:	5360
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii bee haz'áanii íidoolíłígíí éí aláahgo bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ą́góó , hótsaago bił haz'ą́ą nidi , t'áá át'é dadoo'nihgo asdzání danilíinii t'áá ałtso badahastiin , t'áá éí diné alááh ádaat'éii índa a'oh ádaat'éii bił danilį́į doo .
PRED:	And the king 's kingdom shall be given to the kingdom of the kingdom , but all women shall be able to give to all men and women .
GOLD:	When this decree is published throughout the king 's vast empire , husbands everywhere , whatever their rank , will receive proper respect from their wives ! ”

ID:	5361
INPUT:	Áko bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii hágo bizhdííniidgo hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' ábijiní , Haash yit'éego Séítan t'áá bí ha'ídínóolchééł ?
PRED:	And he called for the scribes , and said unto them , How can Satan flee from him ?
GOLD:	Jesus called them over and responded with an illustration . “ How can Satan cast out Satan ? ” he asked .

ID:	5362
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel bibee ádaa hodzódli' bidáahgi hólǫ́ǫgo baa halne' . Éí bąągo Ízrel áádóó Íífreiyim ba'át'e' yii' didoogoh , áádóó Júdah dine'é ałdó' ákódoonííł .
PRED:	And the pride of Israel is in front of his face . Therefore Israel and Ephraim will stumble in Ephraim , and Judah will also do so .
GOLD:	“ The arrogance of Israel testifies against her ; Israel and Ephraim will stumble under their load of guilt.Judah , too , will fall with them .

ID:	5363
INPUT:	Áko Ruth éí Mó'ab dine'é jílíinii ázhdííniid , Kwe'é ałdó' kóshidííniid , Shidá'ák'ehgi ałtso da'ííyizhjį' tsíłkéí shá nidaal'a'í t'éí bíighahgi nanináa doo .
PRED:	Then Naomi said to me , “ This is what you have said to me , ‘ You will live there all the young men in the field . '
GOLD:	Then Ruth said , “ What 's more , Boaz even told me to come back and stay with his harvesters until the entire harvest is completed . ”

ID:	5364
INPUT:	Diné t'ah bich'į' yájíłti'go , nááda'iiłniihii índa kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi siláo binanit'a'í áádóó Sádjusii danilíinii hach'į' niikai ,
PRED:	While he was speaking to the people , the chief priests and Sadducees came to him .
GOLD:	While Peter and John were speaking to the people , they were confronted by the priests , the captain of the Temple guard , and some of the Sadducees .

ID:	5365
INPUT:	Háá'áyį́į́h jį́ éí ts'ídá diyingo óolzin doo
PRED:	On the Sabbath
GOLD:	Wisdom from the

ID:	5366
INPUT:	Háálá shizéé' deidoot'įįł yiniyé shaa nidaa'na' , jó'akon . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné ayóó ádaat'éego dabidziilii shiniyé ahínéikah . Bee haz'áanii héti'ígíí índa ádił ni'iiszíhígíí doo yiniinaa ádaat'į́į da .
PRED:	For , behold , they set my mouth upon me , O Lord , that they may rise up against me , O Lord , for their sins and their sin .
GOLD:	They have set an ambush for me.Fierce enemies are out there waiting , Lord , though I have not sinned or offended them .

ID:	5367
INPUT:	Éí kóbididííniił , Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God , t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Diltłish bee nidanihi'ditseedgo ánihideeshłííł biniinaa daohdlą́ áádóó nihił nidahondooh le' áádóó nídaohkwih índa danohnéego doo náádidoohjah da .
PRED:	“ Tell them , ‘ Thus says the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , ‘ Because I will destroy you with the sword , and you will drink and drink , and you will not be left . ' ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Now tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Drink from this cup of my anger . Get drunk and vomit ; fall to rise no more , for I am sending terrible wars against you . '

ID:	5368
INPUT:	Tł'oh naadą́ą́' agháago yá'át'éehii hwiyiyíí<unk> doo nít'éé' . Jó , tsé bąąhdę́ę́' tsés'ná bitł'izh bee hwiih nohłį́įgo ánihiishłaa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	He will find good wheat , and you will have filled you with honey from the rock .
GOLD:	But I would feed you with the finest wheat.I would satisfy you with wild honey from the rock . ”

ID:	5369
INPUT:	Wózhǫ́ shádi'ááhjígo Júdah dine'é bikin hadaas'áii éí Íídam kéyah hoodzo bich'į'goígíí éí kódahoolyé : Kábziyel , Ííder , Jéígar ,
PRED:	On the south side of the south side of Judah , Edom , who had done many things ,
GOLD:	The towns of Judah situated along the borders of Edom in the extreme south were Kabzeel , Eder , Jagur ,

ID:	5370
INPUT:	Náhookǫsjigo díí saad baa hólne' : Bóhólníihii áníłní , Ízrel dine'é t'ą́ą́' anáhítłíishii , nánídááh ; doo sháháchį'go ninísh'į́į da , háálá naa a'ááh nisin ; hool'áágóó doo sháháchį' da doo , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am angry , Israel , and I will not be angry , for I will not be angry with you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Therefore , go and give this message to Israel . This is what the Lord says : “ O Israel , my faithless people , come home to me again , for I am merciful.I will not be angry with you forever .

ID:	5371
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é éí ałdó' kéyah ayeídi áádóó Júdah shádi'ááhjígo kin hadaas'áhígíí Beth-shíímesh áádóó Éíjalan áádóó <unk> <unk> áádóó Sóko áádóó Tímnah índa <unk> zo , éí binaagóó bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí ałdó' t'áá bił yaatįįh yikai , áko t'áá ákwii kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	The Philistines also sent messengers to the land of Judah , and to the south , and to the cities of Judah , and to the cities thereof , and to its villages ; and they dwelt there .
GOLD:	And the Philistines had raided towns located in the foothills of Judah and in the Negev of Judah . They had already captured and occupied Beth-shemesh , Aijalon , Gederoth , Soco with its villages , Timnah with its villages , and Gimzo with its villages .

ID:	5372
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , diné bijééhkałii nahonishłingo t'áadoo bee <unk> dziihí da .
PRED:	Surely he can not stand up like a blind man , like a blind man .
GOLD:	I choose to hear nothing , and I make no reply .

ID:	5373
INPUT:	Áádóó ákót'ée dooleeł , Shidine'é doo danohłį́į da , bi'doo'niidiits'ídá t'áá éí haz'ą́ągi , Diyin God hináanii ba'áłchíní danilį́ bi'di'níi dooleeł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , that ye are not my people , that they shall be called the children of the living God .
GOLD:	And , “ Then , at the place where they were told , ‘ You are not my people , 'there they will be called ‘ children of the living God . ' ”

ID:	5374
INPUT:	Áká a'doolwoł biniyé sohodizin
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Taw

ID:	5375
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóósh diyin dabidi'níinii ła' nahałtingo íidoolíiłgo yíneel'ą́ ? Yót'áahdiísh nahałtingo íidoolíiłgo yíneel'ą́ ? Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ni lą́ą nídahodiłtį́įhgo á<unk> į́ . Éí bąą niba' ádaniit'ée dooleeł , háálá díí t'áá ałtso íinilaa .
PRED:	Can he send rain among the nations ? Can he send rain to rain ? O Lord God , make the rain for us , for you have made all these things .
GOLD:	Can any of the worthless foreign gods send us rain ? Does it fall from the sky by itself ? No , you are the one , O Lord our God ! Only you can do such things.So we will wait for you to help us .

ID:	5376
INPUT:	Áko t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh ch'iyáán bee ída'azįįdgo óolzin doo , áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' t'áá ałtso Féro áníinii bik'ehgo áłah áńdaal'įįh doo , índa kin hadaas'áágóó ch'iyáán nooh nídaachíhígíí baa ádahojilyą́ą doo biniyé niho'dee'nil doo .
PRED:	And in the year of the year of food shall be eaten , and all the grain of Pharaoh shall gather in the field , and he shall be prepared for food , and for food .
GOLD:	Have them gather all the food produced in the good years that are just ahead and bring it to Pharaoh 's storehouses . Store it away , and guard it so there will be food in the cities .

ID:	5377
INPUT:	Bik'ehgo neiildeeh yę́ę doo deiit'į́į da ; Diyin God yá dahalne'ii doo ła' naagháa da , áádóó haa nízahjį' kót'ée dooleełígíí éí nihitahdóó doo ła' bił bééhóziní da .
PRED:	We do not dwell with us , neither do any prophet know what will happen to us .
GOLD:	We no longer see your miraculous signs.All the prophets are gone , and no one can tell us when it will end .

ID:	5378
INPUT:	Áko John haa ch'íhoní'ą́ągo ání , Yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' Níłch'i Diyinii hasbídí nahalingo hak'ijį' bidah hooleełgo yiiłtsą́ , áko t'áá ákwii dah neezdá .
PRED:	John led them out and said , “ I have seen the Holy Spirit coming on heaven like a spirit , and there they sat there . ”
GOLD:	Then John testified , “ I saw the Holy Spirit descending like a dove from heaven and resting upon him .

ID:	5379
INPUT:	John lá háádę́ę́' bee óhólníihii bik'ehgo tó yee asį́į́h nít'éé' ? Yá'ąąshdę́ę́' daats'í , éí doodaléi' diné bits'ą́ą́dóó daats'í ?
PRED:	For John was baptized in the kingdom of the kingdom ? or from heaven , or from man ?
GOLD:	“ Did John 's authority to baptize come from heaven , or was it merely human ? ”

ID:	5380
INPUT:	T'áá ałch'ijí nineel'ánídóó óola ałk'ésgizígíí bits'ánít'i'gi ałdó' óola naakigo ahéédeelghasígíí yídayiishcha'go éí bee ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí íífad wolyéii bik'ijį' awostisjį' t'áá ałch'ijí bídajiishcha' .
PRED:	And the two rings of gold were of gold , and the two rings of the ephod on the two ends of the ephod , on the two ends of the ephod .
GOLD:	They tied the other ends of the cords to the gold settings on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod .

ID:	5381
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Azhą́ Mózes áádóó Sámuel shidááhdóó yiizį' nidi , díí dine'é bich'ijí aséłtą́ągo t'áadoo tsídíkéez da . Doo shá biyeet'į́į́' ánízáágóó yówehjį' aníłkaad .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Even Moses and Samuel stood before me , but I did not seek this people , but I did not let them go away . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Even if Moses and Samuel stood before me pleading for these people , I would n't help them . Away with them ! Get them out of my sight !

ID:	5382
INPUT:	Jesus áhodííniid , T'óó kónígháníjį' adinídíín nihił hólǫ́ . Adinídíín t'ah nihee hólónídą́ą́' nidaahkai , doodago éí chahałheeł nihik'iidooldoh ; chahałheełgóó naagháhígíí yigááłgóó doo bił bééhózin da .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ The light is with you , and when you have come , you have not come , but the darkness does not know where the darkness is . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	5383
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í haadzíi'go ání , Bił dahołne' , T'áá háiida béésh éé' háidii'nilígíí ádaa has'nihígi át'éego éí béésh éé' biishdoogáłígíí ádaa hojó'niih lágo .
PRED:	The king of Israel answered , “ Tell your brothers , ‘ Whoever is faithful to you will put on a garment . '
GOLD:	The king of Israel sent back this answer : “ A warrior putting on his sword for battle should not boast like a warrior who has already won . ”

ID:	5384
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí índa ooljéé' bá nihonít'i' bijį́įjį' oochííłgóó t'áá ałtso dandósin doo .
PRED:	The sun and the moon will fear you all generations .
GOLD:	May they fear you as long as the sun shines , as long as the moon remains in the sky.Yes , forever !

ID:	5385
INPUT:	Ákohgo índa danihitsi'ké nihaa dahidii'nił , áádóó nihí ałdó' danihitsi'ké nihaa dahidoohnił , áko kéédahwiit'į́įgo t'ááłá'í dine'é dadiidleeł .
PRED:	Then we will give our daughters , and we will take our daughters , and we will give them one tribe .
GOLD:	then we will give you our daughters , and we 'll take your daughters for ourselves . We will live among you and become one people .

ID:	5386
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá ałtso índa tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii John Tó Yee Asį́įhii tó yee dabíísį́į'ii éí díí deidiizts'ą́ą'go ádadííniid , Diyin God ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éé lá ,
PRED:	All the people and John the Baptist heard this , saying , “ God is righteous . ”
GOLD:	When they heard this , all the people — even the tax collectors — agreed that God 's way was right , for they had been baptized by John .

ID:	5387
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman bił hóóne' , Shímiyai éí Jerúsalemdóó Gathgóó naayá , áádóó áádę́ę́' nínáánádzá .
PRED:	And it came to Solomon , saying , Shimei and Shimei went to Jerusalem , and he returned from there .
GOLD:	Solomon heard that Shimei had left Jerusalem and had gone to Gath and returned .

ID:	5388
INPUT:	Nidi shik'is nílíinii , t'óó diné nílíinii , Diyin God bidááh yáníłti'go háishą' ásht'į́ nínízin ? Da' hashtł'ish łeets'aa'ásh diné ábiilaii áyididooniił , Ha'át'íí biniyé kót'éego áshiinilaa ?
PRED:	But you , my brother , son of man , are you speaking to God ? Who is he who made a clay , and say to him , “ Why have you done so to me ? ”
GOLD:	No , do n't say that . Who are you , a mere human being , to argue with God ? Should the thing that was created say to the one who created it , “ Why have you made me like this ? ”

ID:	5389
INPUT:	Kintah da'nítiingóó ániid nidaakaígíí índa hadaastihii naazhjéé' ; nich'eekę'í índa nitsíłkéí éí diltłish bee nidabi'diztseed ; náhóóchįįd yę́ędą́ą́' yíníghą́ą'go doo bik'édí nílį́į́góó nidasíníłtseed .
PRED:	The young men of the city , and their young men and young men are slain by the sword ; you have slain them in the day of your anger .
GOLD:	“ See them lying in the streets — young and old , boys and girls , killed by the swords of the enemy.You have killed them in your anger , slaughtering them without mercy .

ID:	5390
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'éegoda doo nidoołnish da ; díí bee nihoní'áanii ahóyéel'áágóó náás da'ahíínółchííhgóó t'áá danihiníghanígi t'áá ánółtso nihá át'ée doo .
PRED:	You shall not do any work ; this law shall be for you throughout all generations .
GOLD:	You must not do any work at all ! This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	5391
INPUT:	Haash yit'éego shinanit'a'í bá nidaal'a'í a'ohgo ádaat'éii siláo yinanit'a'í nilíinii níwehjį' bi'dííłnihgo Ííjip dine'é bitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí lą'ígo índa dabisiláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahígíí baa dzíínílíi doo ?
PRED:	How can you turn back to the least of my master 's servants , the captain of the mighty men of Egypt , and trust in many chariots and chariots ?
GOLD:	With your tiny army , how can you think of challenging even the weakest contingent of my master 's troops , even with the help of Egypt 's chariots and charioteers ?

ID:	5392
INPUT:	shidine'é bitsį' ałdó' daołghał áádóó dabikágí bik'i dahołdlaad índa dabits'in nidahohtį́įhgo dahołne' ; atsį' doobish biniyé bee abézhí biih yi'nilígi át'éego ádaoł'į́ .
PRED:	You shall eat the flesh of my people , the flesh , and the flesh , and the bones of the flesh , and ye shall eat it as a lamb in his hand .
GOLD:	Yes , you eat my people 's flesh , strip off their skin , and break their bones.You chop them uplike meat for the cooking pot .

ID:	5393
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' dahohtaał ; bízhi' baa dahohniihgo dahohtaał ! Éí yót'ááh hiníláii yikáá' náhodididleehii yéego bich'į' dahohtaał ! Bízhi' éí Jii<unk> wolyé , éí bidááhdóó nihił nidahoozhǫǫh le' !
PRED:	Sing to God ! Sing to the name of his name ! Sing to him in the sky ! Let him sing praise in his name .
GOLD:	Sing praises to God and to his name ! Sing loud praises to him who rides the clouds.His name is the Lord — rejoice in his presence !

ID:	5394
INPUT:	íhooł'aahii nahonitinii bił ahijíłt'é jileehígíí hoł t'áá áko doo , áádóó naalnishí hananit'a'í bił ahijíłt'éhígíí hoł t'áá áko doo . Kin bee bóhólníihii éí Béíyalzííbab deiłníigo , kin bee bóhólníihii ba'áłchíní ałdó' t'ah yówehgo ákódeiłníi doo !
PRED:	And the disciple shall be with him , and he shall be with his master , and with his master 's princes : and they shall say , How much more shall the house say , The house of the house , the house of the lord of the kingdom of the house .
GOLD:	Students are to be like their teacher , and slaves are to be like their master . And since I , the master of the household , have been called the prince of demons , the members of my household will be called by even worse names !

ID:	5395
INPUT:	Áádóó Íshmeiyel ałdó' Mízpahdi Gedaláíyah éí Jew dine'é t'áá ałtso yił dah yikahii índa Kaldíya dine'é ákwii nidaakaii éí diné nidaabaahii danilíinii t'áá yił dayííghą́ą́' .
PRED:	And Ishmael also took all the Jews with him at Mizpah , and all the men that were with him , and the Chaldeans that were with him .
GOLD:	Ishmael also killed all the Judeans and the Babylonian soldiers who were with Gedaliah at Mizpah .

ID:	5396
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii , éí díí nahalin : łóó' bee hahaltsósí taah deistsoozgo łóó' t'áá ał'ąą ádaat'eełii áłah áyiilaa ;
PRED:	Moreover , the Kingdom of heaven is like this : and they gathered together the fish , and gathered them together .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a fishing net that was thrown into the water and caught fish of every kind .

ID:	5397
INPUT:	t'áá bee ádee hazdoodzí'ígíí , doodaii' t'áá bee ádá nihozhdiní'ánígíí hwii' sizíinii a'ohgo í'dólzin ájiił'įįhgo hahastiin éí há bohoníłdzilgo íidoolííł , doodaii' doo ílį́į́góó íidoolííł .
PRED:	If a vow or a vow , then he shall make him humble , and he shall make him an oath , or he shall make him strong .
GOLD:	So her husband may either confirm or nullify any vows or pledges she makes to deny herself .

ID:	5398
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Ch'il na'atł'o'ii bineest'ą' bits'ą́ą́dóó wáin ániidíii shóot'eehígi át'éego , ła' ádííniid , <unk> dįįh lágo , háálá ak'ihojidlí bii' hólǫ́ , áko shinaal'a'í binahjį' doo ałtso ádeeshdįįł da biniyé doo ákódeeshníił da .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ There is no wine like a new wine from the vine , ” says the Lord . “ I will not destroy my servant . ”
GOLD:	“ But I will not destroy them all , ” says the Lord. “ For just as good grapes are found among a cluster of bad ones ( and someone will say , ‘ Do n't throw them all away — some of those grapes are good ! ' ) , so I will not destroy all Israel.For I still have true servants there .

ID:	5399
INPUT:	Áko biyaajį' nitsidinígo' bich'į' nahodeeshłaał biniyé , nidi áshidííniid , T'áadoo ánít'íní ! Ni áádóó nik'isóó Jesus baa hane'ii dayoodlánígíí yił nidaal'a'í ła' ásht'į́ . Diyin God bich'į' nahółá ! Háálá Jesus baa hane'ii bee náásgóó ádahodooníiłii bee baa dahojilne' .
PRED:	And he fell down before his face , and said to me , “ Do n't be afraid ! I am one of your brethren and your brethren , and your brethren . I am one of the prophets . ”
GOLD:	Then I fell down at his feet to worship him , but he said , “ No , do n't worship me . I am a servant of God , just like you and your brothers and sisters who testify about their faith in Jesus . Worship only God . For the essence of prophecy is to give a clear witness for Jesus . ”

ID:	5400
INPUT:	tł'óó'góó dah náánéiteeh , kintahdi nináánádáah łeh , kin naanídaaz'áágóó aa nááhéesdáah łeh .
PRED:	They go out to the city , and they go into the city , and they go into the city .
GOLD:	She is often in the streets and markets , soliciting at every corner .

ID:	5401
INPUT:	Shoo , iiná áádóó yá'át'éehii áádóó aniné índa doo yá'áshóonii díí jį́ nihidáahgi hólǫ́ǫgo áshłaa .
PRED:	Behold , I have made life , good , evil , evil , and evil before you today .
GOLD:	“ Now listen ! Today I am giving you a choice between life and death , between prosperity and disaster .

ID:	5402
INPUT:	Áko ałk'isóó danilínígíí bił béédahoozingo Sesaríya góyaa hoł daaskai , áádóó <unk> góó adahas'a' .
PRED:	When his brothers saw that he was going to Caesarea , they sent him to Caesarea .
GOLD:	When the believers heard about this , they took him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus , his hometown .

ID:	5403
INPUT:	Háálá diné awáalyaa sidáhígíí , bee bik'i hodiit'áanii t'áadoo bééhóziní deesh'aałgi , doo shił beełt'ée da .
PRED:	For I do not know that I am in prison .
GOLD:	For it makes no sense to send a prisoner to the emperor without specifying the charges against him ! ”

ID:	5404
INPUT:	Éí Sáíman , Iskáriyat biye' nilíinii , Júdas ábijiní , háálá t'áá éí nináhodidoo'ááł , éí naakits'áadahígíí ła' atah nilį́ .
PRED:	Simon , Judas , the son of Simon , said to Judas , “ He will give him the twelve . ”
GOLD:	He was speaking of Judas , son of Simon Iscariot , one of the Twelve , who would later betray him .

ID:	5405
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	and one male goat for a sin offering , and their drink offering , and their drink offering , and their drink offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	5406
INPUT:	Éí diné t'áá ákogi át'éii jílį́įgo , diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bitahgi kééhojit'į́įgo bee haz'áanii doo yik'ehgóó ádaat'ínígíí joo'į́įgo áádóó jidiits'a'go biniinaa t'áá ákwíí jį́ hwii' sizíinii t'áá ákogi át'éhígíí bich'į' nahojiiłnáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	He was a righteous man in the midst of the wicked , who walked in the midst of the law , and walked in the midst of his soul every day .
GOLD:	Yes , Lot was a righteous man who was tormented in his soul by the wickedness he saw and heard day after day .

ID:	5407
INPUT:	Yisnááh daniidlį́įgo naakits'áadah náhááh góne' , neeznáá nídízííd binih , ashdla'góó yoołkáałgo Jerúsalemdę́ę́' diné léi' ła' yisdááyáá lágo shaa níyáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áii ts' ídá ałtso bi'disná , shiłníigo shił hoolne' .
PRED:	In the tenth month of the twelfth month , in the tenth month , in the tenth month , a certain man came from Jerusalem , and told me what was done in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On January 8 , during the twelfth year of our captivity , a survivor from Jerusalem came to me and said , “ The city has fallen ! ”

ID:	5408
INPUT:	Doodaii' háí aláahgo naat'áanii shį́įshą' , náánáła' aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' anaa' ííléehgo , da' doósh áłtsé dínóodaał da , áádóó yaa nitsídookos da , naadiindi mííl siláo yee shich'į' hideeskaígíí neeznáadi mííl bee bidááh deeshbahgo daats'í bíighah nízingo ?
PRED:	Or who is the king of war against the king ? Shall he not come first to meet the king ? Or shall he know that he shall not come to meet him , and shall he go up to meet ten thousand men ?
GOLD:	“ Or what king would go to war against another king without first sitting down with his counselors to discuss whether his army of 10,000 could defeat the 20,000 soldiers marching against him ?

ID:	5409
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel diné danilíinii éí Náftalai dine'é áádóó Ásher dine'é índa Manáseh dine'é t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó áłah silį́į'go Mídiyan dine'é yikéé' aheezhjéé' .
PRED:	And the men of Israel gathered together from the tribe of Naphtali , Asher , Asher , Asher , and Manasseh .
GOLD:	Then Gideon sent for the warriors of Naphtali , Asher , and Manasseh , who joined in chasing the army of Midian .

ID:	5410
INPUT:	Ninish'náájí bee dah dinilnii'go nahasdzáán adabiisna' .
PRED:	Your right hand stretched out the earth , and the earth died .
GOLD:	You raised your right hand , and the earth swallowed our enemies .

ID:	5411
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí hool'áágóó bóhólníih doo , Záíyan nílíinii , niDiyin God oochííłgóó t'áá ałtso yá nant'áa doo . Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	The Lord will rule forever , Zion , and he will rule over all generations .
GOLD:	The Lord will reign forever.He will be your God , O Jerusalem , throughout the generations.Praise the Lord !

ID:	5412
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii jidósingo éí iiná yaa halóós , áádóó éí hwee hólǫ́ǫgo t'áadoo anáhóót'i'í jiináa doo , áádóó doo yá'ádaat'éehii doo hainít'į́į da doo .
PRED:	The fear of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) shall bring life to life , and he that is in him shall live ; and he shall not do evil .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord leads to life , bringing security and protection from harm .

ID:	5413
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí diné bist'e' ła' nídeidiinil , áádóó t'áadoo Bóhólníihii nídeídíłkidí nídeidiinil .
PRED:	And the children of Israel took some men , and took them away from the hand of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the Israelites examined their food , but they did not consult the Lord .

ID:	5414
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , yisdánihíínínilii nízhi' baa ha'niih doo biniyé nihíká anilyeed ; nízhi' binahjį' yisdánihínííł áádóó ádił nida'ayeelzíi'ii nihá yóó'adí'aah .
PRED:	O God , help us , and help us for thy name ; save us from thy name , and forgive our sins .
GOLD:	Help us , O God of our salvation ! Help us for the glory of your name.Save us and forgive our sinsfor the honor of your name .

ID:	5415
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , chánahgo nánooshkąąh , Biniiłt'aajį' anáníshchéehii shá nílį́ áádóó dahináanii bikéyahdi ni t'éí shíí' nílį́ , dishní .
PRED:	I cry out to you , Lord , and you are my refuge ; you are my refuge in the land of the living .
GOLD:	Then I pray to you , O Lord.I say , “ You are my place of refuge.You are all I really want in life .

ID:	5416
INPUT:	Índída hakin góde hajizh'eezhgo biyaa nizh'níką́ , áko Diyin God joosdląądgo , haghandóó danilíinii bił t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá íiyisí hoł dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	And he brought them up to the house , and he brought them to the house , and all that believed in him were glad .
GOLD:	He brought them into his house and set a meal before them , and he and his entire household rejoiced because they all believed in God .

ID:	5417
INPUT:	índa bee nihot'áanii dooleeł biniyé bohoníłdzilgo Jéíkab baa deet'ą́ , áko hool'áágóó bee aha'deet'áanii át'éego Ízrel baa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	and he made a covenant for Jacob , and it was given to Jacob for ever .
GOLD:	He confirmed it to Jacob as a decree , and to the people of Israel as a never-ending covenant :

ID:	5418
INPUT:	Nidi dandósin doo biniyé ádił ni'iidzííh yóó'ahidí'aah .
PRED:	But they will fear him , that they may forgive their sins .
GOLD:	But you offer forgiveness , that we might learn to fear you .

ID:	5419
INPUT:	Lébanangi gad jíl'áii alááh ádajít'éii áádóó ayóó ádajít'éii t'áá ájít'é áádóó Béíshangi chéch'il jíl'áii t'áá ájít'é ,
PRED:	He is greater than the Lebanon , and all his great , and all the trees of Bashan ,
GOLD:	He will cut down the tall cedars of Lebanonand all the mighty oaks of Bashan .

ID:	5420
INPUT:	Áádóó ha'át'íí lá bee atídoolnííł lá daniizį́į'go ch'ééh yaa nitsínáádaazkééz , áko t'óó yówehda hoł yéé' áhodoolíiłii yee hach'į' hanáádahaasdzíi'go t'óó hwéédeideezhchid , háálá áhoodzaaígíí biniinaa diné t'áá át'é Diyin God yaa dahaniih .
PRED:	And when they were afraid , they thought that they could not be punished . And they were afraid , and they answered , because all the people praised God because of the vision .
GOLD:	The council then threatened them further , but they finally let them go because they did n't know how to punish them without starting a riot . For everyone was praising God

ID:	5421
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	The Anointing Oil

ID:	5422
INPUT:	Chérab náánáła'ígíí ashdla'áadahdi ké silá bita' ánízah ; éí chérab t'áá áłah t'áá aheeníłtso áádóó t'áá aheełt'éego ályaa .
PRED:	And the height of the one curtain was five cubits high , and the height of the other was one piece of the other .
GOLD:	The two cherubim were identical in shape and size ;

ID:	5423
INPUT:	Éí bąą , Áhodeeshdįįł , dííniid ; doo ázhdoołdįįłígíí áádóó t'óó báhádzidgo bee atíjíł'íinii nahjį' kózhdoolíłígíí biniyé Mózes hach'ą́ą́h ííyá .
PRED:	So Moses said , “ I will destroy him , and he has gone out to destroy him because of his fierce anger . ”
GOLD:	So he declared he would destroy them.But Moses , his chosen one , stepped between the Lord and the people.He begged him to turn from his anger and not destroy them .

ID:	5424
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , ha'a'aahdę́ę́' áádóó e'e'aahdę́ę́' shidine'é yisdádeesh'nił .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord of hosts : Behold , I will deliver my people from the east , and from the east .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : You can be sure that I will rescue my people from the east and from the west .

ID:	5425
INPUT:	Ayóó'ó'ó'ní bee nił hashne'ígíí éí Diyin God bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é ts'ídá bik'eh dahoniil'į́į dooleełii ááhdishní . Bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii , Ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'ní , nínígíí éí hane' yá'át'éehii baa adaho'niine' yę́ędą́ą́' dasidoots'ą́ą́' , éí bik'eh deínóhkááh .
PRED:	I say to you all the commandments of God , that ye may keep all the commandments of God : ye have heard the word of the Good News ,
GOLD:	Love means doing what God has commanded us , and he has commanded us to love one another , just as you heard from the beginning .

ID:	5426
INPUT:	Éí bąą bá nidaal'a'í ałdó' łahgo át'éego ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é yá nidaal'a'í nahalingo yí'ínídadiil'įįhígíí doo t'óó bik'ee ił ahayói da . Yaa nidaaskaígíí bik'ehgo até'él'į́ bii'jį' t'óó bá nidahwiizt'i' doo .
PRED:	Therefore the servants of his servants shall be amazed , and they shall not be ashamed , as the righteous servants of righteousness , as they have done .
GOLD:	So it is no wonder that his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness . In the end they will get the punishment their wicked deeds deserve .

ID:	5427
INPUT:	Míriyam áádóó Éran éí Mózes yik'ijį' haadzíí'
PRED:	Aaron and Moses
GOLD:	The Complaints of Miriam and Aaron

ID:	5428
INPUT:	Mt . 18 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Lost Son

ID:	5429
INPUT:	Éí yiltsą́ , áádóó awéé' bídii'na'go índa i'niiłchį́įgo niigaígíí yik'ee hadoo'níí' .
PRED:	And I saw a child , and a child rose up , and was born upon his head .
GOLD:	She was pregnant , and she cried out because of her labor pains and the agony of giving birth .

ID:	5430
INPUT:	kóní , Diyin God bizaad yidiits'a'ii áádóó Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii bits'ą́ą́dóó ił ééhózin bił bééhózinii índa Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii ił ádzaii yiníł'íinii ni'jį' íítłizh , nidi t'áá yiníł'į́ :
PRED:	He says , “ Listen to the words of God , and the knowledge of the Most High , and the knowledge of the Almighty , and the eyes of the Almighty ;
GOLD:	the message of one who hears the words of God , who has knowledge from the Most High , who sees a vision from the Almighty , who bows down with eyes wide open :

ID:	5431
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih ! Háálá nihiDiyin God baa dahwii'niihgo bich'į' dahwiitaałgo yá'át'ééh , háálá ayóó ánóolnin , áádóó haa ha'niihgo t'éiyá hweełt'é .
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! They sing praise to his God , because he is great , and his name is his name .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! How good to sing praises to our God ! How delightful and how fitting !

ID:	5432
INPUT:	Éíhaz naadiin binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į'go hastą́'áadah nááhaijį' Jerúsalemgi nant'áá nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo t'áá ákogi ájít'į́įgo Bóhólníihii binááł jideeyáa da ; hazhé'é David áát'įįdígi t'áadoo ádziidzaa da .
PRED:	Ahaz was thirty years old when he began to reign in Jerusalem , but he did not do what was right in the sight of the Lord , just as his father David had done .
GOLD:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He did not do what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	5433
INPUT:	Nidi lą'í nááhaigóó ha'íínílníigo hoolzhiizh áádóó hak'ijį' nílį́įgo ná dahalne'ii niNíłch'i Diyinii bii' dahólóonii bee hoł dahwíínílne' , nidi doo dajíists'ą́ą' da ; éí bąą kéyah naaznilgóó dine'é danilíinii bílák'ee dahodííní'ą́ .
PRED:	But it came to pass at the end of many years , when the time came , and the Holy Spirit said to them , ‘ You shall not hear , but you have delivered them into the hand of the nations . '
GOLD:	In your love , you were patient with them for many years . You sent your Spirit , who warned them through the prophets . But still they would n't listen ! So once again you allowed the peoples of the land to conquer them .

ID:	5434
INPUT:	Doodaii' díí diné bił béédahózingo éí t'ah bítséedidą́ą́' béégashii éí náánáła' béégashii niyé'á<unk> go , ákondi halį́į́' ílíinii t'áadoo yah ajííłt'e'góó , t'áá aaníí t'áá hó béégashii bik'é ninázh'doołtééł , áko daaztsáanii hó dooleeł .
PRED:	Or if these men know that there is a man before they have a calf , but the owner shall not enter into the house , but he shall make an ox for himself , and he shall give it to him .
GOLD:	But if the ox had a reputation for goring , yet its owner failed to keep it under control , he must pay full compensation — a live ox for the dead one — but he may keep the dead ox .

ID:	5435
INPUT:	Azhé'é ba'áłchíní neinitinígi át'éego Diyin God nanihineeztą́ą'ii daats'í baa deisoonah . Shą́ą́' , Diyin God kóní : Shiye' nílíinii , Bóhólníihii t'áá hashkée yína'niłtinii t'áadoo doo níníziní . Índa nándiiteehgo t'áadoo nąąh nááháka'í .
PRED:	Do you forget the God of your father 's children ? Do n't you forget the Lord , my son ? Do n't be angry with you , and do n't turn away from you .
GOLD:	And have you forgotten the encouraging words God spoke to you as his children ? He said , “ My child , do n't make light of the Lord 's discipline , and do n't give up when he corrects you .

ID:	5436
INPUT:	T'áadoo náníldzidí , háálá doo ádaa yádíníidzįįł da , doo nidi nił halą́ą da doo , háálá doo naa yáhásingo ándi'doolníił da , nidi ániid nanináádą́ą́' bee naa yáhóósįįdii baidiyíínah índa asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii nahalingo yínííł nanináhígíí doo béénílniih da doo .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , because you do n't be ashamed , but you will not be ashamed ; you will be ashamed , but you will be ashamed , and you will be ashamed as a widow .
GOLD:	“ Fear not ; you will no longer live in shame.Do n't be afraid ; there is no more disgrace for you.You will no longer remember the shame of your youthand the sorrows of widowhood .

ID:	5437
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Ádá hadíídzih ; biniyéii yéego bee hadíídzih , ní Jéíkab biNanit'a'í nilíinii .
PRED:	The Lord said , “ You will speak , and you will say , ‘ The king of Jacob . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Present the case for your idols , ” says the Lord. “ Let them show what they can do , ” says the King of Israel .

ID:	5438
INPUT:	T'áá ádzaagóó yisháałgo áshiilaago nishiizhnizh índa shinaagi doo naagháhígóó áshiilaa .
PRED:	When I go down to the ground , you broke my hands on me , and made me desolate .
GOLD:	He has dragged me off the path and torn me in pieces , leaving me helpless and devastated .

ID:	5439
INPUT:	Áko nááda'iiłniihii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii Bóhólníihii bibee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii t'áá bá haz'ą́ąjį' wóniidi ts'ídá aláahgo diyingo haz'ánígi diyingo naal'a'í chérabim wolyéii bit'a' biyaajį' nideiz'ą́ .
PRED:	The priests took the ark of the covenant of the Lord in the place of the covenant of the covenant of the Lord , and put them under the cherubim .
GOLD:	Then the priests carried the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant into the inner sanctuary of the Temple — the Most Holy Place — and placed it beneath the wings of the cherubim .

ID:	5440
INPUT:	Áko diné yíl'áhígíí ákót'éego saad bighą́ągo éí Férisii danilíinii deidiizts'ą́ą'go , aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Férisii danilíinii éí Jesus deidoołtsoł biniyé siláo adeis'a' .
PRED:	When the crowd heard this , the Pharisees and the Pharisees sent the army to take Jesus .
GOLD:	When the Pharisees heard that the crowds were whispering such things , they and the leading priests sent Temple guards to arrest Jesus .

ID:	5441
INPUT:	Díí doo yá'áshóonii dine'é shizaad doo t'áá k'ad deidiizts'ą́ą'ii , doo ádidahól'áágóó yildahii áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii yá nidaal'a'í áádóó yich'į' nidahałáii éí t'áadoo bee chonáádajoot'įįhígóó díí sis yíchxǫ'ígi ádajít'ée doo .
PRED:	If the wicked men hear my words , they will not listen to them . They will serve other gods and serve other gods . They will be like a garment .
GOLD:	These wicked people refuse to listen to me . They stubbornly follow their own desires and worship other gods . Therefore , they will become like this loincloth — good for nothing !

ID:	5442
INPUT:	Doodaii' łódígíí łahgo ánáánádzaago łigaii silį́į'go náá'iiłniihii bich'į' náázhdoodááł .
PRED:	Or if the person has turned back , he will return to the priest .
GOLD:	However , if the open sores heal and turn white like the rest of the skin , the person must return to the priest

ID:	5443
INPUT:	ádíshní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God yá'ąąshdi honílóonii , nánooshkąąh ; ayóó át'éii áádóó t'áá íiyisí bits'ąą hasti'ii nílíinii , Diyin God éí bee aha'deet'áanii áádóó aa a'ááh hasin ayóó'ádanó'níigo bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yik'eh dahół'íinii yá hasht'eyósinii nílíinii ,
PRED:	And I said , O Lord God of heaven , I pray thee , O God of heaven , and of great covenant , O God , and love , and love unto thee , and keep thy commandments ,
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Lord , God of heaven , the great and awesome God who keeps his covenant of unfailing love with those who love him and obey his commands ,

ID:	5444
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jézebel hane' yił naal'a'ígíí ła' Iiláíjah yich'į' ayííł'a'go ání , Yiską́ągo kóhoodzaago diné nisíníłtseed yę́ęgi át'éego doo ákóniishłaa ládą́ą́' shí ałdó' t'ah yówehgo shidiyin danilíinii ákódashidoolííł .
PRED:	Then she sent a messenger to Elijah , saying , “ Now tomorrow , if I have killed you , how much more will my gods do to me . ”
GOLD:	So Jezebel sent this message to Elijah : “ May the gods strike me and even kill me if by this time tomorrow I have not killed you just as you killed them . ”

ID:	5445
INPUT:	Abáíjah bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Jerobówam éí t'áadoo bidziil násdlį́į' da . Áádóó Bóhólníihii atíhoolaago dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	In the days of Jeroboam was weak , and the Lord struck him .
GOLD:	So Jeroboam of Israel never regained his power during Abijah 's lifetime , and finally the Lord struck him down and he died .

ID:	5446
INPUT:	Áádóó Andrew éí bił hajíí'áázh Jesus bich'į' bił jiní'áázh , áko Jesus honééł'į́į'go áhodííniid , Jó , Sáíman , John biye' ánít'į́į́ lá . <unk> yinílyée doo ( éí Peter ałdó' wolyé , éí tsé jiníigo óolyé ) .
PRED:	And he brought his brother to Jesus . And when he saw him , he said unto him , Behold , Simon the son of Simon is called Peter .
GOLD:	Then Andrew brought Simon to meet Jesus . Looking intently at Simon , Jesus said , “ Your name is Simon , son of John — but you will be called Cephas ” ( which means “ Peter ” ) .

ID:	5447
INPUT:	Méí<unk> , <unk> nath índa Éltiikan ; éí bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił hastą́ągo kin hadaas'áhígíí Júdah dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	He said , “ I have six cities with their villages . ”
GOLD:	Maarath , Beth-anoth , and Eltekon — six towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5448
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii binááł Néídab áádóó Abáíhu éí kǫ' doo dílzingóó náádziisnii'ígíí biniinaa t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ dzineezná .
PRED:	But they died because of the presence of the Lord , Nadab , and Nadab died .
GOLD:	But Nadab and Abihu died when they burned before the Lord the wrong kind of fire , different than he had commanded .

ID:	5449
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii Ízrel biDiyin God kóní , Bóhólníihii éí nihokáá'góó nahałtingo ánáyiidlaajį' tóshjeeh yázhí bii' ak'áán doo ádoodįįł da , tóshjeeh yázhí bii' ak'ah nidi doo ádoodįįł da .
PRED:	For thus says the Lord , the God of Israel , “ He will send rain on the earth , neither will the wine be cut off , nor the oil of oil be cut off . ”
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : There will always be flour and olive oil left in your containers until the time when the Lord sends rain and the crops grow again ! ”

ID:	5450
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí adinídínígíí yinééł'į́į'go bił yá'íít'ééh , áádóó adinídínígíí chahałheeł yił ałts'áyíínil .
PRED:	When God saw the holy things , he put them out of darkness .
GOLD:	And God saw that the light was good . Then he separated the light from the darkness .

ID:	5451
INPUT:	Nidi Maikéíyah ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii hiná ; ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii yee shich'į' haadzí'ígíí t'éí bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	Micaiah said , “ As the Lord lives , I will speak to you what the Lord has spoken to me . ”
GOLD:	But Micaiah replied , “ As surely as the Lord lives , I will say only what the Lord tells me to say . ”

ID:	5452
INPUT:	Niye' bitsi' , doodaii' nitsi' bich'é'é éí doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da , háálá t'áá jilchí'ígo éí t'áá ni łiníchí'ígo í'diinilyaago át'é .
PRED:	“ You shall not take the daughter of your daughter or daughter 's daughter 's daughter 's daughter , for she is your nakedness .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your granddaughter , whether she is your son 's daughter or your daughter 's daughter , for this would violate yourself .

ID:	5453
INPUT:	Éísa éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo táá' náhááh góne' Béíyasha éí Néídab yiyiisxį́įgo yitsásk'eh góne' nináánít'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	In the third year of Asa king of Judah , Baasha killed Baasha in his place .
GOLD:	Baasha killed Nadab in the third year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , and he became the next king of Israel .

ID:	5454
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Nida'diitł'óołgo Filístiya dine'é bílák'ee dandidiit'ááł biniyé naa niikai . Áko Sámson éí diné áyidííniid , T'áá nihí doo dashidiyoołhééłgóó bee shich'į' ádee hadahididoohdzih .
PRED:	They said to him , “ If you will give us victory over to the Philistines , we will give you into the hand of the Philistines . ” So Samson said to the people , “ You will not swear with me . ”
GOLD:	But the men of Judah told him , “ We have come to tie you up and hand you over to the Philistines. ” “ All right , ” Samson said . “ But promise that you wo n't kill me yourselves . ”

ID:	5455
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Yisnááh danohłį́įgo Jerúsalemdóó Bábilangóó anihi'doojaa'go shá bohoolyaii t'áá ánółtso ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , says : “ Come to Babylon , all of you to Babylon .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says to all the captives he has exiled to Babylon from Jerusalem :

ID:	5456
INPUT:	Áko biiskání Bóhólníihii ádííniidígíí yi'iilaago Ííjip dine'é bilį́į́' ałtso daneezná , nidi Ízrel dine'é bilį́į́' t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' daaztsą́ą da .
PRED:	On the next day the Lord did as the Lord had commanded , and all the cattle of Egypt died , but no one died .
GOLD:	And the Lord did just as he had said . The next morning all the livestock of the Egyptians died , but the Israelites did n't lose a single animal .

ID:	5457
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso éí k'os níyizgo níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'é'étiinjį' análdohígíí nídayiiltsééh bik'eh diné t'áá ałtso nídiijahgo t'ááłá'í nítínígo dabiníbaal bich'é'étiingi nidahałáa łeh .
PRED:	And all the people looked at the entrance of the tent , and see all the men coming and worship at the entrance of the tent .
GOLD:	When the people saw the cloud standing at the entrance of the tent , they would stand and bow down in front of their own tents .

ID:	5458
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí náájiiłniihígíí łikání halchingo yishchą́ą'go Bóhólníihii bijéí biyi'di ádííniid , Diné haniinaa ni' doo hóyée'go bá hanáádeesdzih da , háálá diné t'áá áłchíní nilį́į́dę́ę́' bijéí bii'dę́ę́' doo yá'át'éehii bił ádaat'į́ ; hináanii nináneel'ą́ąjį' ásíłdįįdígi át'éego hináanii doo ánáádeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	And the Lord fled , and said unto him in the heart of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) , Blessed be the man 's heart : for I will not bless the man from his youth , for I will cut off the evil man out of the midst of his heart , until I cut off the living .
GOLD:	And the Lord was pleased with the aroma of the sacrifice and said to himself , “ I will never again curse the ground because of the human race , even though everything they think or imagine is bent toward evil from childhood . I will never again destroy all living things .

ID:	5459
INPUT:	Áko Júdas nináhodiní'ánígíí éí haz'ánígi bił bééhózin , háálá Jesus t'áá ahą́ą́h hódahooł'aahii ákwii bił níjíkah nít'éé' .
PRED:	And Judas , the son of Judas , knew that he had gone with him , because he was with his disciples .
GOLD:	Judas , the betrayer , knew this place , because Jesus had often gone there with his disciples .

ID:	5460
INPUT:	Nidi Jerúsalem éí siláo bináshzhiizhgo daołtsą́ągo , ádooldįįłígíí t'áá áyídídę́ę́' hadziihgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	But when you see the army of Jerusalem , you will know that it will come from the end of the end .
GOLD:	“ And when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies , then you will know that the time of its destruction has arrived .

ID:	5461
INPUT:	Táá' yiskánídą́ą́' nitélii yóó'eekaígíí t'áadoo bąąh níni'í , háálá éí shó<unk> t'e' . Háí diné shį́įshą' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yinízinii jílį́ ? Jó , éí t'áá ni áádóó nizhé'é bighandóó danilíinii ałdó' .
PRED:	For three days , the donkeys who had gone away , for who is a man of all Israel ? For you and your father 's house .
GOLD:	And do n't worry about those donkeys that were lost three days ago , for they have been found . And I am here to tell you that you and your family are the focus of all Israel 's hopes . ”

ID:	5462
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Cases of Personal Injury

ID:	5463
INPUT:	háálá t'áá ałtso dahoołtsą́ągo hwéédaasdzííd . Nidi t'áá áko bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní , Nihił dahózhǫ́ . Shíyee' ásht'į́ ; t'áadoo nídaałdzidí .
PRED:	For when they saw him , they were afraid of him . But he said to them , “ Be glad ! I am . Do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	They were all terrified when they saw him.But Jesus spoke to them at once . “ Do n't be afraid , ” he said . “ Take courage ! I am here ! ”

ID:	5464
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí yidiizts'ą́ą'go ádííniid , Diné doo bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí azee' ííł'íní doo yich'į' dadikáah da , nidi bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	But when Jesus heard it , he said to them , “ They do n't return to the sick , but the sick are sick . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he said , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do . ”

ID:	5465
INPUT:	áádóó ał'ąą dine'é éí ayóó át'é ił nilíinii As<unk> wolyéii Samériya kin hadaas'áajį' niyiizh'eezhígíí áádóó náádaała' éí tooh nílíní e'e'aahjí kéédahat'ínígíí índa náádaała'
PRED:	And he brought a great multitude to Samaria , and others who lived on the west side of the river , and others on the west .
GOLD:	They also sent greetings from the rest of the people whom the great and noble Ashurbanipal had deported and relocated in Samaria and throughout the neighboring lands of the province west of the Euphrates River .

ID:	5466
INPUT:	Abínígo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii Jesus deidiyoołhéełgo yaa nídaast'įįd ,
PRED:	In the morning the chief priests and the elders of the people wanted to kill Jesus .
GOLD:	Very early in the morning the leading priests and the elders of the people met again to lay plans for putting Jesus to death .

ID:	5467
INPUT:	Atídashił'íinii índa shi'ana'í danilíinii éí t'óó ahayóí , nidi bee hahíínídzíi'ii doo bits'áosha' át'ée da .
PRED:	My enemies and my enemies are many , but I do not turn away from your word .
GOLD:	Many persecute and trouble me , yet I have not swerved from your laws .

ID:	5468
INPUT:	Áko Saul áádóó haye' Jánathan índa diné hoł naakaígíí éí t'áá Bénjamin bikéyahgi Gíbiyah kin haal'áadi dah yinééł , nidi Filístiya dine'é éí Míkmash báhátisdi dah yinééł .
PRED:	Saul , Jonathan , Jonathan , Jonathan , and all the men who were with him in Benjamin , but the Philistines camped at Gibeon .
GOLD:	Saul and Jonathan and the troops with them were staying at Geba in the land of Benjamin . The Philistines set up their camp at Micmash .

ID:	5469
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii kóníigo yee haadzíi'ii bohodoolnííł biniyé kót'éego Jesus na'nitin : Hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee hahideesdzih , nahasdzáán niit'ą́ą́dóó nidanil'in yę́ę bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	This is what the prophet said : “ I will speak to you a parable , and I will speak to you from the world .
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet : “ I will speak to you in parables.I will explain things hidden since the creation of the world . ”

ID:	5470
INPUT:	Háálá díí naakigo haz'ánígíí t'áá íiyisí baa nitséskees . <unk> dooya'go Christ bił hojílǫ́ǫ laanaa nisin , háálá áájí íiyisí yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	For I think about this two things , that I may eat the flesh of Christ , for it is good .
GOLD:	I 'm torn between two desires : I long to go and be with Christ , which would be far better for me .

ID:	5471
INPUT:	She'asdzą́ą́ éí shiza' niłchxonígíí doo yiníłdzil da , áádóó shidine'é t'áá ła' bił háíjé'ígíí nidi , doo shit'áahjį' dadikáah da .
PRED:	My wife was not able to stand , and my people were with me , but they would not come near to me .
GOLD:	My breath is repulsive to my wife.I am rejected by my own family .

ID:	5472
INPUT:	Éí nihii' sizíinii dahináanii bitahgi nihaa áhályą́ áádóó doo dadiigeehgóó ánihósin .
PRED:	He will keep you in the midst of your soul , and he will keep your feet from your feet .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	5473
INPUT:	Ákohgo Peter hach'į' dah diiyáago áháłní , Bóhólníihii , shik'is shich'į' bąąhági ánát'įįhgoshą' díkwíidi bá yóó'anídideesh'áałgo doo bik'ijį' séł'ą́ą da doo ? T'áá daats'í tsosts'idídi ?
PRED:	Peter went and said to him , “ Lord , why do I forgive my brother , if I do not forgive him seven times ? ”
GOLD:	Then Peter came to him and asked , “ Lord , how often should I forgive someone who sins against me ? Seven times ? ”

ID:	5474
INPUT:	Nidi álílee í'ooł'įįłgo na'adlo' yee nahałáii biyáázh danohłíinii , t'áá éí adiléii áádóó ałjiłnii ba'áłchíní danohłíinii , áháníjį' ninohkááh .
PRED:	But come near , you people who worship other gods , women who live with lies , and children of women .
GOLD:	“ But you — come here , you witches ' children , you offspring of adulterers and prostitutes !

ID:	5475
INPUT:	Haa nízáágóoshą' kót'éego yááłtih doo ? Haa nízáágóoshą' ayóó át'éego níyol nahalingo yáníłti' ?
PRED:	How long long will I speak ? How long will you speak like a wind ?
GOLD:	“ How long will you go on like this ? You sound like a blustering wind .

ID:	5476
INPUT:	Nibik'ehgo iináájí bik'idi'yiishtįįhgo áshíínísin . Áko t'óó bik'eda'ayóii ááníiłii baa yáshti' dooleeł .
PRED:	Give me understanding to your precepts , and I will speak miracles .
GOLD:	Help me understand the meaning of your commandments , and I will meditate on your wonderful deeds .

ID:	5477
INPUT:	<unk> azee' ííł'íní ayóó'óó'níinii índa Díímas ałdó' k'é nihiłní .
PRED:	Grace , our dear dear brother , and our sister .
GOLD:	Luke , the beloved doctor , sends his greetings , and so does Demas .

ID:	5478
INPUT:	Doo hah háháchįįhii éí t'áá íiyisí ak'izhdi'yiitįįh , nidi t'áadoo hodina'í háháchįįhii éí doo áháyą' aláahgo áyiił'įįh .
PRED:	A fierce anger makes a great understanding , but a fool makes a fool .
GOLD:	People with understanding control their anger ; a hot temper shows great foolishness .

ID:	5479
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii yee nashineeztą́'ígíí éí bee nanihinítą́ą́' : jó , Jesus éí nináho'deet'ą́ągo , t'áá éí bitł'éé' Jesus bááh nízhdii'ą́
PRED:	For he taught you the word of the Lord , because Jesus was given to you by night , and he took bread by night .
GOLD:	For I pass on to you what I received from the Lord himself . On the night when he was betrayed , the Lord Jesus took some bread

ID:	5480
INPUT:	Dabiyooch'íidgo yádaałti' , áádóó binda'adlo'go nish'náájí yee yáádadidiilnih .
PRED:	They speak lies to lies , and their right right hand is given to them .
GOLD:	Their mouths are full of lies ; they swear to tell the truth , but they lie instead .

ID:	5481
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nik'é niná'ídláii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin nilíinii ání , T'áadoo nił yé'í ; Jéíkab ch'osh nahonílinii áádóó Ízrel dine'é hastóí danohłíinii , nihíká adeeshwoł .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord , the Holy One of Israel , “ Do n't be afraid ; I will help you , O Jacob , and the elders of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Though you are a lowly worm , O Jacob , do n't be afraid , people of Israel , for I will help you.I am the Lord , your Redeemer.I am the Holy One of Israel . '

ID:	5482
INPUT:	Tsits'aa' dílzinii bikáa'gi diyingo naal'a'í be'elyaii naakigo bits'ádi'nílíidii , chérabim wolyéii , éí Diyin God aa a'ááh nízinii bił haz'ání bik'ijį' bit'a' dah yoołbałgo dah sizį́ . Nidi díí doo t'áá át'éegi baa hojólne' át'ée da .
PRED:	And the angel lifted up two cherubim , and covered them with the cherubim , and covered them with the wings of God , and they are not able to tell it .
GOLD:	Above the Ark were the cherubim of divine glory , whose wings stretched out over the Ark 's cover , the place of atonement . But we can not explain these things in detail now .

ID:	5483
INPUT:	Kin haal'áá léi'gi kéédahojit'į́į dooleeł biniyé t'áá k'éhézdon atiingóó honí'eezh .
PRED:	He led them through a city to live by the way to live along the road .
GOLD:	He led them straight to safety , to a city where they could live .

ID:	5484
INPUT:	éí bąą t'óó náhodínéestsxisgo hwéédideeshchił .
PRED:	Therefore I will let him go , and I will let him go .
GOLD:	So I will have him flogged , and then I will release him . ”

ID:	5485
INPUT:	Áádóó jó , Béthlehem kin shijaa'dę́ę́' Bó'az níyáago da'ayizhígíí áyidííniid , Bóhólníihii nihił hólǫ́ǫ doo . Áko áńdahodoo'niid , Bóhólníihii nik'ijidlí .
PRED:	When Boaz came from Bethlehem , Boaz said to the men who had brought him , “ May the Lord be with you . ” They answered , “ May the Lord bless you . ”
GOLD:	While she was there , Boaz arrived from Bethlehem and greeted the harvesters . “ The Lord be with you ! ” he said. “ The Lord bless you ! ” the harvesters replied .

ID:	5486
INPUT:	éí tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' nidaalnishii t'ááłá'í nítínígo nidool'aałgo nidoolnish biniyé yah aheeskaígíí éí hééł nideiyéego
PRED:	and from twenty years old and twenty years old when they came into the tent of meeting , every man who went in to work for his work .
GOLD:	All the men between thirty and fifty years of age who were eligible for service in the Tabernacle and for its transportation

ID:	5487
INPUT:	Áádóó áshíłní , Diné nílíinii , díísh yiniłtsą́ ? Júdah dine'é kwe'é t'áá íiyisí doo daaldinii baa nidajikaígíí da' t'įįhdígo át'éhígíísh biniinaa yaa nidaakaígíí yee kéyah bikáá'góó t'áá át'é t'áá na'níle'dii nilíinii nihinéést'e' áádóó shá náádahóółchįįd ? Áko shoo , bí<unk> jį' tsin bits'áoz'a' dah nídeidiiłjoł .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Son of man , do you see this ? Do you see all the abominations of Judah , because of all the abominations that they have done in all the land , and they have filled my land with fire . ”
GOLD:	“ Have you seen this , son of man ? ” he asked . “ Is it nothing to the people of Judah that they commit these detestable sins , leading the whole nation into violence , thumbing their noses at me , and provoking my anger ?

ID:	5488
INPUT:	Doo ádahalyáanii éí bee haz'áanii áádóó doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí biniinaa bich'į' nidahwiis'náá' .
PRED:	For we have set up for the sake of the foolish , and for their iniquity .
GOLD:	Some were fools ; they rebelledand suffered for their sins .

ID:	5489
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí díí saad t'áá ałtso Ízrel dine'é yich'į' yee yááłti'go ałch'į' ánáyiidlaa .
PRED:	And Moses spake unto all the words of Israel , and he spake unto them all the words of Israel .
GOLD:	When Moses had finished reciting all these words to the people of Israel ,

ID:	5490
INPUT:	Áko doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó áhoot'éii áádóó nahagizgo yádaałti'ii yits'ą́ąjį' <unk> náa doo ,
PRED:	And he shall turn away from the evil and from the mouth of evil ,
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from evil people , from those whose words are twisted .

ID:	5491
INPUT:	ch'il dadeeníinii índa hosh ałdó' nich'į' hááhinoot'į́į́ł ; dá'ák'ehdóó nidanise'ii niyą́ą doo .
PRED:	You will sleep and sleep , and you will grow in the fields .
GOLD:	It will grow thorns and thistles for you , though you will eat of its grains .

ID:	5492
INPUT:	áádóó nidaat'a'ii índa łóó' tónteel yii' naaldeehii , áádóó tónteel dahiníyį́į́góó yii' nídadikahii t'áá ałtso hódahółníih doo biniyé nihwííníłtį́ .
PRED:	and gave him authority over the sea , and fish in the sea , and in the sea , to rule over them .
GOLD:	the birds in the sky , the fish in the sea , and everything that swims the ocean currents .

ID:	5493
INPUT:	Da'oodlání t'áadoo náhoniyésí yáti' yiniyé sodadilzin
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	The Believers Pray for Courage

ID:	5494
INPUT:	Ákohgo índa Éran áádóó biye'ké éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'é'étiinjį' nihodíí'ishgo tó bee táádahodíígis ,
PRED:	Then you shall bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the tent of meeting , and wash them with water .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	5495
INPUT:	Shí ch'é'étiin nishłį́ ; t'áá háiida shí shee yah ííyáhígíí yisdádooltééł , áádóó yah anádááh índa ch'ínádáahgo hootsojį' anáhádáah dooleeł .
PRED:	I am the door ; whoever goes in to me will be saved , and he will come into the house .
GOLD:	Yes , I am the gate . Those who come in through me will be saved . They will come and go freely and will find good pastures .

ID:	5496
INPUT:	Áko halahkéí Jesus yich'į' i'ííł'a'go ání , Bóhólníihii , diné ayóó'ííní'nínígíí daatsaah .
PRED:	Then the brothers sent to Jesus and said , “ Lord , you love the man who is sick . ”
GOLD:	So the two sisters sent a message to Jesus telling him , “ Lord , your dear friend is very sick . ”

ID:	5497
INPUT:	Áko yaa nídaast'įįdgo , łeets'aa' íí ł'íní bił haz'ání hoolyéegi éí dé'éyóní danilíinii łeehe'níił dooleełgo biniyé kéyah nidayiisnii' .
PRED:	And they brought it to him , and gave it to the potter , that it might be taken away from the midst of the stranger .
GOLD:	After some discussion they finally decided to buy the potter 's field , and they made it into a cemetery for foreigners .

ID:	5498
INPUT:	Bíni'dii doo ákwii át'éii bá bídahiniidééh , áádóó t'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí doo yiih dadookah da .
PRED:	Let them not enter their sins , and let them enter into the righteous .
GOLD:	Pile their sins up high , and do n't let them go free .

ID:	5499
INPUT:	Áko ni bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso nich'į' dadéez'į́į́' , áko bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , háí nikéé'dóó bikáá'dóó nahó'áii yikáá' dah dínóodaałígíí bee bił hodíílnih .
PRED:	And thou , my lord , my lord , the king of Israel looked before thee , and thou shalt declare the words of thy lord the king , which shall come upon the throne .
GOLD:	And now , my lord the king , all Israel is waiting for you to announce who will become king after you .

ID:	5500
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii Éíman há nidaal'a'í hodahodeez'ą́ągo t'áá hó haghan góne' dahwiisxį́ .
PRED:	And the king 's servants against him , and killed him in his own house .
GOLD:	Then Amon 's own officials conspired against him and assassinated him in his palace .

ID:	5501
INPUT:	Asdzání ánááhodoo'niid , Kwá'ásiní , tó baa hólne'ígíí ła' shaa níkaah , áko doo dibáá' náádeeshdleeł da , doo nidi kwe'é tó hánáshdáah da doo .
PRED:	The woman said to him , “ Sir , give me some water to me , and I will not be hungry , but there will not be water . ”
GOLD:	“ Please , sir , ” the woman said , “ give me this water ! Then I 'll never be thirsty again , and I wo n't have to come here to get water . ”

ID:	5502
INPUT:	Áko Mízpeh kin shijaa'dóó Ízrel dine'é ch'íheezhjéé' , áádóó Filístiya dine'é yikéé' nídiijée'go Béthkar haz'ánígíí biyaagóó deiníłtseed .
PRED:	And the children of Israel went out from Mizpah , and followed the Philistines , and killed them in the place of Issachar .
GOLD:	The men of Israel chased them from Mizpah to a place below Beth-car , slaughtering them all along the way .

ID:	5503
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ánínígi át'éego áádóó shash anoołchéłígi át'éego naat'áanii doo yá'áshóonii éí t'áadoo yee ák'idadóldziłígíí yinant'áa łeh .
PRED:	As a lion , and a bear shall rule over them ; and the princes shall rule over them .
GOLD:	A wicked ruler is as dangerous to the pooras a roaring lion or an attacking bear .

ID:	5504
INPUT:	Diné doo ádahalyáanii hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yaa dahalnihgo éí naaljį́į́d nilíinii bijáád t'óó nahíínilígíí nahalin .
PRED:	As the mouth of the foolish men , as a parable of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the foolish .
GOLD:	A proverb in the mouth of a foolis as useless as a paralyzed leg .

ID:	5505
INPUT:	Kodóó náásgóó t'ááká diné ła'da shich'į' ninááhoyółnáá' lágo , háálá shikáá'góó daasidgo naasháhígíí bee Bóhólníihii Jesus bíí' nishłį́įgo bééhózin .
PRED:	No one can answer me again , because I am the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	From now on , do n't let anyone trouble me with these things . For I bear on my body the scars that show I belong to Jesus .

ID:	5506
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' danohłį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę nibéédahołníih dooleeł , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God náánihiisnii'go nihik'é niná'ídláago bąą díí jį́ díí kódaat'éhígíí nihich'į' bee haasdziih .
PRED:	You shall be a slave in the land of Egypt , so that you may serve the Lord your God today , and I command you this day .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in the land of Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you ! That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	5507
INPUT:	Diné nideiłtseedgo dił ats'ádaazlį́įgo ádeile'ii éí diné ba'át'e' ádinii yik'ee dadiniih , nidi diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii éí diné ba'át'e' ádinii yá atídaat'į́ .
PRED:	The wicked hate the wicked , but the righteous are punished .
GOLD:	The bloodthirsty hate blameless people , but the upright seek to help them .

ID:	5508
INPUT:	Nihizhé'é dajílíinii t'óó kónígháníjį' t'áá hó daznízinígi át'éego t'áá hashkéego nidanihizneeztą́ą́' , nidi Diyin God diyingo yee át'éii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz doo biniyé t'áá bí t'éiyá nihá yá'át'éehii biniyé t'áá hashkée nanihinitin .
PRED:	But we have taught us , just as our fathers did , but we are not able to teach them the good things of God .
GOLD:	For our earthly fathers disciplined us for a few years , doing the best they knew how . But God 's discipline is always good for us , so that we might share in his holiness .

ID:	5509
INPUT:	Sálaman bibee hódzą́ áádóó náás adeezlá
PRED:	Solomon 's Death and Solomon
GOLD:	Solomon 's Prosperity and Wisdom

ID:	5510
INPUT:	Héíran áádóó Kánii áádóó Ííden áádóó Ásher índa <unk> <unk> dahoolyéédę́ę́' dine'é éí ninaalyéhé biniyé nił ahaa nida'iilniih nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they went out of Haran , and Sidon , and Sidon , and Sidon ; and they sold for the people .
GOLD:	“ Haran , Canneh , Eden , Sheba , Asshur , and Kilmad came with their merchandise , too .

ID:	5511
INPUT:	Índa díí kin éí aláahdi át'éhígíí bik'ee t'óó bił adahayóigo yą́ą́h dah hidikáhígíí t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé Bóhólníihii díí kéyah áádóó díí kin kóyiilaa lá ?
PRED:	And all those who are at this house shall say to him , Why have the Lord done this house and this house ?
GOLD:	And though this Temple is impressive now , all who pass by will be appalled . They will ask , ‘ Why did the Lord do such terrible things to this land and to this Temple ? '

ID:	5512
INPUT:	Bee hool'iní bá yada'ii'áii áádóó áliv naazkaadii
PRED:	The lampstand of the
GOLD:	A Lampstand and Two Olive Trees

ID:	5513
INPUT:	Éí t'áá ałtso diné ak'idi'yiitįįhii bich'į' ííshjání danilį́ , índa ił ééhózin nishódayoołt'eehii bił t'áá da'áko .
PRED:	These are the knowledge of the people , and the knowledge of knowledge .
GOLD:	My words are plain to anyone with understanding , clear to those with knowledge .

ID:	5514
INPUT:	Jó , bááh t'ááłá'í si'ánígíigi át'éego nihí t'óó ahonii'yói nidi , Christ bee ats'íís t'ááłá'íígíí daniidlį́ , háálá t'áá áníiltso éí bááh t'ááłá'íígíí ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iizgo nídeiidį́į́h .
PRED:	For we are as one loaves of bread , but we are one body , for we are all the bread of the bread .
GOLD:	And though we are many , we all eat from one loaf of bread , showing that we are one body .

ID:	5515
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahdi jiníná , áko Bóhólníihii áníinii t'áadoo bik'eh dahojííł'įįd da , áádóó Tahápaniiz kin haal'áadi jiníná .
PRED:	And they came to Egypt , and did not obey the voice of the Lord ; and they came to Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	The people refused to obey the voice of the Lord and went to Egypt , going as far as the city of Tahpanhes .

ID:	5516
INPUT:	Áádóó aYe' nihokáá' dine'é yisdáyiinííł dooleełgo aTaa' biníł'a'ígíí daníil'į́į́' , áko éí baa ch'ídahoyiit'aah .
PRED:	And we have seen the Son whom the Father sent us into the world , and we have seen it .
GOLD:	Furthermore , we have seen with our own eyes and now testify that the Father sent his Son to be the Savior of the world .

ID:	5517
INPUT:	Áádóó kéyah Gáliliigi Kapérniyam kin haal'áhí góyaa jiníyá . Áko t'áá háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ná'oodleeł góne' nazh'nitin ,
PRED:	And he went down to Capernaum in Galilee . And he was teaching on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	Then Jesus went to Capernaum , a town in Galilee , and taught there in the synagogue every Sabbath day .

ID:	5518
INPUT:	Shitsi' t'ą́ą́' anáhítłíishii nílíinii , haash nízahgóó tádínáah doo ? Bóhólníihii nihokáa'gi t'ah doo ííléehii ániidíii ánááyiidlaa : éí asdzání ła' diné bidádínóolniił biniyé yikéé' nahaadá .
PRED:	My daughter , how long shall the Lord make a new thing in the midst of the earth ? There is no woman who has not been able to follow him .
GOLD:	How long will you wander , my wayward daughter ? For the Lord will cause something new to happen — Israel will embrace her God . ”

ID:	5519
INPUT:	Níneveh dine'é yę́ę ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi díí k'ad ahoolchíłígíí yá nidahodoo'áałgo yee deidoozįįł , háálá Jónah éí Diyin God bizaad yaa hoolne'ígíí binahjį' łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdadeezkéezgo dayoosdląądgo ádił nida'iiszí'ígíí yits'áhaaskai , nidi jó'akon , Jónah yiláahgo ayóó át'éii éí kǫ́ǫ́ naaghá .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the day of judgment , that the people of Ai shall give it to this generation , because they turned away from God the word of Jonah , but behold , he is greater than Jonah .
GOLD:	The people of Nineveh will also stand up against this generation on judgment day and condemn it , for they repented of their sins at the preaching of Jonah . Now someone greater than Jonah is here — but you refuse to repent .

ID:	5520
INPUT:	Áko doo da'oo'íinii éí da'oo'į́į dooleeł áádóó bijédaahkałii da'didoots'į́į́ł .
PRED:	And ye blind shall hear , and hear , and hear .
GOLD:	And when he comes , he will open the eyes of the blindand unplug the ears of the deaf .

ID:	5521
INPUT:	Bich'į' ádííniidgo áádóó shich'į' haadzíi'go , ákondi shíists'ą́ą́' nít'é'ígíí doo wooshdlą́ą da doo .
PRED:	I called to him and spoke to me , but I do not believe what I hear .
GOLD:	And even if I summoned him and he responded , I 'm not sure he would listen to me .

ID:	5522
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Josáíyah éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii yee Bóhólníihii yich'į' nahasá , áko átsé nídízííd binih dį́į́ts'áadah yoołkááł góne' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii dibé yázhí nideistseed .
PRED:	Josiah served the Passover in Jerusalem , and they killed the Passover in the first month .
GOLD:	Then Josiah announced that the Passover of the Lord would be celebrated in Jerusalem , and so the Passover lamb was slaughtered on the fourteenth day of the first month .

ID:	5523
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bee háánílyį́į́h , áádóó ha'íínílníigo binahjį' áhodíínílzée'go biba' sínídá ; diné t'áá ałtsoní boosánígíí éí doo yá'át'ééhgóó nahagizgo t'áadoo biniinaa ádił náhodílchiłí .
PRED:	Be careful to keep the Sabbath of the Lord , and speak with your mouth , and speak in your mouth ; for all things are evil .
GOLD:	Be still in the presence of the Lord , and wait patiently for him to act.Do n't worry about evil people who prosperor fret about their wicked schemes .

ID:	5524
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego ałdó' yá'át'éehgo ó'oo'níiłii t'áadoo bahat'aadí daat'į́ , azhą́ doo t'áadoo bahat'aadí ákódaat'į́į da nidi , doo nazhnił'in le' át'ée da .
PRED:	In the same way the commandment is pure , but he can not be able to hide .
GOLD:	In the same way , the good deeds of some people are obvious . And the good deeds done in secret will someday come to light .

ID:	5525
INPUT:	áko índa doo bik'ee shił yéé'góó yáshti' doo , nidi shiyi'di doo ákóhoot'ée da .
PRED:	Then I will not speak with me , but it is not in me .
GOLD:	Then I could speak to him without fear , but I can not do that in my own strength .

ID:	5526
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é da'oołch'į́dígíí bii' hadooldoh , índa Júdah dine'é bi'ana'í ábi'disdįįd doo ; Íífreiyim dine'é éí Júdah dine'é doo nááyoołch'į́įd da doo índa Júdah dine'é éí Íífreiyim dine'é doo yíni' náánéís'ą́ą da doo .
PRED:	The children of Ephraim shall be broken , and Judah shall be destroyed ; Ephraim shall be destroyed , and Judah shall not build an offering , and Judah hath not built it .
GOLD:	Then at last the jealousy between Israel and Judah will end.They will not be rivals anymore .

ID:	5527
INPUT:	T'áá ákwe'é sooké danihidííniidgo éí t'áá ákwe'é siikée doo , índa doo ákóde bich'į' diit'ash da .
PRED:	If you say , ‘ We are here , we will not go up with us . '
GOLD:	If they say to us , ‘ Stay where you are or we 'll kill you , ' then we will stop and not go up to them .

ID:	5528
INPUT:	Háálá Ámalek dine'é áádóó Kéínan dine'é nihidáahdi nidaakai áádóó diltłish yee nihił nidazdiyoołhał ; jó , Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ąjį' noojé'ígíí biniinaa Bóhólníihii doo nihił hólǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For the Amalekites and the Canaanites shall kill you with the sword , and with the sword ; for the Lord was not with you because of the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	When you face the Amalekites and Canaanites in battle , you will be slaughtered . The Lord will abandon you because you have abandoned the Lord . ”

ID:	5529
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii kóní , Néínídzáago hadaałt'é ánándeeshdlíiłgo shidááhdóó yidíízįįł . T'óó baa'ihii bitahdę́ę́' ílíinii bits'áínínilgo yáshti'ígi át'éego shá yáníłti' doo . Bí naa náhidookah daats'í , nidi ni éí ts'ídá doo bididíínáał da .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord , ‘ I will come to you , and you will stand before me , and you will turn away from the midst of the evil , and turn away , and I will speak to you , but you shall not go . '
GOLD:	This is how the Lord responds : “ If you return to me , I will restore youso you can continue to serve me.If you speak good words rather than worthless ones , you will be my spokesman.You must influence them ; do not let them influence you !

ID:	5530
INPUT:	Jó , ha'a'aahjí jiilgishgo e'e'aahjį' nidi tsé'naa bee i'didla'ígi át'éego , Diné Silį́į'ii doogááł .
PRED:	For as the east wind goes down to the west , but as the Son of Man will come .
GOLD:	For as the lightning flashes in the east and shines to the west , so it will be when the Son of Man comes .

ID:	5531
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné ła' díí na'nitin doo jiniizį́'ígíí éí diné doo jinízinii doo éí át'ée da , nidi Diyin God doo jiniizį́į́'góó át'é . Jó , Diyin God t'áá bí biNíłch'i Diyinii nihaidii'aah .
PRED:	Therefore , no one who has rejected these things is not able to know , but God has given us the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Therefore , anyone who refuses to live by these rules is not disobeying human teaching but is rejecting God , who gives his Holy Spirit to you .

ID:	5532
INPUT:	Áman dine'é éí Ízrel dine'é yide ádahósin
PRED:	The children of Ammon
GOLD:	Jair Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	5533
INPUT:	Áko diné t'óó nitsíkeesgo doo yáłti'góó biniyé níyáhígíí daats'í Bóhólníihii iiniizį́į́' , nízingo sizį́ .
PRED:	And the Lord stood at the voice of the man , that he would speak , and he was standing at the mouth of the people .
GOLD:	The servant watched her in silence , wondering whether or not the Lord had given him success in his mission .

ID:	5534
INPUT:	Háálá shízhi' dayózhíigo t'áá ádzaii nihił dahalne' . Doo dahóół'aad da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	For they have spoken to you that hate my name , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	because they are telling you lies in my name . I have not sent them , ” says the Lord .

ID:	5535
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Diyin God ánáádoo'niid , Dahináago táyi' naaldeehii t'óó adahayói le' , índa nahasdzáán bikáá' wódahgo tsídii nidaat'a' doo .
PRED:	Then God said , “ Let the living creatures be fruitful in the sea , and let the birds of the earth grow . ”
GOLD:	Then God said , “ Let the waters swarm with fish and other life . Let the skies be filled with birds of every kind . ”

ID:	5536
INPUT:	Nidi shaa ahí'iildee'go ákwe'é dadziizį'go t'éiyá shizaad bee shidine'é bił dahojoolne' doo nít'éé' , áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó dahináanii índa doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádaat'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' dah nídabizhdiiłkai doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	But when they came to me , they stood and told my people the words of my people , and they turned away from evil and evil .
GOLD:	If they had stood before me and listened to me , they would have spoken my words , and they would have turned my peoplefrom their evil ways and deeds .

ID:	5537
INPUT:	Háálá yáshti' baa nídiisdzáádóó nidishghaash ; nidishghaashgo doo ts'ííd ánihi'didoolníił da áádóó ałtso ánihi'didooldįįł , dishní , háálá Bóhólníihii bizaad biniinaa shá bíighah shá nidahałt'i'go shaa nídiikai , áádóó shąąh nidayiiłhaał .
PRED:	For I say to you , “ My mouth will not be put to death , and I say to you , ‘ Because they have come to me all the day of the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	When I speak , the words burst out. “ Violence and destruction ! ” I shout.So these messages from the Lordhave made me a household joke .

ID:	5538
INPUT:	ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó ahonííłkaad áádóó kédaayahgóó tadahodi'nooskaad ; bee ádajít'éii índa ádajíít'įįdígíí bik'ehgo haa nídasist'įįd .
PRED:	I scattered them among the nations , and scattered them among the nations , according to their ways , and according to their deeds .
GOLD:	I scattered them to many lands to punish them for the evil way they had lived .

ID:	5539
INPUT:	Éí bąą Íílai ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bich'į' bee ádee hadeesdzíi'go ádííniid , Ádił nida'ayoosíi'go éí didlidgo nááhániihii índa nááhániihii bee doo nihąąh nahjį' kólyaagóó ahool'áa doo .
PRED:	Therefore I swore to the house of Eli , saying , “ If they have sinned , the burnt offering and the burnt offering will be cut off forever . ”
GOLD:	So I have vowed that the sins of Eli and his sons will never be forgiven by sacrifices or offerings . ”

ID:	5540
INPUT:	Háálá nihi'ana'í bits'ąą nihaa ádahalyą́ą doo biniyé aláahgo naat'áanii éí siláo nidaabaahii áádóó łį́į́' yee anada'ał'íinii bíídéeshkiłígíí baa yánísin nít'éé' , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' yádeiilti'go ádabidii'niid , NihiDiyin God éí yá'át'éehii biniyé há dabidéez'į́į'ii t'áá ałtso yik'i dah doolnih , nidi yóó'adabidii'aahii t'áá ałtso yich'į' bibee adziilii áádóó t'óó báhádzidgo hashké nídzingo atí'éł'íinii yee yik'ijį' nilį́ .
PRED:	For I have done to the king of our enemies , that they may keep him from our enemies , and for we have spoken to the king , for we have spoken to the king , saying , ‘ He is our God , and upon all his mighty men , and upon all his mighty men . '
GOLD:	For I was ashamed to ask the king for soldiers and horsemen to accompany us and protect us from enemies along the way . After all , we had told the king , “ Our God 's hand of protection is on all who worship him , but his fierce anger rages against those who abandon him . ”

ID:	5541
INPUT:	Diné naalnishii áłch'į́į́dígo ayą́ągo , doodaii' lą'í ayą́ągo łikango ná'iilwosh , nidi t'áá ałtsoní bee hólóonii éí yąą doo hazhó'ó ałhosh da .
PRED:	A little man is a little man , or a great cry , but all things are in him .
GOLD:	People who work hard sleep well , whether they eat little or much . But the rich seldom get a good night 's sleep .

ID:	5542
INPUT:	Éíbel bi'oodlą' bee Diyin God yich'į' nááyiisnii'ígíí éí Kéin nááyiisnii'ígíí t'ah biláhígi át'éego t'áá nídoolyéełgo nááyiisnii' . Éí bee Diyin God ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'é , níigo yee há haadzíí' , háálá Éíbel náádziisnii'ii Diyin God há bił yílįįd . Azhą́ dadziztsą́ą nidi hwe'oodlą' bee t'ahdii yájíłti' .
PRED:	In faith he offered sacrifices to God , just as he offered sacrifices . In fact , he spoke righteousness to him , because he did what is right , but he was still still speaking .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Abel brought a more acceptable offering to God than Cain did . Abel 's offering gave evidence that he was a righteous man , and God showed his approval of his gifts . Although Abel is long dead , he still speaks to us by his example of faith .

ID:	5543
INPUT:	Éí bijį́įdi baa nidasoohkaii shich'į' ádił nidaałteehgo ádił nida'iyoołzí'ígíí t'áá ałtso doo nihił baa yádahasin da doo , háálá nihiníí'dóó bee ádaa dadzíínóhdlíii nahjį' kódeeshłííł , áádóó shidził diyinii biniinaa t'áadoo ła' ádaa hodzódlíigo aghá'ádooł'áhí da dooleeł .
PRED:	And you shall not be ashamed of all your sins which you have committed against me in that day , because I will put your trust in your midst , and it shall be a high mountain .
GOLD:	On that day you will no longer need to be ashamed , for you will no longer be rebels against me.I will remove all proud and arrogant people from among you.There will be no more haughtiness on my holy mountain .

ID:	5544
INPUT:	áko Jesus ádeidííniid , Díí ádaanínígíísh dints'a' ? Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Aoo' , da' kóhá'nínígíísh t'ah doo dayínółta' da ? Áłchíní yázhí índa awéé't'ahdii da'ałt'o<unk> ha'niih t'áá ákogi át'éiiyee yádaałti'go íinilaa .
PRED:	They said to Jesus , “ Do you hear this ? ” Jesus said to them , “ Do you not know that you say , ‘ Yes , do n't you know that you have no children or children ? '
GOLD:	They asked Jesus , “ Do you hear what these children are saying ? ” “ Yes , ” Jesus replied . “ Have n't you ever read the Scriptures ? For they say , ‘ You have taught children and infants to give you praise . ' ”

ID:	5545
INPUT:	Oo'áłígíí biyaagi ni'ííníłdįįd bijį́įjį' t'áadoo nánídlínígóó níyoołkáałgo neidiní'ánígíí biyi' nił hózhǫ́ǫgo ne'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'ííní'níinii bił hiníná , háálá oo'áłígíí biyaagi hinínánígíí áádóó binishínílnishii bits'ą́ą́dóó níí' dooleełii át'é .
PRED:	In the days of thy life thou shalt love thy wife , and thy wife , for the work which thou hast done under the sun , and the work which thou hast done under the sun .
GOLD:	Live happily with the woman you love through all the meaningless days of life that God has given you under the sun . The wife God gives you is your reward for all your earthly toil .

ID:	5546
INPUT:	Mó'ab éí t'áá tsíłkéí nilį́į́dą́ą́' t'óó ałk'i dahisłáago hoolzhiizh ; t'áá hasht'edíít'e' nít'éé' t'áadoo nahaasghan da , índa t'áadoo yisnááhgóó naayáa da ; éí bąą t'ahdii t'áá ákóhálniih , t'ahdii t'áá ákóhálchin .
PRED:	Moab 's young men fought against you at the time , and he had prepared for peace . He had not gone back to his house , and he did not go back . So he was still hungry .
GOLD:	“ From his earliest history , Moab has lived in peace , never going into exile.He is like wine that has been allowed to settle.He has not been poured from flask to flask , and he is now fragrant and smooth .

ID:	5547
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , shahastóí danohłíinii , nihich'į' bee ák'i hadideesdzihígíí shá dadoohts'į́į́h !
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , listen to what I say to you .
GOLD:	“ Brothers and esteemed fathers , ” Paul said , “ listen to me as I offer my defense . ”

ID:	5548
INPUT:	Béínai ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii hastą́ądi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	The sons of Sinai , six hundred and two .
GOLD:	The family of Bani642

ID:	5549
INPUT:	éí háni'dii naat'á éé' nizhóníii aláahgo naat'áanii yiih nádááh nít'éé' yę́ę dazhdoojih áádóó łį́į́' nabiyéé nít'éé' yę́ę dazhdoolóós índa binaat'á ch'ah bá nídazhdoo'ááł ,
PRED:	Let them bring a robe in the king 's robe , and bring him to the horses , and upon his head .
GOLD:	he should bring out one of the king 's own royal robes , as well as a horse that the king himself has ridden — one with a royal emblem on its head .

ID:	5550
INPUT:	Éí bąą awéé' bí'nahii ashchį́įjį' nahjį' nihodidoo'ááł , áádóó bik'isóó daadzíi'ii Ízrel dine'é yich'į' t'ą́ą́' kónéidoodlííł .
PRED:	Therefore he shall bring the child out of the child , and he shall bring them back to the children of Israel .
GOLD:	The people of Israel will be abandoned to their enemiesuntil the woman in labor gives birth.Then at last his fellow countrymenwill return from exile to their own land .

ID:	5551
INPUT:	Jó , díí nízaadę́ę́' ninádahidookah áádóó shoo , díí náhookǫs áádóó e'e'aahdę́ę́' índa Sáínim kéyahdę́ę́' éí ninádahidookah .
PRED:	For they shall come from far away , and behold , they shall come from the east , and from the east , and from the east .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	5552
INPUT:	Áádóó hódahooł'aahii ábizhdííniid , Bąąhági áhodooníiłgo bee na'íhontaah ts'ídá t'áádóo nídí áánííł , nidi haniinaa áhooníiłii , éí doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	And he said to his disciples , “ It is true for sin , but woe to him because of his sake ! ”
GOLD:	One day Jesus said to his disciples , “ There will always be temptations to sin , but what sorrow awaits the person who does the tempting !

ID:	5553
INPUT:	Béíyal-héímangi Sálaman bich'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'á áádóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áhígíí ła' yaa ádahalyą́ą dooleełgo yeidiní'ą́ . Éí t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'ááłáhídi mííl béésh łigaii hak'eh níjaa'go aneest'ą' bik'é bich'į' nidajiilée doo .
PRED:	He gave the vineyard of Solomon , and the vineyard of his vineyard , and gave them to each man a thousand shekels of silver .
GOLD:	Solomon has a vineyard at Baal-hamon , which he leases out to tenant farmers.Each of them pays a thousand pieces of silverfor harvesting its fruit .

ID:	5554
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii , Táá' yiską́ągo shaa náhidoohkah , hałníigo há nihoní'ánígíí bik'ehgo táá' yiską́ągo Jerobówam áádóó dine'é t'áá át'é Riihobówam yaa haaskai .
PRED:	And the king went to Rehoboam for three days , according to the word of the king , saying , Give me three days , and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Three days later Jeroboam and all the people returned to hear Rehoboam 's decision , just as the king had ordered .

ID:	5555
INPUT:	Díí éí adinídíín yik'ijį' nidaalteehii ła' ádaat'į́ ; éí bik'ehgo dahonít'i'ígíí doo yéédahósin daáádóó doo yik'eh hidikáah da .
PRED:	This is the light of light ; they do not walk in the way of evil .
GOLD:	“ Wicked people rebel against the light.They refuse to acknowledge its waysor stay in its paths .

ID:	5556
INPUT:	Kéyah haa dideesh'áałgo hach'į' bee ádee hadeesdzíi'ii biih hóó'eezhgo wódahgo deílk'idii t'áá ałtso índa tsin díłch'ilgo naazkaadii dayiiłtsą́ągo ákwii nááhidoonihii náádayiisnii' ; ákwii Bóhólníihii bee bá dahozhdoołchįįłii náádajiisnii' ; ákwii tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii náádajiisnii' índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii yadajiinil .
PRED:	When I brought them into the land which I swore to them , they offered all the hills , and the trees of the forest , and the trees of the forest , and offered them there ; and they offered sacrifices and drink offerings .
GOLD:	for when I brought them into the land I had promised them , they offered sacrifices on every high hill and under every green tree they saw ! They roused my fury as they offered up sacrifices to their gods . They brought their perfumes and incense and poured out their liquid offerings to them .

ID:	5557
INPUT:	Áádóó áliv tsin naazkaadii bineest'ą' bąąh nidahołhaałgo bikéédę́ę́' t'áadoo bąąh nináádahołhaałí ; éí dé'éyóní áádóó áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii índa sáanii bąąh ádahasdįįdii bá át'ée doo .
PRED:	You shall not take the olive trees from the olive tree , and the fatherless , and the fatherless , and the widow .
GOLD:	When you beat the olives from your olive trees , do n't go over the boughs twice . Leave the remaining olives for the foreigners , orphans , and widows .

ID:	5558
INPUT:	Jó , diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahígóó naagháii éí Diyin God doo yóó'abididoo'áał da , índa doo yá'áshónígi ádaat'ínígíí Diyin God ts'ídá doo háká adoolwoł da .
PRED:	For a man shall not forsake God , neither shall he forsake his God , neither shall he help him .
GOLD:	“ But look , God will not reject a person of integrity , nor will he lend a hand to the wicked .

ID:	5559
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	Peter Denies Jesus

ID:	5560
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras bee bóhólnííh bił nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá át'é Jew dine'é hakin hadaas'áagi hodadiilkaalii nidazdoołtsił biniyé áłah dzizlį́į́' . Áko doo ła'da hodiilkaal da ; jó , t'óó hak'e'íyé'ígi át'éego diné bik'idiyaa dajílį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And all the Jews gathered together together to kill them in all the cities of King Ahasuerus , to kill them . And there was no one in him .
GOLD:	The Jews gathered in their cities throughout all the king 's provinces to attack anyone who tried to harm them . But no one could make a stand against them , for everyone was afraid of them .

ID:	5561
INPUT:	kónígháníjį' hojílǫ́
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	( Psalms 90–106 )

ID:	5562
INPUT:	Nidi bí áádóó bá nidaal'a'í índa bikéyah bikáá'góó diné kéédahat'íinii Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bizaad yee yá yáłti'go t'áadoo deidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	But the prophet Jeremiah did not listen to the word of the Lord , his servants , his officials , and all the inhabitants of the land .
GOLD:	But neither King Zedekiah nor his attendants nor the people who were left in the land listened to what the Lord said through Jeremiah .

ID:	5563
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' nináhodiyeesh'ish , áádóó Asíriya kéyahdę́ę́' áłah ánáhodeeshdlííł . Áko kéyah Gíliyad áádóó Lébananjį' náhodeesh'ish índa kéyah doo hohóoghah da hodooleeł .
PRED:	I will bring them back from Egypt , and I will bring them back from Assyria . And I will bring them back to the land of Gilead and Lebanon , and the land will not be able to pass .
GOLD:	I will bring them back from Egyptand gather them from Assyria.I will resettle them in Gilead and Lebanonuntil there is no more room for them all .

ID:	5564
INPUT:	háálá aláahgo naat'áanii dabighan yóó'adidoot'ááł ; kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii yóó'ahidoonééł ; bine' na'adzi'ii bá nahaz'ánígóó áádóó kin yadaa'áhígóó hool'áágóó naaldlooshii dabighan doo ; ákwii télii ałchinii bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo índa dibé da'ałchozh doo .
PRED:	For the cities of the king shall be forgiven ; the inhabitants of the city shall be forsaken , and the cities of the city , and the beasts of the field shall eat , and the wild donkeys shall eat .
GOLD:	The palace and the city will be deserted , and busy towns will be empty.Wild donkeys will frolic and flocks will grazein the empty forts and watchtowers

ID:	5565
INPUT:	Dadine'é nihik'eh dahół'į́įgo nihídahółníihgo áyiilaa ; ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nahaz'áanii nihiyaa ayíínilgo bik'i dadiil'eez .
PRED:	Thou hast obeyed us , and hast put them under the kingdoms of the nations , and set their feet upon thee .
GOLD:	He subdues the nations before us , putting our enemies beneath our feet .

ID:	5566
INPUT:	Éí hoogááłdę́ę́' diné t'áadoo ła' bił ííshjání ályaa da , nidi k'ad daal'aadii dadiyinii áádóó Diyin God yá dahalne'ii Níłch'i Diyinii bee Diyin God bił yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	There was no one to tell anyone about it , but now the Holy Spirit of God appeared to the apostles and the prophets .
GOLD:	God did not reveal it to previous generations , but now by his Spirit he has revealed it to his holy apostles and prophets .

ID:	5567
INPUT:	Nidi nihí éí Ízrel dine'é bilą́ąjį' anaa' biniyé hasht'e'ádadidiilnííł ; kéyah daabíí' dooleełíjį' bił niniikaigo kéyahgi kéédahat'ínígíí biniinaa kin hadaas'á ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'in góne' nihada'áłchíní kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	But we will make war against the children of Israel ; when they come with him , we will dwell in the cities of the land because of their inheritance .
GOLD:	Then we will arm ourselves and lead our fellow Israelites into battle until we have brought them safely to their land . Meanwhile , our families will stay in the fortified towns we build here , so they will be safe from any attacks by the local people .

ID:	5568
INPUT:	Dził Hórebgi óola doolyį́į'go béégashii yáázh yééda'iidlaago yich'į' nidahasá .
PRED:	They sacrificed a calf at Mount Sinai , and worshipped them .
GOLD:	The people made a calf at Mount Sinai ; they bowed before an image made of gold .

ID:	5569
INPUT:	Héshban yinílyéii , Rábah nichago ák'idiit'aah , háálá Éí'ai kin haal'á hoolchxǫ'go ályaa . Rábahdóó atsi'ké danohłíinii , yéego daohcha ; tł'oh yishbizh bee áká daołzisgo atínídadinohdleehgo kin haal'á binaa ahééda'astł'inígíí bine'dę́ę́' ałnááhohjah , háálá Málkam wolyéii áádóó binááda'iiłniihii índa bá nidaal'a'í naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá yił bi'disnáágóó dadooleeł .
PRED:	Heshbon , Heshbon , for it was destroyed ; for it was destroyed , O daughters of Ai , and weep , and mourn , and put sackcloth on sackcloth , and put on sackcloth , and put on sackcloth ; for the princes of the priests , and the princes of the priests , and the princes of the priests .
GOLD:	“ Cry out , O Heshbon , for the town of Ai is destroyed.Weep , O people of Rabbah ! Put on your clothes of mourning.Weep and wail , hiding in the hedges , for your god Molech , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands .

ID:	5570
INPUT:	Áádóó Job ánáádoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	Job answered ,
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	5571
INPUT:	Nidi kin haal'áagi asdzání dahodísinii áádóó ił danilíinii índa diné alááh dahideezíinii éí Paul áádóó Bárnabas atídoolnííł biniyé Jew dine'é hadahoneeshchaad , áko bikéyahdóó ch'ídahoneeshchą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the women who had been in the city were filled with Paul and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and the Jews fled out of the land .
GOLD:	Then the Jews stirred up the influential religious women and the leaders of the city , and they incited a mob against Paul and Barnabas and ran them out of town .

ID:	5572
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nich'į' ná'iinishkąąh , háálá honoojíígóó kǫ' naanídzoosxihgo tł'oh deítsoígíí ałtso adahideezk'ą́ą́' , índa kéyahgóó tsin naazkaadii ałtso dadíílid .
PRED:	I cry unto thee , O Lord , for the fire is burned up in the wilderness , and fire is burned with fire , and all the trees of the land .
GOLD:	Lord , help us ! The fire has consumed the wilderness pastures , and flames have burned up all the trees .

ID:	5573
INPUT:	Áthniyel éí Kúshan-rishathéíyim yits'ą́ąjį' Ízrel dine'é yisdáyíínil
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Othniel Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	5574
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí báhóóchįįdgo wáin dajidlánídóó náhidiitahgo bighan binaagi hootso haz'ą́ą́ góne' ííyá , nidi Héíman éí Esther bich'į' hwe'iina' baa ná'iizhdookąął biniyé jiizį' , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii binahjį' doo yá'át'éehii bá ninázhnítłizhgo baa ákozniizį́į́' .
PRED:	And the king was angry with the wine , and went into the house of the house of the house , but Haman sat down to the life of Haman , for he saw that he was evil for the king .
GOLD:	Then the king jumped to his feet in a rage and went out into the palace garden.Haman , however , stayed behind to plead for his life with Queen Esther , for he knew that the king intended to kill him .

ID:	5575
INPUT:	Áko nihikéyahgi ana'í nihich'į' nahwiiłnáago bik'ijį' anaa' ádaahłéehgo nízaadgóó éí dilní didííłts'į́įłgo bee i'dííłnih , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł nihéédahodoonihgo nihi'ana'í bits' ą́ąjį' yisdádoohkah .
PRED:	And thou shalt hear the sound of thy enemies in the land of thy land , and thou shalt hear a long time , and thou shalt speak unto the face of the Lord thy God .
GOLD:	“ When you arrive in your own land and go to war against your enemies who attack you , sound the alarm with the trumpets . Then the Lord your God will remember you and rescue you from your enemies .

ID:	5576
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó bidił t'éí t'áadoo daohsání ; łeeshtahjį' tó yaadzídígi át'éego ni'jį' yadahoohsíid doo .
PRED:	Only you shall not eat the blood of blood ; you shall pour out it as water on the ground .
GOLD:	But you must not consume the blood . You must pour it out on the ground like water .

ID:	5577
INPUT:	Díí Bóhólníihii bich'į' hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh baa náhwiilzhíishgo nídeit'aahígíí éí baa nídahwiilzhish góne' baa ch'éédahoht'áah doo .
PRED:	This is the feast of the Lord in the appointed appointed time , and in the appointed time you shall come .
GOLD:	“ In addition to the Sabbath , these are the Lord 's appointed festivals , the official days for holy assembly that are to be celebrated at their proper times each year .

ID:	5578
INPUT:	Nidi a'ohgo ádaat'éii nahasdzáán daabíí' dooleeł , áádóó t'áá ałtsoní bee hasht'ehodít'é baa bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	But the poor shall inherit the earth , and all things shall rejoice in peace .
GOLD:	The lowly will possess the landand will live in peace and prosperity .

ID:	5579
INPUT:	Éí bąą shidine'é t'áadoo hoł éédahoozingóó biniinaa t'óó naalte' dazhdooleeł , áádóó diné bił danilíinii dichin bi'niighą́ą́' áádóó bidine'é deíl'áhígíí dibáá' bi'niighą́ą́' .
PRED:	Therefore my people shall not know that they shall not be slaves , and they shall be hungry and hungry , because they are hungry and thirsty .
GOLD:	So my people will go into exile far awaybecause they do not know me.Those who are great and honored will starve , and the common people will die of thirst .

ID:	5580
INPUT:	Nidi bí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí yee ádee haadzíi'ii át'éego , doodaii' t'áá bí ninéidiní'ą́ągo nááyiisnii'ii át'éego t'áá nááyiisnii' bijį́ doodį́į́ł , áádóó bíí'ohígíí biiskání ałdó' doodį́į́ł .
PRED:	But if he offer a vow , he shall offer it as a vow , or a burnt offering , and it shall be eaten on that day , and the next day shall eat it .
GOLD:	“ If you bring an offering to fulfill a vow or as a voluntary offering , the meat must be eaten on the same day the sacrifice is offered , but whatever is left over may be eaten on the second day .

ID:	5581
INPUT:	Diltłish bee , dichin bee , naałniih bee atíhásh'į́į doo , áádóó hóyée'go bá hada'iisdzíi'ii dajílį́į doo , áádóó diné hak'ee t'óó bił adahayói doo , áádóó honiinaa diné , Tłehee yéi' , daaníi doo índa há nidahałt'i'go hą́ą́h nídadikah doo biniyé nihokáá'góó bee ídahólnííh nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá át'é bitahjį' adahonííłkaadígóó diné hak'ee áńdaadįįhgo ádeeshłííł ,
PRED:	And the sword shall be a pestilence , and a pestilence shall be a curse , and a curse shall be at him , and all the kingdoms thereof shall be a reproach , and a reproach shall be cut off from the face of the earth ; and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	Yes , I will pursue them with war , famine , and disease , and I will scatter them around the world . In every nation where I send them , I will make them an object of damnation , horror , contempt , and mockery .

ID:	5582
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá bí ádá chánahgo diné dadiyinii danohłį́įgo ánihidoolííł ; jó , ákót'éego nihich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo áádóó bik'eh deínóhkáahgo chánah danohłį́į doo .
PRED:	The Lord himself himself will make you strong , as he swore to you . If you obey the commandments of the Lord your God , and be careful to obey him .
GOLD:	“ If you obey the commands of the Lord your God and walk in his ways , the Lord will establish you as his holy people as he swore he would do .

ID:	5583
INPUT:	Ooljéé' nahalingo hool'áágóó bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii hasht'eilyaa doo . Éí yá'ąąshdi t'áá aaníígóó halne'ígíí nahalingo bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii niłdzilgo si'ą́ą doo . Síilah .
PRED:	Your throne will be established forever , and your throne will be like a prophet in heaven . Selah
GOLD:	It will be as eternal as the moon , my faithful witness in the sky ! ” Interlude

ID:	5584
INPUT:	Áko hahastiin Elkéínah áhodííniid , Bidíí'nít'óodjį' t'áá ni nił yá'át'éhígi át'éego ánílééh , nidi Bóhólníihii t'áá bí t'éí bizaad chánah íidoolííł . Áko Hánnah hayáázh <unk> díít'óodjį' t'áá ákwe'é bi'jiiłt'o' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then she said to her husband , “ If you are old , you will do what is good . But the Lord will make her strong , but she would have a son . ”
GOLD:	“ Whatever you think is best , ” Elkanah agreed . “ Stay here for now , and may the Lord help you keep your promise. ” So she stayed home and nursed the boy until he was weaned .

ID:	5585
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Jónah yik'ijį' adee' na'atł'o'ii hainíísą́ ; éí bee Jónah bik'ijį' chaha'oh doo , áko doo hach'į' nahwii'náa da doo . Áko Jónah éí ch'ilígíí t'áá íiyisí yaa bił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	And the Lord God cut off the vine , and he shall take place upon Jonah , and he shall not be troubled ; and Jonah was very glad .
GOLD:	And the Lord God arranged for a leafy plant to grow there , and soon it spread its broad leaves over Jonah 's head , shading him from the sun . This eased his discomfort , and Jonah was very grateful for the plant .

ID:	5586
INPUT:	Áko asdzání áádóó áłchíní t'áadoo wólta'í dinéhígíí t'áá bízhánígo dį́įdi mííl da'ííyą́ą́' lá .
PRED:	And the woman and the children were not read , and they ate four thousand .
GOLD:	There were 4,000 men who were fed that day , in addition to all the women and children .

ID:	5587
INPUT:	Diné náás daazlį́į'ii dahóyą́ , áádóó diné lą'í dabiiskáanii lą'ígóó ak'idadi'yiitįįh .
PRED:	The wise men are wise , and many men have understanding .
GOLD:	Wisdom belongs to the aged , and understanding to the old .

ID:	5588
INPUT:	Diyin God yee ayóó át'éego ayóó ábóodziilii bee danihidziil ánihiilaago t'áá ałtsojį' hada'íínółní áádóó nízaadgóó dziilí bee hada'íínółníigo nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo biniyé sodiilzin .
PRED:	And we pray for you in the power of God , that you may be strong in all things , and in all things ,
GOLD:	We also pray that you will be strengthened with all his glorious power so you will have all the endurance and patience you need . May you be filled with joy ,

ID:	5589
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Éran ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii nááda'iiłniihii éí kin hadaas'áago dah nídadziltsogóó kéédahat'ínígíí ła' diné dabi'dééji'ígíí éí nááda'iiłniihii bada'áłchíní bitahdę́ę́' dinéhígíí áádóó Líívai dine'é dayéélta'ígíí bik'ehgo t'áá át'é ch'iyáán bitaa nídajijih nít'éé' .
PRED:	And the sons of Aaron , the priests , who were in the cities of the priests , according to their families , according to their families , according to their number , according to their number , according to their number , according to all the families of the Levites .
GOLD:	As for the priests , the descendants of Aaron , who were living in the open villages around the towns , men were appointed by name to distribute portions to every male among the priests and to all the Levites listed in the genealogical records .

ID:	5590
INPUT:	Ał'ąą át'éego índa doo bééhózingóó na'nitin danilíinii t'áadoo yóó'adanihinii'áhí . Diyin God bee ajooba' hwe'oodlą' bitsxe'go áyiił'įįhjí yá'át'ééh , t'áadoo le'é daadą́ągo bee nida'nitinii t'áadoo yá'át'éehgo hodahideezyįįd da .
PRED:	For we are all without knowledge and understanding . It is good for the grace of God to do good .
GOLD:	So do not be attracted by strange , new ideas . Your strength comes from God 's grace , not from rules about food , which do n't help those who follow them .

ID:	5591
INPUT:	Áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii Jerúsalemdę́ę́' yíkaígíí ádaaní , Béíyalzííbab hwii' hólǫ́ǫ́ lá , áko níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í bee níłch'i bida'iiníziinii ayi'dę́ę́' hahizhniłkaad lá .
PRED:	The scribes who came from Jerusalem said , “ He has no power . He has cast out demons out demons . ”
GOLD:	But the teachers of religious law who had arrived from Jerusalem said , “ He 's possessed by Satan , the prince of demons . That 's where he gets the power to cast out demons . ”

ID:	5592
INPUT:	Áko Éran t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' binááhaigo Dził Hor bighą́ą'di daaztsą́ .
PRED:	Aaron was one hundred and twenty years old when he died at Mount Seir .
GOLD:	Aaron was 123 years old when he died there on Mount Hor .

ID:	5593
INPUT:	Éí bąą Mó'ab dine'é chaał hahoyiiníih doo ; t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Mó'ab kéyahgi dajicha doo , áádóó Ker-háraseth kin haal'áádóó t'áadoo náhódle'ígóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii ahídiiłjée'ii yaa daacha .
PRED:	So Moab will cry out for help ; all of Moab will mourn , and all the fruit of Moab will mourn .
GOLD:	The entire land of Moab weeps.Yes , everyone in Moab mournsfor the cakes of raisins from Kir-hareseth.They are all gone now .

ID:	5594
INPUT:	Díidíígíí binahjį' Páílat ts'ídá hwéédideeshchił niizį́į́' , nidi Jew dine'é hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Díí diné béédííníchid ládą́ą́' doo Síízar bik'is nílį́į da doo ; t'áá háiida ła' aláahgo naat'áanii ízh'díl'ínígíí éí Síízar bits'ą́ą́jí jílį́ .
PRED:	So Pilate wanted to let him go free . But the Jews cried out to him , “ If you have touched this man , you will not be Caesar 's brother . Whoever is the king 's . ”
GOLD:	Then Pilate tried to release him , but the Jewish leaders shouted , “ If you release this man , you are no ‘ friend of Caesar . ' Anyone who declares himself a king is a rebel against Caesar . ”

ID:	5595
INPUT:	Bi'ana'í danilíinii bigaan nish'náájí dabidziilgo íinilaa . Bi'ana'í t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo íinilaa .
PRED:	You have made his right hand strong ; you have made all his enemies rejoice .
GOLD:	You have strengthened his enemiesand made them all rejoice .

ID:	5596
INPUT:	Áko diné yíl'áhígíí , T'áadoo ádóhníní , dahałníigo hach'adahashké , nidi t'óó nówehda hanáázhdoolghaazhgo ájíní , Bóhólníihii , David biYe' nílíinii , nihaa jiiníbaah !
PRED:	The crowd said to him , “ Do n't be angry , Lord , have mercy on us ! ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the crowd yelled at them.But they only shouted louder , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	5597
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bee ídahólníihii t'áá át'é kédaayahgóó Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bida'ana'í yich'į' naazbaa'ígíí yaa dahodiizts'ą́ą'go Diyin God yik'ee bił yéé' dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	When the Lord heard all the kingdoms of all the kingdoms of the land , they feared God .
GOLD:	When all the surrounding kingdoms heard that the Lord himself had fought against the enemies of Israel , the fear of God came over them .

ID:	5598
INPUT:	Azhą́ naakidi mííl nááhaigóó jiináa nidi , yá'ádaat'éehii t'áadoo bee ák'idzisdla'góogo haláahgo hanályį́į́h . Da' doósh t'áá ałtso t'ááłáhíjį' ahikáah da ?
PRED:	But if he lives two thousand years , he did not receive good things . Did n't he not each one return to another ?
GOLD:	He might live a thousand years twice over but still not find contentment . And since he must die like everyone else — well , what 's the use ?

ID:	5599
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii kóní , Júdah kéyahdóó dabi'disnáago dah bi'diijaa' ígíí díí fig yá'ádaat'éhígíí nahalingo baa ákodínéesįįł . Éí bá yá'ádaat'éeh dooleeł biniyé kodóó Kaldíyadę́ę́' dine'é bikéyahgóó dahóół'aad .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord God of Israel : I will show you what is good . I have taken away from Judah , and I have sent them out of the land of the Chaldeans to do good .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : The good figs represent the exiles I sent from Judah to the land of the Babylonians .

ID:	5600
INPUT:	Kót'éego Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar doonéełgo , Ííjip dine'é yik'eh dadidoodleeł , níigo Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah yich'į' haadzíi'go ání :
PRED:	So the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet of Babylon , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave the prophet Jeremiah this message about King Nebuchadnezzar 's plans to attack Egypt .

ID:	5601
INPUT:	Da'oodlání kót'éego ádaaníił doo
PRED:	The Good News
GOLD:	Do What Is Good

ID:	5602
INPUT:	Áádóó ni índa asdzání bił ałk'ee diní'niihgo ádeeshłííł ; na'áłchíní índa éí ba'áłchíní yił ałk'ee dadi'niihgo ádeeshłííł ; éí nitsiits'iin yidoołjish ; ni éí bikétal dííłjish .
PRED:	And I will give you a hand with the woman , and with his children , and with the hand of his children , and with the head of his head ; and he shall put the head of his land .
GOLD:	And I will cause hostility between you and the woman , and between your offspring and her offspring.He will strike your head , and you will strike his heel . ”

ID:	5603
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haa dajít'ée doo , hó'ní
PRED:	The Lord says to him
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5604
INPUT:	Éíyee' yádiłhił biláahdi hólóonii óolyé ; nishą' éí ha'át'íí bíninil'ą́ ? Áádóó ch'į́įdiitah bilááh góyaa nidi ayóó át'é ; nishą' , ha'át'éego nił bééhózin doo ?
PRED:	You are greater than heaven . What do you want to go down to the dead ? How do you know ?
GOLD:	Such knowledge is higher than the heavens — and who are you ? It is deeper than the underworld — what do you know ?

ID:	5605
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id jį́ bich'į' hoolzhishgo Diyin God ałtso nijishnish , índa tsosts'id jį́ azlį́į'go ałtso nijishnishígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó háájoolyį́į́' .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the seventh day , that God had done all his work , and the seventh day came out of his saints .
GOLD:	On the seventh day God had finished his work of creation , so he rested from all his work .

ID:	5606
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Jiihóíyada éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin yindadoolnishígíí yeinínil , áko tsé deitł'inígíí índa kin ádeił'íní éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédeidoodlííł biniyé shóyoost'e' , áádóó ałdó' béésh índa béésh łitsoii yindaalnishígíí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédeił'į́į doo biniyé shóyoost'e' .
PRED:	And the king gave them the work of Jehoiada and Jehoiada to the house of the Lord , and to build the house of the Lord , and to make it for the house of the Lord , and for the bronze .
GOLD:	The king and Jehoiada gave the money to the construction supervisors , who hired masons and carpenters to restore the Temple of the Lord . They also hired metalworkers , who made articles of iron and bronze for the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	5607
INPUT:	Kót'éego dóola yázhí , doodaii' deenásts'aa' , doodaii' dibé yázhí , doodaii' tł'ízí yázhí t'ááłá'í nítínígo ákónál'įįh doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt make a bull , a ram , a ram , or a goat , or a goat , or a goat ;
GOLD:	“ Each sacrifice of a bull , ram , lamb , or young goat should be prepared in this way .

ID:	5608
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jóseph ádííniid , Bida'azis bii' tł'oh naadą́ą́' hadadołbin , áádóó dabibéeso t'óó biih nídahidoohnił , áádóó yist'éí yikiin náákah dooleełígíí bá ádadoohłííł . Áko ákódajiilaa .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to them , “ Take some grain , and put them into the money , and bring them into the money , and make them for them . ” So they did so .
GOLD:	Joseph then ordered his servants to fill the men 's sacks with grain , but he also gave secret instructions to return each brother 's payment at the top of his sack . He also gave them supplies for their journey home .

ID:	5609
INPUT:	Áko éí diné nahagizgo inaha'á yiniyé néeshch'il , áádóó éí bidaa' náyiits<unk> go doo yá'áshóonii bee bohoolnííł .
PRED:	And he shall cut off his hand , and cut off his mouth , and his mouth shall be fulfilled .
GOLD:	With narrowed eyes , people plot evil ; with a smirk , they plan their mischief .

ID:	5610
INPUT:	Shidine'é danilíinii éí áłchíní hach'į' nidahwiiłná áádóó sáanii ałdó' hwee ádídahólnííh . Shidine'é danohłíinii , nihindanit'a'í t'áá áhoodzaagóó danihí'éésh áádóó bik'ehgo dayínóhkáahii nihits'ą́ą́' nidayiishchxǫ' .
PRED:	My people have destroyed your children and women . You have destroyed them , O my people , and have destroyed them as you have done .
GOLD:	Childish leaders oppress my people , and women rule over them.O my people , your leaders mislead you ; they send you down the wrong road .

ID:	5611
INPUT:	Ádam bits'ą́ą́dóó adideezhchíinii
PRED:	The People of Edom
GOLD:	The Descendants of Adam

ID:	5612
INPUT:	Nídii'nééh ; jó , díí nídadéét'i'ii át'é ; nihí éí nił dahoniidlǫ́ǫgo nizhónígo chánah nílį́įgo ádíínííł .
PRED:	Arise , behold , this is the way which we have seen ; that we may be strong , and be strong .
GOLD:	Get up , for it is your duty to tell us how to proceed in setting things straight . We are behind you , so be strong and take action . ”

ID:	5613
INPUT:	David éí Jésii biye' nilíinii bisodizin kojį' nidahaazt'i' .
PRED:	And David the son of Jesse came to the prayer of Jesse .
GOLD:	( This ends the prayers of David son of Jesse . )

ID:	5614
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Bábilan dine'é atíidoolííł
PRED:	The People of Babylon
GOLD:	A Hymn of Praise to the

ID:	5615
INPUT:	doodaii' yóó'eeldéelii nízhdiiláago biniinaa hayooch'íidgo t'áá ádzaagóó ádee hazdiidziihgo díí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ át'éii t'áá ałtso háiida áyoolíiłgo éí yee ádił ni'iilzíhígíigi át'éego ádił adzisiihgo
PRED:	Or if he has taken away the way that he has taken away , he who does not sin against all these sins , as he has sinned .
GOLD:	or you find lost property and lie about it , or you lie while swearing to tell the truth , or you commit any other such sin .

ID:	5616
INPUT:	Áko béésh bee diné bił niizhníłhaalgo éí diné jiisxíinii jílį́ ; diné jiisxíinii ts'ídá hodi'yoolyéłí .
PRED:	And he smote him with his hand , and smote him with a hand , and smote him with a man , and he shall be put to death .
GOLD:	“ But if someone strikes and kills another person with a piece of iron , it is murder , and the murderer must be executed .

ID:	5617
INPUT:	Nidi shikéyahgóó shik'éí bich'į' díínááł ; áadi índa shiye' Áízak be'asdzą́ą́ dooleełígíí bá nídidííłtééł .
PRED:	But you shall go to my own land , and there you shall take a wife for my son Isaac .
GOLD:	Go instead to my homeland , to my relatives , and find a wife there for my son Isaac . ”

ID:	5618
INPUT:	Dine'é shich'į' nidaalteehii t'áá bí nitsídaakeesii bik'ehgo doo yá'át'ééh áhoot'éégóó deíkáahii shá bíighah bich'į' dah deeshnih ;
PRED:	I will give to my people all day long ; I will give them the way of the wicked .
GOLD:	All day long I opened my arms to a rebellious people.But they follow their own evil pathsand their own crooked schemes .

ID:	5619
INPUT:	Éí bijéí t'áá ákogi át'éego yaa áhályą́ą́ nít'éé' , áádóó bíla' yee doo bił nahontł'agóó yá yigááł nít'éé' .
PRED:	He keeps the heart of his heart , and his hands is in his heart .
GOLD:	He cared for them with a true heartand led them with skillful hands .

ID:	5620
INPUT:	Éí bąą hoda'ana'í bílák'ee hodííní'ą́ągo ti'dahoyoosnii' , áádóó hach'į' nidahwii'náago hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' nídanookąąhgo yá'ąąshdę́ę́' dahodisíníts'ą́ą́' , áádóó lą'ígóó aa a'ááh nínízinii bik'ehgo yisdáda'iiníiłii haa dadííní'ą́ ; éí hoda'ana'í bits'ą́ąjį' yisdádahwiiznil .
PRED:	Therefore , when you gave them into the hand of their enemies , they cried out to them in the wilderness , and they cried out to them in the wilderness , and you saved them from the hand of their enemies .
GOLD:	So you handed them over to their enemies , who made them suffer . But in their time of trouble they cried to you , and you heard them from heaven . In your great mercy , you sent them liberators who rescued them from their enemies .

ID:	5621
INPUT:	bikáá' náá'iiniihí óola bee ályaii áádóó ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́įhii áádóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii índa níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'é'étiingi dáádiníbaalígíí ;
PRED:	The altar of gold , and the oil , and the oil , and the incense , and the door of the tabernacle ,
GOLD:	the gold altar ; the anointing oil and fragrant incense ; the curtain for the entrance of the sacred tent ;

ID:	5622
INPUT:	Nidaal'a'í hada'ídées'į́į'go binanit'a'í nádzáago biidoołtséłígíí , éí bik'idahojidlí ; t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Bí áká doolzisgo bikáá' adání yich'į' dah yidínóołbįįłgo yiyaa nidi'yookááł .
PRED:	“ Blessed are the servants of his master 's servants , who will come to the rock , and blessed are those who are on the rock , and I say to you , ‘ I say to you , ‘ You will sit down and sit down on the ground . '
GOLD:	The servants who are ready and waiting for his return will be rewarded . I tell you the truth , he himself will seat them , put on an apron , and serve them as they sit and eat !

ID:	5623
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'é shá bidíníniidii yídin danilíinii éí bíni'dii yéego bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo ádaaníi le' ; t'áá aaníí , bíni' áłahjį' kódaaníi doo , Bóhólníihii ayóó át'éii nilį́ ; bá naal'a'í yá'át'éehgo dah ooléłígíí bił nihooshǫǫh !
PRED:	Let those who seek my righteousness be glad , and let them shout for joy ; yea , the Lord is a great servant .
GOLD:	But give great joy to those who came to my defense.Let them continually say , “ Great is the Lord , who delights in blessing his servant with peace ! ”

ID:	5624
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é éí Diyin God yééhósinígíí yee yaa haniih
PRED:	The People of the world
GOLD:	Weeping in Jerusalem

ID:	5625
INPUT:	nihí doo Mózes át'į́ yę́ęgi ádeiit'į́į da , jó , éí hanii' bits'ádi'nílíidgo , doo bits'ádi'nílíid da yileełígíí ádin silį́į'jį' Ízrel dine'é doo yik'i dadooghał da jinízingo bik'íníjíłtih nít'éé' .
PRED:	We did not do as Moses did , behold , the glory of glory was filled with the children of Israel .
GOLD:	We are not like Moses , who put a veil over his face so the people of Israel would not see the glory , even though it was destined to fade away .

ID:	5626
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Jesus bee shił chohoo'į́įgo t'óó hodíína'go Timothy nihich'į' deesh'aał nisin , áádóó aadę́ę́' nádzáago ádanoht'éegi shił bénáhoosdzingo shił náhodooshǫǫł .
PRED:	I hope in the Lord Jesus , that I may send Timothy to you , and if he comes , he will make me happy as he comes .
GOLD:	If the Lord Jesus is willing , I hope to send Timothy to you soon for a visit . Then he can cheer me up by telling me how you are getting along .

ID:	5627
INPUT:	T'áadoo ni<unk> dléłígóogo ha'át'íishą' biniyé nitsásk'eh niyaa hai'aah doo ?
PRED:	If you have no money , why do you give your place ?
GOLD:	If you ca n't pay it , even your bed will be snatched from under you .

ID:	5628
INPUT:	Áko ni , diné náánáła' neinitinii nílíinii , da' niísh t'áá ni doo niná'ádidíníítįįł da ? Doo azhni'įįh da , diníigo diné bił hólne'ii , t'áá ni daats'í aní'įįhgo ádíní ?
PRED:	And you , son of man , do you not teach your own teaching ? Do you not teach the man , saying , ‘ You are the judge of the man ? '
GOLD:	Well then , if you teach others , why do n't you teach yourself ? You tell others not to steal , but do you steal ?

ID:	5629
INPUT:	Éí doodago , kin biyaadę́ę́' haastł'inígíí hajíítł'ingo ch'ééh ájííł'įįdgo , dahoníł'ínígíí t'áá ałtso há nidahałt'i'go
PRED:	And when they sought him , they sought him all that was in the wall , that he might not build a wall ,
GOLD:	Otherwise , you might complete only the foundation before running out of money , and then everyone would laugh at you .

ID:	5630
INPUT:	Tó yaadziidii nahonishłin ; shits'in t'áá át'é ahádahaazwod ; ak'ah neesk'ihii dííłhį́'ígi át'éego shijéí niseedzá ;
PRED:	I am like a flood , and all my bones have fled ; my heart is like oil .
GOLD:	My life is poured out like water , and all my bones are out of joint.My heart is like wax , melting within me .

ID:	5631
INPUT:	Áádóó yóó'adashizdeez'ą́ągo diyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' łikání halchinii dazhdííłidgo índa t'áá hó dahála' bee bindajishnishii bich'į' nidahojiłáago doo yá'áshónígi ádajíít'įįdígíí biniinaa bee atíhodeeshłíiłii hak'ijį' bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	I will punish them because they have forsaken me , and I will punish them because of the evil things they have done .
GOLD:	I will pronounce judgmenton my people for all their evil — for deserting me and burning incense to other gods.Yes , they worship idols made with their own hands !

ID:	5632
INPUT:	Shidá'ák'ehgi níyá , shilah índa bá'deeshxehii nílíinii , mir éí spáis shee hólóonii bił áłah íishłaa . Shitsés'ná bitł'izh bits'a' t'áá bił yíyą́ą́' ; shiwáin áádóó abe' yishdlą́ą́' . Da'ohsą́ , shik'isóó danohłíinii ; ídlą́ , ayóó'óósh'níinii , łą́ągo ahíkaah .
PRED:	I have gathered my sister in the field , my sister , and my sister , and I have eaten with honey ; I have eaten wine and drink wine , my brothers , and my love .
GOLD:	I have entered my garden , my treasure , my bride ! I gather myrrh with my spicesand eat honeycomb with my honey.I drink wine with my milk.Oh , lover and beloved , eat and drink ! Yes , drink deeply of your love !

ID:	5633
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí David áyidííniid , Shiye' David nílíinii , nik'ihojidlíi doo , ayóó ádaat'éii t'óó ahayóí áálíił doo áádóó ałdó' ak'eh dinídlį́į dooleeł . Ákohgo David dah nídiidzá , áádóó Saul ałdó' bikéyahgóó anáádzá .
PRED:	Saul said to David , “ My son David , bless you , and you will do many things . ” So David went back to his own country .
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed. ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	5634
INPUT:	Sáíman , ( náánáła' yízhí yee hóózhi'go Peter yinílyée doo , hodííniid ) índa yił háá'áázh Andrew índa James áádóó John áádóó Philip áádóó Barthálemew
PRED:	Simon named Peter , one of them called Peter . He called him Peter , James , John , John , John , Philip , Philip , and Philip .
GOLD:	Simon ( whom he named Peter ) , Andrew ( Peter 's brother ) , James , John , Philip , Bartholomew ,

ID:	5635
INPUT:	Áádóó Ábner éí Bénjamin dine'é ałdó' yich'į' yee hahaasdzíí' , índa Ábner éí Hííbran kin haal'áagi David ałdó' yaa níyáago yich'į' yee hahaasdzíí' ; éí Ízrel dine'é bił yá'ádaat'éehii áádóó Bénjamin dine'é bił yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é yee yił nahasne' .
PRED:	Abner spoke to the men of Benjamin , and Abner came to Hebron , and spoke to David in Hebron , and told him all the good news of Israel and Benjamin .
GOLD:	Abner also spoke with the men of Benjamin . Then he went to Hebron to tell David that all the people of Israel and Benjamin had agreed to support him .

ID:	5636
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar áhodííniid , Shéídrak , Mííshak áádóó Abédniigo , t'áásh aaníí shidiyin danilíinii doo bá nidaał'a' da índa óola e'elyaii biisį'ii doo bich'į' nidahohłáa da ?
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar said to them , “ I have not served the gods of my gods , and you have not worship the gods of gold ? ”
GOLD:	Nebuchadnezzar said to them , “ Is it true , Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego , that you refuse to serve my gods or to worship the gold statue I have set up ?

ID:	5637
INPUT:	Ákohgo Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel áádóó diné neeznált'éego yił yíkaígíí nídiijée'go Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Shéífan biye' Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah éí Júdah kéyahgi nant'áago áyiilaa yę́ę diltłish yee dayiisxį́ .
PRED:	Then Ishmael the son of Ishmael and ten men who were with him arose and killed Gedaliah son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Ishmael and his ten men suddenly jumped up , drew their swords , and killed Gedaliah , whom the king of Babylon had appointed governor .

ID:	5638
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bá naal'a'í ti'hooznii'ii
PRED:	The People of the
GOLD:	The

ID:	5639
INPUT:	T'áá áníiltso dibé nahalingo yóó'adahiikááh ; t'ááłá'í niitínígo t'áá nihí daniidzingóó ahiikááh , índa doo ákwii ádeiit'įįdii t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii hak'iidii'ą́ .
PRED:	We will turn away like sheep , and every one will return to his face , and the Lord has given us all our sins .
GOLD:	All of us , like sheep , have strayed away.We have left God 's paths to follow our own.Yet the Lord laid on himthe sins of us all .

ID:	5640
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Mó'ab dine'é binanit'a'í danilíinii dah nídiikaigo Béílak yaa nákaigo ádaaní , Béílam éí doo nihił nihideeshkah da , nihiłní .
PRED:	So the princes of Moab went up and came to Balak , saying , “ I will not go with you . ”
GOLD:	So the Moabite officials returned to King Balak and reported , “ Balaam refused to come with us . ”

ID:	5641
INPUT:	Áko Gérshan dine'é nilíinii bizhé'é éí ba'áłchíní yá aląąjį' sizínígíí Léíyel biye' Iiláíyasaf wolyé .
PRED:	And the sons of Gershon , the father of the families of the sons of Gershon , the son of Kohath , the son of Kohath .
GOLD:	The leader of the Gershonite clans was Eliasaph son of Lael .

ID:	5642
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin áńdoolníłígíí bee diné bi'ílnii'
PRED:	The Temple
GOLD:	A Call to Rebuild the Temple

ID:	5643
INPUT:	Áko ni , diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bidził naaznilígíí bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Ízrel dine'é bidził nohłíinii , Bóhólníihii áníinii dadoohts'į́į́h :
PRED:	“ Son of man , speak to the mountains of Israel , and say to them , ‘ Hear the word of the Lord , O mountains of Israel ,
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy to Israel 's mountains . Give them this message : O mountains of Israel , hear the word of the Lord !

ID:	5644
INPUT:	Áko háíghal , nít'éé' shoo , diné léi' éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii éé' yee hadít'éego <unk> dę́ę́' óola sis yee ákászaazgo sizį́ .
PRED:	Then I lifted up my eyes , and behold , there was a certain man sitting in linen cloth , clothed him with gold .
GOLD:	I looked up and saw a man dressed in linen clothing , with a belt of pure gold around his waist .

ID:	5645
INPUT:	Áádóó k'adę́ę nihozhneeł'ąąhgo asdzání haa ádahalyánígíí ádahałní , T'áadoo nił yé'í , háálá ashkii shíníłchį́ . Nidi t'áadoo háádzoodzíí'góó t'óó nahonizhníł'ąąd .
PRED:	They said to the women , “ Do n't be afraid , because you gave birth to a son . ” But he did not listen to her .
GOLD:	She died in childbirth , but before she passed away the midwives tried to encourage her . “ Do n't be afraid , ” they said . “ You have a baby boy ! ” But she did not answer or pay attention to them .

ID:	5646
INPUT:	ábididííniił , Jánathan bighandi doo dadeestsaał da , áko doo ákǫ́ǫ́ náshidííł'aał da , dishníigo aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' ádaa ná'iisiskan .
PRED:	And thou shalt say unto him , I will not die in the house of Jonathan , and I cried unto the king .
GOLD:	If this happens , just tell them you begged me not to send you back to Jonathan 's dungeon , for fear you would die there . ”

ID:	5647
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , T'ah abíínídą́ą́' nídidíí'nahgo Féro bidááhdę́ę́' nidíínááł , áko ábididííniił , Hííbrew dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shidine'é béé'níłnííh , áko shich'į' nidahałáa doo .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning , and say to Pharaoh , ‘ This is what the Lord God says : Let my people go and worship me . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	5648
INPUT:	Éí nihidine'é yę́ę na'adlo' yee atídayííł'įįdgo danihizhé'é yę́ę bada'áłchíní yázhí dadínóonééł biniyé t'áákáajį' ch'ídahohjááh , deiłníigo .
PRED:	They have rejected your people , saying , “ Go out to the children of your fathers , to die . ”
GOLD:	This king exploited our people and oppressed them , forcing parents to abandon their newborn babies so they would die .

ID:	5649
INPUT:	Áko béésh łitsoii íí'áa dooígíí áyiilaa , áádóó bílátah dah doo'niłígíí bá naneesdizígíí bąąh pámgrenit aneest'ą' béé'ályaago yił yik'ídeisti' ; łahjí dah si'ą́ą dooígíí ałdó' ákót'éego yá ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And he made the pillars of brass , and put them on the sides of the pomegranates ; and they put the pomegranates on the sides of the pomegranates .
GOLD:	He also encircled the latticework with two rows of pomegranates to decorate the capitals over the pillars .

ID:	5650
INPUT:	Áádóó dayiiłtsood , háálá bee baa hwiidínóot'įįłii t'ah doo bee hoł dahane' da .
PRED:	And they took him , because they had not told him what he had done .
GOLD:	They held him in custody because they did not know what to do with him .

ID:	5651
INPUT:	Ákwe'é yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' hatah honiigaiigo dadziztsą́ , áko táádeizgizgo ná'ádeídi nideistį́ .
PRED:	In those days the white became white , and they washed them , but they washed them .
GOLD:	About this time she became ill and died . Her body was washed for burial and laid in an upstairs room .

ID:	5652
INPUT:	Diné binda'adlo'go indahagizii yąąh nahwiiłkaad , áko yindaalnishii doo bee bada'ídeeł da .
PRED:	He has cut them off with the proud , and they are not able to get up .
GOLD:	He frustrates the plans of schemersso the work of their hands will not succeed .

ID:	5653
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bitsi'ké índa diné t'áá ałtso Mízpahgi daadziihgo siláo binanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan éí Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah bee bóhólníihgo áyiilaii Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí yisnáago Áman dine'é bitahgóó iiníí łkaad .
PRED:	When the king 's daughters and all the people who were in Mizpah , Gedaliah son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , the son of Shaphan , was one of the children of Ammon .
GOLD:	Then Ishmael made captives of the king 's daughters and the other people who had been left under Gedaliah 's care in Mizpah by Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard . Taking them with him , he started back toward the land of Ammon .

ID:	5654
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí Béíshan kéyah biyi' bíí' dooígíí yeidiní'ą́ , nidi Manáseh dine'é łahjį' ałníí'dóóígíí éí dabik'is bikédaayah bitahgi Jórdan tooh e'e'aahjígo bíí' dooígíí Jáshowa beidiní'ą́ . Áádóó dahaghangóó Jáshowa hwéé'iisnii'go hak'ijisdli' ,
PRED:	So Moses gave the land of Manasseh to the tribe of Bashan , but half of Manasseh gave the half of the tribe of Manasseh as far as the east side of the Jordan . Joshua blessed them .
GOLD:	Moses had given the land of Bashan , east of the Jordan River , to the half-tribe of Manasseh . ( The other half of the tribe was given land west of the Jordan . ) As Joshua sent them away and blessed them ,

ID:	5655
INPUT:	Éí bąą ni'ana'í nilíinii dichin nilį́įgo ba'dííłtsoł ; dibáá' nilį́įgo tó baa dííkááł , háálá ákónít'į́įgo bitsiit'áagi tsííd lą'í yéinitsi doo .
PRED:	Therefore give him food to your enemies , and give him water to drink ; for thou shalt take many things upon his head .
GOLD:	Instead , “ If your enemies are hungry , feed them.If they are thirsty , give them something to drink.In doing this , you will heapburning coals of shame on their heads . ”

ID:	5656
INPUT:	Áko táadi azlį́į́' góne' siláo yinanit'a'í nilíinii ashdladiingo bisiláo yił anáábi'diis'a' . Áko díí ashdladiin siláo binanit'a'í ákóde haayáago Iiláíjah bidáahjį' nitsizhdinígo'go níjookąąhgo ábijiní , Diyin God yá naal'a'í nílíinii , nánooshkąąh , bíni'dii she'iina' índa díí ashdladiingo siláo bida'iina' ná nidaal'a'í nił nilį́į le' .
PRED:	And the third time the captain of the captain of the guard sent him to the captain of the army . And the captain of the captain of the army went up to meet Elijah , and cried out before him , and said , O God , I pray thee , my life , and my life .
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	5657
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham haghangi há naal'a'í alą́ąjį'ígíí hwee hólóonii yaa áhályánígíí ábizhdííniid , T'áá shǫǫdí , shitsoosk'id biyaa adílnííh .
PRED:	Abraham said to his servant who was in charge of his house , “ Please let my thigh bow down . ”
GOLD:	One day Abraham said to his oldest servant , the man in charge of his household , “ Take an oath by putting your hand under my thigh .

ID:	5658
INPUT:	Nidi ni éí nits'ąą hasti' doo nít'éé' ! Náháchįįhgo háishą' nidááhdóó yidoozįįł ?
PRED:	But you are not able to speak against you . Who will be able to stand before you ?
GOLD:	No wonder you are greatly feared ! Who can stand before you when your anger explodes ?

ID:	5659
INPUT:	Áko Jesus bimá áyidííniid , Asdzání , shíísh haa shidíílíiłgo shaa nánít'į́ ? Baa nideeshaałígíí t'ah doo shá baa hoolzhíish da .
PRED:	Jesus said to his mother , “ Woman , what do you want me to do to me ? My time is not near . ”
GOLD:	“ Dear woman , that 's not our problem , ” Jesus replied . “ My time has not yet come . ”

ID:	5660
INPUT:	Íífreiyim biyooch'íidgo áníinii áádóó ade áhósinii biniinaa bi'deesteh
PRED:	The People of Ephraim
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5661
INPUT:	nidi kót'éego bá ádoohłííł , áko t'áá dahináa doo áádóó doo dadínóonéeł da ; aláahgo diyingo nidaalyéhígíí yich'į' nídadikahgo Éran áádóó biye'ké ákóne' yah anákahgo Kóhath dine'é t'áá ałtso bindajil'a' dooígíí índa dabiyéel dooígíí ałdó' yich'į' ninádei'nił doo ,
PRED:	But you shall do to them , and they shall live , and they shall not die ; and Aaron and his sons shall go into the house of Kohath , and to the rest of the sons of Kohath , and to the rest of the children of Kohath .
GOLD:	This is what you must do so they will live and not die when they approach the most sacred objects . Aaron and his sons must always go in with them and assign a specific duty or load to each person .

ID:	5662
INPUT:	Áko Bénjamin dine'é ádadííniid , Átséédą́ą́' yę́ęgi át'éego yóó'adahineezhchą́ą́' . Nidi Ízrel dine'é ádaaní , Kin haal'áádóó da'nítiingóó yóó'adahodíníit'ah biniyé dadíníichééł .
PRED:	The men of Benjamin said , “ They fled like the first time . But the Israelites said , “ We will flee from the city . ”
GOLD:	Then the warriors of Benjamin shouted , “ We 're defeating them as we did before ! ” But the Israelites had planned in advance to run away so that the men of Benjamin would chase them along the roads and be drawn away from the town .

ID:	5663
INPUT:	Bił dah nídi'diilnihgo náádahaniihii dílzinígíí t'áá át'é éí Ízrel dine'é Bóhólníihii yaa deidiyii'aahígíí niye'ké índa nitsi'ké bił nihaa diní'ą́ ; éí ahóyéel'áágóó bee nihoní'áanii át'é ; áshįįh bee aha'deet'áanii ahóyéel'áágóó Bóhólníihii binááł ni áádóó na'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii nihich'į' bee nihodiní'ą́ .
PRED:	I have given you all the holy offerings to the Lord , and to your sons , and to your daughters , and to your daughters , as well as the covenant of the covenant of the Lord for ever and ever .
GOLD:	Yes , I am giving you all these holy offerings that the people of Israel bring to the Lord . They are for you and your sons and daughters , to be eaten as your permanent share . This is an eternal and unbreakable covenant between the Lord and you , and it also applies to your descendants . ”

ID:	5664
INPUT:	Kwe'é da'oodlání áłah nádleehígi ne'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' yee naa dahalne' . Éí náásgóó deíkááhgóó chodayooł'į́į dooleełígíí bee bíká anánílwo'go Diyin God baa bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo biniyé ánít'į́ .
PRED:	The love of the church is in your love , that you may rejoice in your way , that your hope may be glad in the way .
GOLD:	They have told the church here of your loving friendship . Please continue providing for such teachers in a manner that pleases God .

ID:	5665
INPUT:	Áko nihí doo kwe'é dashinooł'a' da , nidi Diyin God át'į́ , áko Féro bizhé'é nishłį́įgo índa bighan t'áá át'é áádóó Ííjip kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' binanisht'áago áshiilaa .
PRED:	And ye have not sent me here , but God is the God of Pharaoh , and have made me ruler over all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So it was God who sent me here , not you ! And he is the one who made me an adviser to Pharaoh — the manager of his entire palace and the governor of all Egypt .

ID:	5666
INPUT:	ashdla'ígíí <unk> niks , hastánígíí sárdiyas , tsosts'idígíí <unk> so<unk> , tseebíígíí béril , náhást'éígíí tópaz , neeznánígíí <unk> <unk> , ła'ts'áadahígíí jéísinth , naakits'áadahígíí ámethist .
PRED:	And he shall pray for the seven , and he shall set up the seventh row , and the breadth of the seven cubits , and the twelve cubits , and the twelve .
GOLD:	the fifth onyx , the sixth carnelian , the seventh chrysolite , the eighth beryl , the ninth topaz , the tenth chrysoprase , the eleventh jacinth , the twelfth amethyst .

ID:	5667
INPUT:	Ákwii yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' John Tó Yee Asį́įhii , Judíya kéyah honoojíidi níyáago halne'go kóní ,
PRED:	At that time John the prophet came to the wilderness of Judah and told him ,
GOLD:	In those days John the Baptist came to the Judean wilderness and began preaching . His message was ,

ID:	5668
INPUT:	Biye' alą́ąjį' naagháhígíí dá'ák'ehdi naaghá , nít'éé' áádę́ę́' hooghanjį' náádáałgo , dilní índa da'azhishgo yidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And when he was in the field , he was in the field , and when he came to his house , he heard that he was going to his house .
GOLD:	“ Meanwhile , the older son was in the fields working . When he returned home , he heard music and dancing in the house ,

ID:	5669
INPUT:	áko ákǫ́ǫ́ i'ííł'a'go awáalyaadi John bitsiits'iin k'élne' ,
PRED:	And I sent and sent for John the head of the prison ,
GOLD:	So John was beheaded in the prison ,

ID:	5670
INPUT:	Nihá nihonít'i' , nihá nihodoot'ihígíí baa hoolzhiizh ; nihik'ijį' ídlį́įgo hanihidilzíidgo nihik'i hwiidooleeł , jó'akon .
PRED:	Behold , we have come to us , and we have come , and we will be ashamed of us .
GOLD:	The end has come.It has finally arrived.Your final doom is waiting !

ID:	5671
INPUT:	T'áadoo ha'át'íhída nihida'diił'áhí , nidi ahééh danohsingo t'áá ałtsojį' sodizin índa ná'ookąąh bee deínóhkeedígíí Diyin God bił béédahonohsin le' .
PRED:	Do n't think about anything , but you know that God will know everything and prayer .
GOLD:	Do n't worry about anything ; instead , pray about everything . Tell God what you need , and thank him for all he has done .

ID:	5672
INPUT:	Éíhaz dahazhé'é yę́ę bitahjį' ajiiłhaazhgo Jerúsalem kin haal'áhígi yóó'ádahoolaa , nidi Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilínígíí dabitséní'ootséél góne' éí doo nidahastį́į da . Áádóó haye' Heziikáíyah éí hatsásk'ehgi nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	And Ahaz buried him among his fathers in Jerusalem , but they buried him in the tomb of the kings of Israel . And Hezekiah his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Ahaz died , he was buried in Jerusalem but not in the royal cemetery of the kings of Judah . Then his son Hezekiah became the next king .

ID:	5673
INPUT:	Bíla' nishtł'ají yee shitsiiyah déesnii' áádóó bigaan nish'náájí yee shináznii' .
PRED:	He put my hands on my right hand and his right hand on my right hand .
GOLD:	His left arm is under my head , and his right arm embraces me .

ID:	5674
INPUT:	Nidi Peter áháłní , Azhą́ t'áá ádzíłtso t'ą́ą́' anázhníídee' nidi , shí éí ts'ídá doo t'ą́ą́' anídeeshtłish da .
PRED:	But Peter said to him , “ Even if all have fallen , I will not turn back . ”
GOLD:	Peter said to him , “ Even if everyone else deserts you , I never will . ”

ID:	5675
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shijéí bee doo ádaa hash'niih da , índa doo ádaa jííníshdlíigo naasháa da . Ayóó ádaat'éii doo ła'deeshłíiłii doo beinísht'į́į da .
PRED:	I will boast in my heart , O Lord , and I will not be proud ; I will not judge the great .
GOLD:	Lord , my heart is not proud ; my eyes are not haughty.I do n't concern myself with matters too greator too awesome for me to grasp .

ID:	5676
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad Bóhólníihii bizaad yísíníłts'ą́ą́' . Shą́ą́' , ádíní , Ízrel dine'é t'áadoo bik'ijį' yáníłti'go hólne'í , índa Áízak ba'áłchíní t'áadoo bik'ijį' saad hidiiłtáahgo hólne'í .
PRED:	Now listen to the word of the Lord . You said , “ Do n't speak against Israel , and do n't speak against them , Isaac , Isaac , and his children . ”
GOLD:	Now then , listen to this message from the Lord : “ You say , ‘ Do n't prophesy against Israel.Stop preaching against my people . '

ID:	5677
INPUT:	Jó , dine'é ła' doo béédahonohsinii hágo dabididohniił , áádóó dadine'é doo nihéédahósinii Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God áádóó Ízrel dine'é biDiyin nilíinii binahjį' nihaa hidookah , háálá éí ayóó ádanoht'éego ánihiilaa .
PRED:	For you shall say , ‘ You have not known , ' and you shall say , ‘ The Lord your God and Israel has made us great . '
GOLD:	You also will command nations you do not know , and peoples unknown to you will come running to obey , because I , the Lord your God , the Holy One of Israel , have made you glorious . ”

ID:	5678
INPUT:	Nidi hazhé'é yiyiisxínígíí ba'áłchíní éí t'áadoo nidzistseed da ; Mózes binaaltsoos biyi' bee haz'áanii t'áá bee ak'e'ashchínígíí biyi' Bóhólníihii haadzíí' kóníigo , Azhé'é danilíinii áłchíní biniinaa doo nidootsił da , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é biniinaa doo nidootsił da , nidi diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo ádił nidadziisíhígíí biniinaa nidaho'ditseed doo .
PRED:	But he did not kill his father 's children . He said in the book of Moses , ‘ Because of the law of Moses , ' says the Lord , ‘ You shall not die because of the fathers ' sake of their father or children , but every man shall die because of their sin .
GOLD:	However , he did not kill the children of the assassins , for he obeyed the command of the Lord as written by Moses in the Book of the Law : “ Parents must not be put to death for the sins of their children , nor children for the sins of their parents . Those deserving to die must be put to death for their own crimes . ”

ID:	5679
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii t'áá yee shich'į' haadzí'ígi át'éego dah diiyáago Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígíí bíighahdi nídíł'į́į́' .
PRED:	As the Lord had spoken to me , he went out and hid it by the river .
GOLD:	So I went and hid it by the Euphrates as the Lord had instructed me .

ID:	5680
INPUT:	Díí doo nihainísht'į́įgo ádíshníi da , háálá t'áá íídą́ą́' ánihidííniid , Łá'í daniidlį́įgo nii'néełgo , doodaii' dahinii'náago nihijéí bii' dahonohłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	I do not say to you , for I have said to you , “ If we are called , we will be in your hearts . ”
GOLD:	I 'm not saying this to condemn you . I said before that you are in our hearts , and we live or die together with you .

ID:	5681
INPUT:	Jó , shidiyingo naal'a'í nihilą́ąjį' yigáałgo Ámor dine'é áádóó Hét dine'é áádóó Píírez dine'é áádóó Kéínan dine'é áádóó Háíva dine'é índa Jííbas dine'é yich'į' nihidoo'ish , áko éí ádahodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	For the angel will go before you , and he will drive out the Amorites , the Hivites , the Hivites , and the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	For my angel will go before you and bring you into the land of the Amorites , Hittites , Perizzites , Canaanites , Hivites , and Jebusites , so you may live there . And I will destroy them completely .

ID:	5682
INPUT:	Áádóó e'e'áahgo náá'iiniih baa hoolzhiizhgo shi'éé' áádóó shi'éénééz nehéłdládígíí t'ahdii bee áká síszaazgo t'óó shił ahayóigo sídáhídóó nídiish'na' , áko nitsidinígo'go Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God bich'į' dah didiishnii' .
PRED:	And when I came to the evening , I lifted up my robe , and put my robe on my robe , and I lifted up my face to the Lord my God .
GOLD:	At the time of the sacrifice , I stood up from where I had sat in mourning with my clothes torn . I fell to my knees and lifted my hands to the Lord my God .

ID:	5683
INPUT:	Júdah kéyah éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin silį́į́' áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Judah became the temple of the Lord , and the kingdom of Israel became king .
GOLD:	the land of Judah became God 's sanctuary , and Israel became his kingdom .

ID:	5684
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii hiná ; éí shitsé niłdzilii nilį́įgo baa ha'niih le' , áádóó Diyin God yisdáshíłtéehii ayóó át'éii nilį́į le' ;
PRED:	May the Lord live , and bless me , and let my God be exalted .
GOLD:	The Lord lives ! Praise to my Rock ! May the God of my salvation be exalted !

ID:	5685
INPUT:	Áádóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaaígíí t'áá át'é índa tsin dootł'izh naazkaadii t'áá át'é dabiyaagóó ákǫ́ǫ́ eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadlá bá nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	And he built altars for all the high places , and for every green tree , and under every green tree .
GOLD:	They set up sacred pillars and Asherah poles at the top of every hill and under every green tree .

ID:	5686
INPUT:	Diné bijéí yee hóyáanii éí bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii shóidoołt'eeł , nidi diné doo áhályą́ą́góó yáłti'ii éí t'áadoo biniyéhí da jidooleeł .
PRED:	The heart of a wise man shall give his commandment , but the mouth of a fool shall be nothing .
GOLD:	The wise are glad to be instructed , but babbling fools fall flat on their faces .

ID:	5687
INPUT:	Da' diné shik'ee diniihii atílyaaígíísh bąą shił nihoozhǫǫhínda doo yá'át'éhígi ábi'diilyaagoósh baa ts'íigo lą́ą niizį́į́' ?
PRED:	Is it not because I am afraid of the people , that I am afraid of him that is evil ?
GOLD:	“ Have I ever rejoiced when disaster struck my enemies , or become excited when harm came their way ?

ID:	5688
INPUT:	Tsé'édǫ́'ii bee atí'ályaaígíí
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	A Plague of Gnats

ID:	5689
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é atíbi'diilyaa nidi t'áadoo yits'ą́ą́dóó ídahooł'ą́ą' da
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	's Chosen Servant

ID:	5690
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é aadę́ę́' yinéełgo biniinaa tsintah haz'ą́ áádóó bits'ádaoz'a' yóó'adoot'ánígi át'éego éí yoołkáa łdi bidziilgo bikin hadaas'áhígíí yóó'adeididoo'ááł áádóó bikéyah t'áadoo násdlį́'ígóó haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , when the children of Israel come out of the midst of the house of Israel , that they shall forgive the cities , and the cities thereof shall be desolate .
GOLD:	Their largest cities will be like a deserted forest , like the land the Hivites and Amorites abandonedwhen the Israelites came here so long ago.It will be utterly desolate .

ID:	5691
INPUT:	Féstas kéyahgi níyáádóó táá' yiską́ągo Sesaríyadóó Jerúsalem góde ííyá .
PRED:	On the third day Festus went up to Caesarea , and went up to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Three days after Festus arrived in Caesarea to take over his new responsibilities , he left for Jerusalem ,

ID:	5692
INPUT:	Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi da'nítiingóó yaa nidaakaígíísh doo yíní'į́į da ?
PRED:	Do you not look at the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem ?
GOLD:	Do n't you see what they are doing throughout the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem ?

ID:	5693
INPUT:	Béeso tálent wolyéhígíí binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	The Death of God
GOLD:	Parable of the Three Servants

ID:	5694
INPUT:	Éigi át'éego nii' sizíinii bá hódzą́ nił bééhózin doo , hódzą́ bik'ííníyáago náás ná honít'i' doo , áádóó nił chohoo'íinii doo nahjį' kódoolníił da .
PRED:	You will know that wisdom is in this way , and you will find wisdom , and you will find no hope .
GOLD:	In the same way , wisdom is sweet to your soul.If you find it , you will have a bright future , and your hopes will not be cut short .

ID:	5695
INPUT:	Kóbididííniił , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Kin haal'áagi diné nideiłtseedgo bidił danílį́įgo ádeile'ii índa eda'alyaii ádá ádeile'go yee nida'ádiilchxǫǫhii éí atíhodi'doolníłígíí bik'íhodoolzhishgo át'é .
PRED:	“ Tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : If the people have sinned against the city , they are to be put to death . They are to be put to death .
GOLD:	and give her this message from the Sovereign Lord : O city of murderers , doomed and damned — city of idols , filthy and foul —

ID:	5696
INPUT:	Jó , doo ákwii ánít' éhígíí yee' ákót'éego yániiłti'índa diné binídahwéedǫ́ǫsii yádaałti'ígi át'éego yáshti' dooleeł nínízingo nihidí'aah .
PRED:	For all the sins of iniquity are all before him , and let them speak as the old men , and let them speak as the old .
GOLD:	Your sins are telling your mouth what to say.Your words are based on clever deception .

ID:	5697
INPUT:	Ákohgo kin haal'á bidáń'dítį́įhgi diné áłah silį́'ígíí t'áá ałtso áádóó hastóí ałdó' ádaaní , Oo'íinii lá daniidlį́ ni . Bóhólníihii éí asdzání nighan góne' yah adoogáłígíí díí yá íidoolííł : Réíchel áádóó Líyah éí t'áá áłah Ízrel dine'é k'ee'ąą yiyííłąądígi át'éego ná áyóle' . Éfata haz'ą́ągi ít'į́į doo áádóó Béthlehemgi ts'ídá néého'dílzin doo .
PRED:	And all the people of the city gate of the city , and all the elders of the city , saying , We are witnesses . The woman will come into the house of the Lord , and Rachel will come into the house of Rachel , and the name of the children of Israel shall be called Bethlehem .
GOLD:	Then the elders and all the people standing in the gate replied , “ We are witnesses ! May the Lord make this woman who is coming into your home like Rachel and Leah , from whom all the nation of Israel descended ! May you prosper in Ephrathah and be famous in Bethlehem .

ID:	5698
INPUT:	Áko haníbaal nizh'nínil yę́ęgi kéyah ła' nidziis'nii' ; Shííkem bizhé'é Héímor wolyéii baa nidziis'nii' ; éí neeznádiin béeso bik'é nizhnínil .
PRED:	And he sent his tent in his tent ; and he gave Shechem his father Shechem a hundred shekels of money .
GOLD:	Jacob bought the plot of land where he camped from the family of Hamor , the father of Shechem , for 100 pieces of silver .

ID:	5699
INPUT:	Éí Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii bee baa dahwii'niih , áádóó Diyin God honáłt'éego diné ájiilaaígíí ałdó' bee dayíníidziih .
PRED:	They speak to the Father , and to God the Father , who created human beings .
GOLD:	Sometimes it praises our Lord and Father , and sometimes it curses those who have been made in the image of God .

ID:	5700
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí naanish bee ída'azįįdgo íidoolíiłgo nidaałnish doo áádóó nihits'ą́ą́dóó nidahachíihii áádóó nihilį́į́' nidahachíihii índa nihidáda'ak'ehdóó aneest'ą' bilááh náádleełgo yee nihik'ijidlíi doo ; jó , Bóhólníihii éí yá'át'éehii bee náás náádahodeezt'i'ii biniyé nihaa bił ninááhoozhǫǫh doo ; danihizhé'é yę́ę yaa bił nihoozhǫǫh nít'éé' yę́ęgi ádoonííł .
PRED:	The Lord your God will make you glad , and he will bless you and your children , and your fields , and you will rejoice in the way of the Lord your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ The Lord your God will then make you successful in everything you do . He will give you many children and numerous livestock , and he will cause your fields to produce abundant harvests , for the Lord will again delight in being good to you as he was to your ancestors .

ID:	5701
INPUT:	Dah doohnééh ho'doo'niid
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	Moses Sees the

ID:	5702
INPUT:	Haa nízáágóoshą' doo ákót'éégóó nidahoyoh'aah doo , áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii nihił nilį́į doo ? Síilah .
PRED:	How long will you judge the way of the wicked ? Selah
GOLD:	“ How long will you hand down unjust decisionsby favoring the wicked ? Interlude

ID:	5703
INPUT:	Jó , naalte' doo hool'áágóó a'ałk'ee sidáa da , nidi aYe' t'éiyá hool'áágóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For he is not a slave for ever , but the Son is forever .
GOLD:	A slave is not a permanent member of the family , but a son is part of the family forever .

ID:	5704
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Éran ííłní , Dabikéyah doo ła' nihíí' da doo , doodaii' bitahdóóígíí doo ła' nihíí' da doo , Ízrel dine'é bitahgi shí nihíí' nishłį́ .
PRED:	The Lord said to Aaron , “ There is no inheritance in the land of Aaron or among the children of Israel .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Aaron , “ You priests will receive no allotment of land or share of property among the people of Israel . I am your share and your allotment .

ID:	5705
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah éí Aizéíyah ííłní , Bóhólníihii náshidoołdzihígíí áádóó táá' yiską́ągo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góde deesháałgo ha'át'íísh bee bééhózin doo .
PRED:	Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ This is what the Lord says : I will go up to the temple of the Lord three days and three days . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Hezekiah had said to Isaiah , “ What sign will the Lord give to prove that he will heal me and that I will go to the Temple of the Lord three days from now ? ”

ID:	5706
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádííniid , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ! Ha'át'íí lá ahayóí lá . Áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii lá ádabiłní , Diltłish doo deidoołtséeł da , índa dichin doo nihaa doołnih da , nidi díí nihił haz'ą́ągi bee ach'į' hózhóonii nihaa dideesh'ááł , daaní , jó'akon .
PRED:	And he said , O Lord God , what shall ye see ? And the prophets say , They shall not see the sword , neither shall they see the sword , but I will give you peace in this place .
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , their prophets are telling them , ‘ All is well — no war or famine will come . The Lord will surely send you peace . ' ”

ID:	5707
INPUT:	Ákódahoodzaago łah jį́įgo nináázh'nítingo , ákwii Férisii danilíinii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii , éí Gáliliidi índa Judíya kéyahdi kin hadaas'áhídę́ę́' t'áá ałtso índa Jerúsalemdę́ę́' neheeskaigo naháaztą́ą́ lá , áádóó Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii bee náázhdi'doołááł biniyé hoł hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the same day , that the Pharisees , and the scribes , and the scribes , and all the cities of Galilee , and all the cities of Judah , and Jerusalem were with him .
GOLD:	One day while Jesus was teaching , some Pharisees and teachers of religious law were sitting nearby . ( It seemed that these men showed up from every village in all Galilee and Judea , as well as from Jerusalem . ) And the Lord 's healing power was strongly with Jesus .

ID:	5708
INPUT:	Nidi kin haal'áágóó t'ą́ą́' nídínídzáago Ábsalam ábididííniił , Aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , ná naal'a'í nishłį́į doo ; t'áá nizhé'é yá naal'a'í nishłį́ yę́ęgi át'éego k'ad ni ałdó' ná naal'a'í nishłį́į doo . Ákohgo Ahíthofel kót'é nínígíí doo idééłníi da shá ádíílííł .
PRED:	But when he returned to the city , he said to Absalom , “ O king , I am your servant , your servant , as your servant has been your servant , so you will not make the counsel of Ahithophel . ”
GOLD:	Return to Jerusalem and tell Absalom , ‘ I will now be your adviser , O king , just as I was your father 's adviser in the past . ' Then you can frustrate and counter Ahithophel 's advice .

ID:	5709
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God nihíká ádííniidgo bíká nihił chodahoo'ínígíí , índa ak'ihojidlí ayóó át'éii hodiyį́į́' bíí' dadooleełígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé nihijéí bii' nihił ííshją́ą́ ánihósin dooleełgo nihá sodiszin .
PRED:	And I pray for you in your heart , that you may know that the glory of God has called you .
GOLD:	I pray that your hearts will be flooded with light so that you can understand the confident hope he has given to those he called — his holy people who are his rich and glorious inheritance .

ID:	5710
INPUT:	Nidi bee shidi'doolzįhígíí shá hólǫ́ , áko dooládó' lá bíighah adooleełjį' ádił ninisdzíił da !
PRED:	But my life is with me , and how much more shall I cut off my life all the day long .
GOLD:	I have a terrible baptism of suffering ahead of me , and I am under a heavy burden until it is accomplished .

ID:	5711
INPUT:	Josáíyah nant'áago tseebííts'áadah yihah góne' díí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii bee hoo'a' .
PRED:	This was the Passover in the twelfth year of Josiah , in the twelfth month .
GOLD:	This Passover was celebrated in the eighteenth year of Josiah 's reign .

ID:	5712
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii bídayéełkaah bijį́ yá'ąąshiidę́ę́' Diyin God éí bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii chánah íidoolíiłii ts'ídá doo <unk> xǫǫh át'ée da doo . Ts'ídá doo ła'da bee hóhólníih da doo ; díí bee óhólníihgo bił dah nidahaz'áanii ałtso bił nihoníyáa doo , nidi éí bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the days of the kings , that the kingdom of God of heaven shall not be able to rule over the kingdom , but none shall rule over all these kingdoms .
GOLD:	“ During the reigns of those kings , the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed or conquered . It will crush all these kingdoms into nothingness , and it will stand forever .

ID:	5713
INPUT:	Hidínááhgóó t'áá ałtsojį' t'áá bí t'éí baa ákonínízingo yá'át'éehgo dahonít'i' góó niyoo<unk> doo .
PRED:	In all your way you will find out what is right in all your way .
GOLD:	Seek his will in all you do , and he will show you which path to take .

ID:	5714
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' Jew dine'é aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii Páílat ádeidííniid , Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í t'áadoo bee ak'ená'ílchíhí , nidi , Díí diné t'áá bí ání , Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í nishłį́ , níigo bee ak'e'íłchí .
PRED:	Then the chief priests said to Pilate , “ Do n't be written in the book of the Jews , but he said , ‘ I am the king of the Jews . '
GOLD:	Then the leading priests objected and said to Pilate , “ Change it from ‘ The King of the Jews ' to ‘ He said , I am King of the Jews . ' ”

ID:	5715
INPUT:	Diné ła' éí t'áá ha'át'íhída neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' Bóhólníihii yaa néidii'aahígíí éí , Nááhideesh'nih , nízingo éí ashdla' aháádzooígíí t'ááłá'í yínéidoozohgo Bóhólníihii yaa néidii'aahii bą́ą́h ílínígíí ninéidoodlééł .
PRED:	If a man shall give a tenth of a tenth of it to the Lord , he shall give it to the Lord , and he shall give it to the Lord according to the fifth part of it .
GOLD:	If you want to buy back the Lord 's tenth of the grain or fruit , you must pay its value , plus 20 percent .

ID:	5716
INPUT:	áko aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii t'áá ałtso áłah áyiilaago háadi Christ doochíłígíí yína'ídééłkid .
PRED:	And the chief priests and the scribes gathered together together , and asked him , Where is Christ ?
GOLD:	He called a meeting of the leading priests and teachers of religious law and asked , “ Where is the Messiah supposed to be born ? ”

ID:	5717
INPUT:	Chahałheełdiísh t'óó bik'eda'ayóigo áálíłígíí béédahózin doo ? Hoyoo'néehgo haz'ą́ągiísh t'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí bééhózin doo ?
PRED:	Do n't you know how we have done in darkness ? Do n't you know what is right ?
GOLD:	Can the darkness speak of your wonderful deeds ? Can anyone in the land of forgetfulness talk about your righteousness ?

ID:	5718
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God éí Júdah dine'é bitahgóó t'áá ła' bijéí yee tsídeideeskéezgo áyiilaa , áko aláahgo naat'áanii índa naat'áanii danilíinii yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí Bóhólníihii bizaad k'ehgo ádaadzaa .
PRED:	And God made some of the people of Judah in their heart , and they did according to the word of the Lord , and according to the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	At the same time , God 's hand was on the people in the land of Judah , giving them all one heart to obey the orders of the king and his officials , who were following the word of the Lord .

ID:	5719
INPUT:	ííłní , Shí ałdó' éí bee óhólníihii shaa dinoh'aah , áko t'áá háiida bik'i dah dahidishníihgo Níłch'i Diyinii biih dahwiileeh doo .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Give me authority to me . If anyone will put my hands on you , you will enter into the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	“ Let me have this power , too , ” he exclaimed , “ so that when I lay my hands on people , they will receive the Holy Spirit ! ”

ID:	5720
INPUT:	Áádóó ch'é'étiin éí tsosts'idts'áadah ké silá ákóhoníłtéél áádóó ch'é'étiingi ni'dóó níléí wódahjį' nineel'áníjį' tseebíidi ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ánízah ; t'áá ałch'ijí ákót'é áádóó hodiyingo haz'ání góne' nááseego yí'nééł'ąąd , nít'éé' hastą́diindóó ba'aan tseebíí ké silá ákónízah , naaniigo éí tádiindóó ba'aan dį́į́' ké silá ákóhoníłtéél .
PRED:	And he measured the breadth of the gate , and the breadth of the gate , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof .
GOLD:	The doorway was 171/2 feet wide , and the walls on each side of it were 83/4 feet long . The sanctuary itself was 70 feet long and 35 feet wide .

ID:	5721
INPUT:	Éí nahasdzáán t'ah doo álnééhdą́ą́' Diyin God hak'i diilnii' , áádóó nihoolzhíísh t'ah doo baa yíłkaahgóó nihá yit'íní áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	For before the earth was laid upon his face , and his face was revealed to us before the end of the end .
GOLD:	God chose him as your ransom long before the world began , but now in these last days he has been revealed for your sake .

ID:	5722
INPUT:	éí shádi'áahjigo hahoodzogo Akrábim báhátis , Zin honoojíígóó hodeesdzo áádóó Kéídesh-barníyají shádi'ááh góde índa Hézran kin shijaa' bíighahgóó , Ádar haz'áníjį' índa <unk> haz'áníjį' hodeesdzo ,
PRED:	And the border went out from the south side of Zin , and from the wilderness to the wilderness of Kadesh , and to the south , and to the south , and to the south , and to the border thereof .
GOLD:	ran south of Scorpion Pass into the wilderness of Zin , and then went south of Kadesh-barnea to Hezron . Then it went up to Addar , where it turned toward Karka .

ID:	5723
INPUT:	Aró'er kin shijaa'góoda , <unk> haz'ánígóoda , Éshtiimowa kin haal'áágóoda ,
PRED:	He said , “ If you do n't have seen it , you wo n't have a city .
GOLD:	Aroer , Siphmoth , Eshtemoa ,

ID:	5724
INPUT:	Diné bíní si'áanii doo bił ałch'odíí'niił da áádóó diné bánáháchįįhii t'áadoo béédiilwo'í .
PRED:	Do n't love a man with him , and do n't be angry with him .
GOLD:	Do n't befriend angry peopleor associate with hot-tempered people ,

ID:	5725
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'á binaagi ahééhool'áhídóó bínáádí'nííł'ąął ; ha'a'aahjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' ; shádi'áahjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' ; e'e'aahjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' ; náhookǫsjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' bídadí'nííł'ąął , áko éí ałníi'gi kin haal'áa dooleeł . Díí kin hadaas'áago binaagi dahootsooígíí daabíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	And the border of the city shall be three hundred cubits high , and the east side of the east side shall be three hundred cubits , and the breadth thereof shall be three hundred cubits . This shall be the border of the cities .
GOLD:	Measure off 3,000 feet outside the town walls in every direction — east , south , west , north — with the town at the center . This area will serve as the larger pastureland for the towns .

ID:	5726
INPUT:	áádóó béésh łigaii hazhnitáhígi át'éego áádóó yódí nées'į́į'ii házdéez'į́'ígi át'éego hánít'į́įgo ,
PRED:	and they shall be silver , and they shall bear them as silver ;
GOLD:	Search for them as you would for silver ; seek them like hidden treasures .

ID:	5727
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , éí kóníigo hadoolghaazh , Haashą' nihíléehgo ánít'į́ , Jesus , Diyin God biYe' nílíinii ? Atínihidi'doolníłígíí t'ah doo baa hoolzhíish da nidiísh atínihidíílíiłgo biniyé yíníyá ?
PRED:	And behold , he cried out , saying , What are you doing ? Jesus , the Son of God , has not come to us ?
GOLD:	They began screaming at him , “ Why are you interfering with us , Son of God ? Have you come here to torture us before God 's appointed time ? ”

ID:	5728
INPUT:	Áko Béílak éí Béílam ííłní , Haa lá shííníł'įįd ? Shą́ą́' shida'ana'í bidíníídzįįł biniyé níká i'ííł'a' , nidi shoo , t'óó bik'ijiisínídli' .
PRED:	Balak said to Balaam , “ What have you done to me ? I sent for you to call for my enemies , but behold , you blessed them . ”
GOLD:	Then King Balak demanded of Balaam , “ What have you done to me ? I brought you to curse my enemies . Instead , you have blessed them ! ”

ID:	5729
INPUT:	Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó diné neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' .
PRED:	The men of Bethlehem , a hundred and three .
GOLD:	The people of Bethlehem123

ID:	5730
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é dabijoołáii índa doo dandzinii índa doo bił da'ólta'ii Diyin God náyiilááh , áko éí bee ha'át'íhída t'áá ákónéehee ádaat'éii át'éego baa nitsáhákeesii t'áadoo nánídlínígóó bee bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	God has given the world to those who hate him , and those who hate him , so that they may know that there is nothing wrong .
GOLD:	God chose things despised by the world , things counted as nothing at all , and used them to bring to nothing what the world considers important .

ID:	5731
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Díí saad bee ak'e'íłchí ; ni áádóó Ízrel dine'é díí saad bik'ehgo nihił ahadadi'nisht'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ write these words , and I have made a covenant with you according to these words .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Write down all these instructions , for they represent the terms of the covenant I am making with you and with Israel . ”

ID:	5732
INPUT:	Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'íinii áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó kéédahat'íinii índa kǫ́ǫ́ aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii índa naat'áanii danilíinii kéédahojit'ínígóó t'áá díí jį́įdi át'éhígi át'éego hóyée'go há ha'oodzíi'ii ałtso áho'disdįįd doo , áádóó diné bik'ee t'óó bił adahayóigo , Tłehee yéi' , daaníigo yą́ą́h nidadikah doo , índa doo naagháhígóó hwiidoo'aał biniyé dahodiyeeshdlį́į́ł ,
PRED:	And the inhabitants of Jerusalem , and the inhabitants of Judah , and the inhabitants thereof , and the princes thereof , and the princes thereof , and the inhabitants thereof , shall be cut off , and all the people that dwell in this day ; and they shall become a desolation , and a desolation , and a desolation .
GOLD:	I went to Jerusalem and the other towns of Judah , and their kings and officials drank from the cup . From that day until this , they have been a desolate ruin , an object of horror , contempt , and cursing .

ID:	5733
INPUT:	Éí yidiiską́ą́góó naałniih bee bąąh dahaz'ą́ągo baa'ihii jílį́į dooleeł ; doo bi'díídee'ii jílį́ ; t'áá sahdii haghan doo ; níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi haghan doo .
PRED:	And he shall be a plague in the days of leprosy ; he shall be unclean ; he shall go out of the camp .
GOLD:	As long as the serious disease lasts , they will be ceremonially unclean . They must live in isolation in their place outside the camp .

ID:	5734
INPUT:	Áko booshk'iizhjígo yah adahwiisdzą́ągo wóne'í nahaz'ánígíí éí náásee'go lók'aa' bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsoígi ákódahonízah áádóó naaniigo éí ałdó' ákódahoníłtéél índa éí hooghan bita'gi t'áá bíni' nahaz'ánígóó ádahonízahígíí éí tseebíí ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódahonízah . Ch'é'étiin siláii wóyahdi bízhnééł'ąądgo t'áá áłah lók'aa' bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsoígi ákóníłtéél .
PRED:	And he measured the breadth of the court , twenty cubits long and twenty cubits , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof round about .
GOLD:	There were guard alcoves on each side built into the gateway passage . Each of these alcoves was 101/2 feet square , with a distance between them of 83/4 feet along the passage wall . The gateway 's inner threshold , which led to the entry room at the inner end of the gateway passage , was 101/2 feet front to back .

ID:	5735
INPUT:	Christ be'iina' nihá ninéidiní'ánígíí bąą Diyin God bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' baa ákodaniidzį́į́' , áko nihí ałdó' Christ bee nihik'isóó danilíinii bá nihe'iina' ninádahidiit'aah doo .
PRED:	For we know that the grace of Christ has given us for the sake of his life , so that we also may have the life of our brethren in Christ .
GOLD:	We know what real love is because Jesus gave up his life for us . So we also ought to give up our lives for our brothers and sisters .

ID:	5736
INPUT:	Wót'áahdi atsá naat'a'ígíí , áádóó tsé'éłkáá'góó tł'iish naa'na'ígíí , áádóó tónteel bikáá'góó na'a'eełígíí , áádóó diné éí ch'ikę́ę́h yił ahiniidzįįhígíí .
PRED:	The eagle was in the high places , and the serpent of the sea , and the sea was in its place , and the virgin was in its place .
GOLD:	how an eagle glides through the sky , how a snake slithers on a rock , how a ship navigates the ocean , how a man loves a woman .

ID:	5737
INPUT:	Yínííł ił hózhǫ́ nídoodleeł
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Sadness Will Be Turned to Joy

ID:	5738
INPUT:	Nihijéí tł'áahdi Níłch'i Diyinii t'áá bí nihiníłch'i ííłní , Diyin God ba'áłchíní danohłį́ .
PRED:	But the Holy Spirit said to us , “ You are children of God . ”
GOLD:	For his Spirit joins with our spirit to affirm that we are God 's children .

ID:	5739
INPUT:	Háálá díí diné Daniel ts'ídá aláahgo haniihii éí baa na'iisgeelgo ááhyiłnínígíí yik'idi'yiitįįhgo áádóó hane' bee éé'deetįįhii yaa halne' índa t'áá íiyisí nidantł'ago deít'éehii k'ééyoołdǫǫł ; éí Bélteshazar ałdó' wolyé . Áko k'ad Daniel , Hágo , bidiní ; éí ááhyiłníinii nił ííshją́ą́ íidoolííł .
PRED:	For these men , Daniel , a dream , and a dream , and a feast of bread , and a feast of bread , and a feast of bread , and an ephah , that is , the name of Daniel , shall show thee the interpretation .
GOLD:	This man Daniel , whom the king named Belteshazzar , has exceptional ability and is filled with divine knowledge and understanding . He can interpret dreams , explain riddles , and solve difficult problems . Call for Daniel , and he will tell you what the writing means . ”

ID:	5740
INPUT:	Nidi dooda jidííniid kójíníigo , Baa nánít'ínígíí doo shił bééhózin da , doo nidi nik'i'diishtįįh da . Áko tł'óó'góó chaha'oh dah sikáníjį' ch'ízhníyá , nít'éé' naa'ahóóhai biką'í ádííniid .
PRED:	But he said to them , “ I do n't know what you are doing , but I do n't understand . I went out into the darkness . ” And the servant said , “ I do n't understand it . ”
GOLD:	But Peter denied it . “ I do n't know what you 're talking about , ” he said , and he went out into the entryway . Just then , a rooster crowed .

ID:	5741
INPUT:	Háálá aTaa' yee át'éii t'áá ałtso Jesus hwii' hólónígíí éí aTaa' bił hóshǫ́ .
PRED:	For all that the Father has in him is pleased with the Father .
GOLD:	For God in all his fullnesswas pleased to live in Christ ,

ID:	5742
INPUT:	Tííman nílíinii , kin haal'á nitahdóó diné dabidziilii nani'eeshígíí biyadahodidoolyis , áko Íísa bidziłdóóígíí t'ááłá'í jinítínígo nidahodi'dootsiłgo ádazhdoodįįł .
PRED:	I will make the commanders of the mighty men of the city , and everyone who is of Esau will die .
GOLD:	The mightiest warriors of Temanwill be terrified , and everyone on the mountains of Edomwill be cut down in the slaughter .

ID:	5743
INPUT:	áádóó t'áá nihíla' bee yéego nideiilnishgo t'áá nihí ák'inideiildzil . Danihódziihii bá sodadiilzin ; atídanihi'dil'į́įgo hada'ííníilní ;
PRED:	and we have our hands with our hands , and we pray for him , and we pray for him .
GOLD:	We work wearily with our own hands to earn our living . We bless those who curse us . We are patient with those who abuse us .

ID:	5744
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í áłt'ąą la' díí bee haa hane' dohníigo ádadoohníi doo , Dooládó' ade íinízinii yę́ę t'áadoo násdlį́'í da , hashké nídzin yę́ę t'áadoo násdlį́'í da !
PRED:	And ye shall say unto him , How much more shall the king of Babylon say unto him , How much is he that hath been destroyed !
GOLD:	you will taunt the king of Babylon . You will say , “ The mighty man has been destroyed.Yes , your insolence is ended .

ID:	5745
INPUT:	Díí bee nihonish'aah : éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá háiida , doodaii' bináá'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é éí shóhólníihgo haz'ą́ągi kéédahat'íinii t'áá bí ádeinízingo Jerúsalem kin haal'áágóó deeshááł , danízinígíí ákǫ́ǫ́ nił dookah .
PRED:	This is what I am saying : If any man or Levites and Levites who live in his own kingdom , I will go to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ I decree that any of the people of Israel in my kingdom , including the priests and Levites , may volunteer to return to Jerusalem with you .

ID:	5746
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman bił hóóne'go Jó'ab éí Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzinii yich'į' anííchą́ą́' , áádóó , shoo , bikáá' náá'iiniihí yíighahgi sizį́ . Nít'éé' Sálaman éí Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah ákǫ́ǫ́ ayííł'a'go ííłní , Nílááh , bił andeełgo síłhé .
PRED:	When King Solomon told Solomon , Joab ran to the tent of the Lord , and behold , there stood beside the altar ; and Solomon said to him , “ Go and take him away . ”
GOLD:	When this was reported to King Solomon , he sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada to execute him .

ID:	5747
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hwe'asdzą́ą́ naakigo ła' ayóó'ájó'níigo áádóó ła' jijoołáago , áko ayóó'ájó'nínígíí áádóó jijoołáhígíí t'áá áłah há ashchį́įgo áádóó haye' alą́ąjį' há yizhchíinii éí jijoołáhígíí biyáázh nilį́įgo ,
PRED:	If anyone loves two wives , he loves one of them , and loves them ; and he that loves them , and he that loves them , and the firstborn son of the firstborn .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has two wives , but he loves one and not the other , and both have given him sons . And suppose the firstborn son is the son of the wife he does not love .

ID:	5748
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí diné yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Nihitahdóó ła' anaa' biniyé hasht'e'ádadidoołníiłgo bíni' Mídiyan dine'é yich'į' nídahididoobahgo Bóhólníihii yá k'éédeididoodlííł .
PRED:	Moses said to the people , “ If any of you want to go up to fight against Midian , he will go up against Midian and attack the Lord . ”
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ Choose some men , and arm them to fight the Lord 's war of revenge against Midian .

ID:	5749
INPUT:	Áádóó siláo yinééł yists'ą́ą'go tsin múlberri yíl'áhígíí bílátahgóó bii' hodiists'ą́ą'go bikéé' hidoohkah , áko Bóhólníihii nihilą́ąjį' hooleełgo Filístiya bisiláo yinéełii neidoołtsił .
PRED:	And when the army hear them in the midst of the forest , ye shall follow them in the midst of the forest , and the Lord shall destroy the army of the Philistines .
GOLD:	When you hear a sound like marching feet in the tops of the poplar trees , be on the alert ! That will be the signal that the Lord is moving ahead of you to strike down the Philistine army . ”

ID:	5750
INPUT:	áadi índa danihizhé'é yę́ę éí kéyah hool'áádę́ę́' ahóyéel'áágóó baa diní'ánígi kééhoht'į́į dooleełgo nihaa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	and I will give you the land that I gave to your fathers forever and ever .
GOLD:	Then I will let you stay in this land that I gave to your ancestors to keep forever .

ID:	5751
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii yáłti'ígíí nahalingo saad nináyii'níłígíí bąąJob t'áá nabíhodi'nitaahgo daotsa' laanaa nisin .
PRED:	Job 's words were like a wicked man who speaks evil , so that Job would die .
GOLD:	Job , you deserve the maximum penaltyfor the wicked way you have talked .

ID:	5752
INPUT:	Éí k'os biníí'dóó ha'át'íí shį́į́ dahináanii nahalingo dį́lt'éego ałdó' haakai . Kódanoolnih ; diné nidahalin .
PRED:	And there were four living creatures like the cloud , and four living creatures were like men .
GOLD:	From the center of the cloud came four living beings that looked human ,

ID:	5753
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Asíriya dine'é atíidoolííł
PRED:	The People of Assyria
GOLD:	Blessings for the

ID:	5754
INPUT:	K'éé'dídléehii yéego naalnishii t'éiyá nídaneest'áanii bí áłtsé choidooł'įįł .
PRED:	The dragon can give the fruit of the fruit of the field .
GOLD:	And hardworking farmers should be the first to enjoy the fruit of their labor .

ID:	5755
INPUT:	Nída'oolch'ihgóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' hadadeezbin doo ; bii' da'aljizhí biyi'dę́ę́' wáin ániidíii áádóó ak'ah ániidíii wó'ądaazlį́į doo .
PRED:	They shall be full of grain , and they shall be full of wine and oil .
GOLD:	The threshing floors will again be piled high with grain , and the presses will overflow with new wine and olive oil .

ID:	5756
INPUT:	Sǫ' dajiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí bąą hoł dahóózhǫǫd ,
PRED:	When they saw the stars , they were glad .
GOLD:	When they saw the star , they were filled with joy !

ID:	5757
INPUT:	Háálá danihi'doolzį́'ígíí bee hoł yóó'ádanihi'diilyaa ; t'áá éí ałdó' binahjį' dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' Diyin God nááhodiisáii áyoolíiłii deinohdlą́ągo baa dadzíínóhłíhígíí binahjį' hoł náádanihidi'yiiljéé' .
PRED:	For we have been baptized with him , and we have been raised from the dead , who believe in him , who raised us from the dead .
GOLD:	For you were buried with Christ when you were baptized . And with him you were raised to new life because you trusted the mighty power of God , who raised Christ from the dead .

ID:	5758
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Táberah nahós'a'gi áádóó Másah nahós'a'gi índa Kíbrath-hatéí'avah nahós'a'gi Bóhólníihii bádahoshoołchįįdgo hashké nídabinoołdzįįh nít'éé' .
PRED:	The Lord was angry with all the people of Israel in the land of Israel . He was angry with them in front of the land of Israel . He was very angry .
GOLD:	“ You also made the Lord angry at Taberah , Massah , and Kibroth-hattaavah .

ID:	5759
INPUT:	Ákondi t'áadoosti'ee yáłti'go naaghá , nidi doo ádabijiníní da ! Naat'áanii dajílíinii daats'í díí t'áá aaníí Christ át'į́įgo hoł béédahoozin .
PRED:	But when they were speaking , they said , “ It is not true ! ” But the princes knew that the Christ is the truth .
GOLD:	But here he is , speaking in public , and they say nothing to him . Could our leaders possibly believe that he is the Messiah ?

ID:	5760
INPUT:	Kéídeshdóó dah náádii'náago Íídam kéyah nihoodzogi Dził Hor si'ánígi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They set out from Kadesh and camped at Mount Seir .
GOLD:	They left Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor , at the border of Edom .

ID:	5761
INPUT:	Áko Éran ninájíl'aah bik'eh éé' bijánil bąąh yoo' achaaí bąąh sinilígíí diits'a' doo biniyé biih níjídáahgo hodiyingo haz'ání góne' Bóhólníihii binááł yah aníjídááh áádóó ch'ééjiidááh , ákótéego doo dazdootsaał da .
PRED:	And Aaron put on the robe of the robe , and he went out to meet the Lord in front of the sanctuary , and he shall not die .
GOLD:	Aaron will wear this robe whenever he ministers before the Lord , and the bells will tinkle as he goes in and out of the Lord 's presence in the Holy Place . If he wears it , he will not die .

ID:	5762
INPUT:	T'áá na'níle'dii hahodi'yoolghan ; ni'jį' ahodi'yoolghan ; ha'a'aahdę́ę́' deeyolgo haneest'ą' ałtso yisgan ; hats'áoz'a' dabidziilii yiyiizti'go daniiłna'go ałtso adahideezk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And it cometh to pass , that he shall be cut down , and his house shall be cut down ; and the east wind shall cut off its branches , and burnt it with fire .
GOLD:	But the vine was uprooted in furyand thrown down to the ground.The desert wind dried up its fruitand tore off its strong branches , so that it witheredand was destroyed by fire .

ID:	5763
INPUT:	Índa diné ła'da wáin ániidíígíí tó abid hadaastihii doo yiih yikaah da ; ákódziidzaago wáin éí tó abid deidoołdoh , áko wáin éí yóó'íína' doo , índa tó abid éí t'áá ádzaaí dadooleeł , nidi wáin ániidíígíí tó abid ádaaniidíígíí biih yikááh .
PRED:	And no one shall put new wine into the new wine , and the wine shall be filled with wine , and the wine shall be broken , and the wine shall be broken , but they shall enter into the wine .
GOLD:	“ And no one puts new wine into old wineskins . For the wine would burst the wineskins , and the wine and the skins would both be lost . New wine calls for new wineskins . ”

ID:	5764
INPUT:	Da' díísh doo bee nich'į' haasdzíi' da ? Nidziilgo í'díí'nílzin áádóó chánah í'díí'nílzin ; t'áadoo náníldzidí , doodaii' t'áadoo ádił nisindáhí , háálá Bóhólníihii niDiyin God éí t'áá hidínááhgóó nił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Do n't I say this to you ? Be strong and strong . Do n't be afraid of your sins , for the Lord your God is with you .
GOLD:	This is my command — be strong and courageous ! Do not be afraid or discouraged . For the Lord your God is with you wherever you go . ”

ID:	5765
INPUT:	Ha'éé' dadzizgisii hoł dahózhǫ́ . Éí iiná tsin sikaadii baa dahizhdookahgo , áádóó kin haal'áagi ch'é'étiin góne' yah adahizhdookahgo bee há nahaz'ą́ .
PRED:	These are those who are clothed with clothes . They will come to the tree , and they will enter into the city gate .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who wash their robes . They will be permitted to enter through the gates of the city and eat the fruit from the tree of life .

ID:	5766
INPUT:	Áádóó Abáíjam éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ada'iishxaazhígi át'éego i'jííłhaazhgo David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áko haye' Éísa hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And Abijah slept with his fathers , and was buried in the city of David ; and Asa his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Abijam died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Asa became the next king .

ID:	5767
INPUT:	éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'é'étiingi náádi'yoołnihgo Bóhólníihii bich'į' néidiyoołnihii t'áadoo niyílósí nááyiisnii'go éí bidine'é bits'ą́ąjį' bidi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	and he shall offer his offering at the entrance of the tent of meeting , and he shall be cut off from his people .
GOLD:	but does not bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle to offer it to the Lord , that person will be cut off from the community .

ID:	5768
INPUT:	Asdzání éí diné ła' bił neezhtéezhgo hwíígąsh háána'go éí t'áá ájíłah nizhdoobeeł , áko i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didéeh da doo .
PRED:	If a woman lies with a woman , he shall wash his body in water , and he shall be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	After a man and a woman have sexual intercourse , they must each bathe in water , and they will remain unclean until the next evening .

ID:	5769
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é áádóó Kaldíya dine'é t'áá ałtso áádóó Pííkad dine'é áádóó Shówa dine'é áádóó Kówa dine'é índa Asíriya dine'é t'áá ałtso éí tsíłkéí bídin hóyée'ii , agháago naat'áanii danilíinii índa hashkééjí naat'ááh danilíinii , t'áá ałtso bídahólníihii áádóó łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii éí t'áá ałtso łį́į́' bił nihidoojah .
PRED:	And the hand of Babylon , and all the Chaldeans , and the Chaldeans , and the remnant of Assyria , and the princes of Assyria , and all the princes of Assyria , and all their princes , and all their princes , and all their princes .
GOLD:	For the Babylonians will come with all the Chaldeans from Pekod and Shoa and Koa . And all the Assyrians will come with them — handsome young captains , commanders , chariot officers , and other high-ranking officers , all riding their horses .

ID:	5770
INPUT:	Áko haa bił dahóózhǫǫdgo tsinaa'eeł yiih dahast'e'go , t'áá áko kéyah bich'į' da'jíł'eełígíí baa da'dzis'éél .
PRED:	And they were filled with joy , and they went into the boat , and went to the land .
GOLD:	Then they were eager to let him in the boat , and immediately they arrived at their destination !

ID:	5771
INPUT:	Háálá , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ninaanish bee shił hózhǫ́ǫgo áshiinilaa . Níla' bee íinilaaígíí baa shił hózhǫ́ǫgo hashtaał .
PRED:	For thou hast made me glad , O Lord , and hast made me glad ; I will sing for joy in thy hand .
GOLD:	You thrill me , Lord , with all you have done for me ! I sing for joy because of what you have done .

ID:	5772
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihitahdóó dabi'disnánígíí Záíyanjį' néiní'eezhgo t'óó baa nidasiigeel nahalin silį́į́' .
PRED:	The Lord brought you back to Zion , and his dreams became a dream .
GOLD:	When the Lord brought back his exiles to Jerusalem , it was like a dream !

ID:	5773
INPUT:	Diltłish bee nidaaztseedii bitah dazhdínóonééł ; diltłish baa ho'deet'ą́ ; hodine'é t'óó ahayóí deíl'áhígíí t'áá hoł nahjį' kóbi'dilnééh .
PRED:	The sword will die by the sword , and the multitude of the peoples will die by the sword .
GOLD:	The Egyptians will fall with the many who have died by the sword , for the sword is drawn against them . Egypt and its hordes will be dragged away to their judgment .

ID:	5774
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó <unk> t'éiyá bił séké . Mark baa díínáałgo áádę́ę́' bił díí'ash , háálá shá naal'a'go t'áá íiyisí choo'į́ .
PRED:	except only only , go with me , and take John , and take him away , for they are worthy of service .
GOLD:	Only Luke is with me . Bring Mark with you when you come , for he will be helpful to me in my ministry .

ID:	5775
INPUT:	T'áá háiida daz'diits'a'ii Níłch'i Diyinii éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii kwííłníigo yee yił halne'ígíí háni'dii dajíists'ą́ą́' ! T'áá ak'eh deesdlį́'ígíí mána nanil'inii ła' haa deeshnił , áádóó tsé łigaii haa deesh'ááł , bikáa'gi yízhí ániidíii bik'iisdzohgo éí doo ła' hoł bééhóziní da , nidi baa yít'ánígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	If anyone has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the church , ‘ I will give it to you , and I will give it to you , and there is no one on it except a new stone . '
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . To everyone who is victorious I will give some of the manna that has been hidden away in heaven . And I will give to each one a white stone , and on the stone will be engraved a new name that no one understands except the one who receives it .

ID:	5776
INPUT:	Ła' diné bibąąhági ádaat'éii t'áadoo bahat'aadí daat'į́ , áko éí ánihwiit'aahjį' dabí'éésh , nidi ła' bibąąhági ádaat'éii doo hah deiltséeh da .
PRED:	Some people are guilty of the wicked , and they come to judgment , but there is no sin in them .
GOLD:	Remember , the sins of some people are obvious , leading them to certain judgment . But there are others whose sins will not be revealed until later .

ID:	5777
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í éí Bókim haz'ánígi honíle'
PRED:	The angel of the Lord
GOLD:	The

ID:	5778
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii niDiyin God hiná ; ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí łees'áán shee ádin , nidi ak'áán yílá bee haajaa' bíighahgo t'éiyá tóshjeeh yázhí bii' , ak'ah ałdó' <unk> į́į́dí tóshjeeh yázhí bii' ; jó , chizh naakigo náháshłááh , áko yah adeesháałgo łees'áán ádeeshłííł ; shiyáázh áádóó shí éí dii<unk> go áádóó díníi'nééł .
PRED:	And he said , As surely as the Lord thy God lives , I have no bread , but a basket of fine flour mixed with oil , and I will go in and take two loaves of bread , and I will go in , and I will go into the midst of my son .
GOLD:	But she said , “ I swear by the Lord your God that I do n't have a single piece of bread in the house . And I have only a handful of flour left in the jar and a little cooking oil in the bottom of the jug . I was just gathering a few sticks to cook this last meal , and then my son and I will die . ”

ID:	5779
INPUT:	átséédą́ą́' hahastiin nít'é'ígíí bighandóó ch'íhoníł'a'ígíí doo bił ahaa nínáázhdoot'ash da , háálá ákóhát'į́įgo Bóhólníihii bił t'óó baa'ih ; ázhdoolchxǫ'dóó bik'ijį'go ákót'é . Áko kéyah bikáá' doo ádił ni'iidzííh ádoohłíił da ; jó , éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłíiłii át'é .
PRED:	The man who has sent her out of the house of her husband 's house will not go back to her , because she is unclean , and the Lord your God is unclean , and you shall not do evil in the land which the Lord your God has given you .
GOLD:	the first husband may not marry her again , for she has been defiled . That would be detestable to the Lord . You must not bring guilt upon the land the Lord your God is giving you as a special possession .

ID:	5780
INPUT:	Tsosts'id góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Dan dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin .
PRED:	And the seventh month the children of Dan according to their families , according to their families .
GOLD:	The seventh allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Dan .

ID:	5781
INPUT:	Tsin naazkaadii aláahgo yinant'áa dooígíí ak'ah yik'i yadeidooził biniyé dah diikaigo áliv tsin ádeididooniił , Nihinanít'áa dooleeł .
PRED:	Then the king of the trees went out to pour oil on the trees , and say to them , “ Your king will reign over us . ”
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	5782
INPUT:	Nihí , áłtsé Christ baa dadziisiidli'ígíí , Diyin God yee ayóó át'éii baa dahwii'niih dooleełgo nihik'i diilnii' .
PRED:	We are first first , and we have laid our hands on God 's glory .
GOLD:	God 's purpose was that we Jews who were the first to trust in Christ would bring praise and glory to God .

ID:	5783
INPUT:	Diyin God áádóó Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ , éí dahináanii índa daneeznáanii yaa nídóot'įįłii binááł , áádóó Jesus yidooltséłígíí índa bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii binahjį' ándishní ,
PRED:	I say to you , “ Jesus Christ , the living and the dead and the dead , and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ ,
GOLD:	I solemnly urge you in the presence of God and Christ Jesus , who will someday judge the living and the dead when he comes to set up his Kingdom :

ID:	5784
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ;
PRED:	The offering was a silver offering , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , and twenty shekels of fine flour mixed with oil .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	5785
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é éí diltłish bee atíbi'diilyaago diné nidaatseedii naa ahineezdee'go áádóó diné t'óó ahayóí dah ho'diijaa'go índa kin bee danił dzilgo bitł'ááh nídaastł'inii táá<unk> xǫ'go Iithiyópiya dine'é haa yínííł danilį́įgo haa daachxa doo .
PRED:	And the Egyptians shall fall by the sword , and the slain shall be slain by the sword , and the houses of many people shall be broken , and the foundations thereof shall cry for joy .
GOLD:	A sword will come against Egypt , and those who are slaughtered will cover the ground.Its wealth will be carried awayand its foundations destroyed.The land of Ethiopia will be ravished .

ID:	5786
INPUT:	Dził Záíyangi yínííł danilíinii łeeshch'iih bitsásk'ehgi nizhóníii áádóó yínííł bitsásk'ehgi ak'ah bee ił hózhóonii índa ąąh nahóókaadii bitsásk'ehgi aa ha'niih yee hadadít'éego baa dideesh'ááł , áko tsin naazkaadii t'áá ákogi át'éii Bóhólníihii k'iidííláhígíí dabidi'níi doo ; éí baa dahojiniih doo biniyé ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	And I will give thee the ashes in Zion , and in his place , and in his place , and in his place , and I will give them the glory of the righteous , that they may praise the Lord .
GOLD:	To all who mourn in Israel , he will give a crown of beauty for ashes , a joyous blessing instead of mourning , festive praise instead of despair.In their righteousness , they will be like great oaksthat the Lord has planted for his own glory .

ID:	5787
INPUT:	Shí ánísht'éhígi ádanoht'éego shí ałdó' t'áá nihígi át'éego yáshti' doogo át'é ; nihich'į' shitsii' néishgha'go saad nihik'ijį' yéideestsihgo át'é .
PRED:	I will speak like you , just as I am , and I will speak with you , and I will bring you on your head . ”
GOLD:	I could say the same things if you were in my place.I could spout off criticism and shake my head at you .

ID:	5788
INPUT:	Áko kéyahdóó kéédahat'ínígíí éí aláahgo naat'áanii Éíman yindahaz'ánígíí a łtso nideistseed , ákohgo haye' Josáíyah hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	So Josiah killed all the kings of the land , and they killed Josiah his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King Amon , and they made his son Josiah the next king .

ID:	5789
INPUT:	Áko Ííjipdóó óola áádóó béésh łigaii índa naalye'é da'ílíinii t'áá át'é yidoołnééł . Áko Líbiya dine'é índa Iithiyópiya dine'é bá nidaal'a'í danilį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	And he shall take all the vessels of Egypt , silver , and all the spoil of gold ; and he shall be his servants : and they shall be a servants of Ethiopia and Ethiopia .
GOLD:	He will gain control over the gold , silver , and treasures of Egypt , and the Libyans and Ethiopians will be his servants .

ID:	5790
INPUT:	Ásaa' bii' béésh łigaii bąąh hadilyį́hí béésh łigaii bá át'é , áádóó déédíljah góne' óola bii' dilyį́hí óola bá át'é , nidi Bóhólníihii éí ajéí nayínítaah .
PRED:	The silver is silver for silver , and gold is for them in the furnace ; but the heart of the Lord is a heart of heart .
GOLD:	Fire tests the purity of silver and gold , but the Lord tests the heart .

ID:	5791
INPUT:	nihí nihe'oodlą' binahjį' Diyin God bibee adziilii bee nihaa ádahayą́ągo yisdánihidoo'nilgo niiníłką́ądi yit'íní ánihidi'doolníiłgo hasht'enihi'dólzin .
PRED:	In the same way , we are ready to be able to be saved by the power of God , by the power of his power .
GOLD:	And through your faith , God is protecting you by his power until you receive this salvation , which is ready to be revealed on the last day for all to see .

ID:	5792
INPUT:	T'áá ákwíí bíní t'ááłá'í nítínígo łį́į́' bá ninájíłjoł áádóó łį́į́' bá niná'jíjihígi ádaat'éé nít'éé' . Áko t'áá ákwíí bíní t'ááłá'í nítínígo łį́į́' ání nahalingo yił kéédahat'íinii be'asdzą́ą́ yich'į' ádaaníí nít'éé' .
PRED:	And every morning they brought each man his horses , and as his horses ; and every morning they spake unto his neighbor as one morning .
GOLD:	They are well-fed , lusty stallions , each neighing for his neighbor 's wife .

ID:	5793
INPUT:	Nidi Bó'az ánáhodoo'niid , Nahastiin daaztsą́ą́dóó wóshdę́ę́' bizháá'áád nílíní t'áá át'é bá íinidzaaígíí bee shił hóóne' . Nizhé'é áádóó nimá índa nikéyah bits'ą́ą́' dah diniyáago doo ééhonísingi yíníyáá lá .
PRED:	But Boaz said to her , “ I have done all that you have done for her husband from the dead . I have left your father , your mother , your mother , your mother , and your mother . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , I know , ” Boaz replied . “ But I also know about everything you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband . I have heard how you left your father and mother and your own land to live here among complete strangers .

ID:	5794
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádabi'dil'ínígíí bitahjí jílį́į dooleełgo nizhdiní'ą́ , Féro bighandi t'óó kónígháníjį' nidi bąąhági át'éii ił honeełniígíí éí doo yiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	He appointed him to be the God of his people , who are not in the house of Pharaoh , but he rejected not the sin of sin .
GOLD:	He chose to share the oppression of God 's people instead of enjoying the fleeting pleasures of sin .

ID:	5795
INPUT:	Jóseph hazhé'é ábizhdííniid , Doo ákót'ée da , shizhé'é , dííyee' alą́ąjį' yizhchį́ ; éidígo nish'náájí bee bitsii't'áagi dah dílnííh .
PRED:	Joseph said to his father , “ No , my father , you are the firstborn , and put your hands on the head of his right hand . ”
GOLD:	“ No , my father , ” he said . “ This one is the firstborn . Put your right hand on his head . ”

ID:	5796
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand

ID:	5797
INPUT:	Éí bąągo t'áá át'é adinídíín bee nits'íís bił hool'ingo t'áadoo łahjį' bił chahałheełí , t'áá bee hool'iní i'dííłdláadgo ná adiníłdínígi át'éego t'áá át'é adinídíin dooleeł .
PRED:	Therefore all the light shall be light in darkness , and the light shall be light , as light shall be light .
GOLD:	If you are filled with light , with no dark corners , then your whole life will be radiant , as though a floodlight were filling you with light . ”

ID:	5798
INPUT:	Éí naat'áanii hoo'áałii ákǫ́ǫ́ nídídáahgo áadi shinááł ná'ádį́įh doo ; naat'áanii nilíinii yah a'atiin góne' yah adoogááł áádóó nihééhédáahgo éí chaha'oh haz'ání góne' ch'ééhédáah doo .
PRED:	And the prince shall come , and eat it before me : and the prince shall enter into the gate , and shall go into the inner court .
GOLD:	Only the prince himself may sit inside this gateway to feast in the Lord 's presence . But he may come and go only through the entry room of the gateway . ”

ID:	5799
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílak éí Béílam ííłní , Ts'ídá doo bidíníídzįįł da . Ts'ídá doo bik'ijiidíídliił da .
PRED:	Balak said to Balaam , “ You will not curse him . You will not bless him . ”
GOLD:	Then Balak said to Balaam , “ Fine , but if you wo n't curse them , at least do n't bless them ! ”

ID:	5800
INPUT:	Áko ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ naazínígíí éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go , Díí diné Iiláíjah yíká ání , dadííniid .
PRED:	Some of the men standing there heard this , saying , “ This man is Elijah . ”
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	5801
INPUT:	Abáíjam nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Abijah 's King Abijah of Israel
GOLD:	Abijam Rules in Judah

ID:	5802
INPUT:	Doo yá'ádaashóonii , shi'ana'í danilíinii índa shidadiilkaalii , éí naaldlooshii nidahalingo dashidoolghał biniyé shaatįįh yínáago dadeezgo'go naa'aníídee' .
PRED:	The wicked and my enemies have turned against me , and they have bowed down like wild animals .
GOLD:	When evil people come to devour me , when my enemies and foes attack me , they will stumble and fall .

ID:	5803
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go shił áhoodzaago , shoo , Diné Silį́į'ii nahalingo yá'ąąshdę́ę́' k'os bił yildohgo áádóó As'ahdę́ę́' Bíyoołkááł wolyéii yich'į' yigáałgo áádóó yił yaadaaskaigo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	In the night I saw that the Son of Man came down from heaven , and behold , a long cloud came down to heaven , and they went down with him .
GOLD:	As my vision continued that night , I saw someone like a son of man coming with the clouds of heaven . He approached the Ancient One and was led into his presence .

ID:	5804
INPUT:	Áádóó álílee ádaat'éii áádóó áhooníiłii Ííjip dine'é bitahgi aláahgo naat'áanii Féro wolyéii áádóó bikéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áyííł'įįdígíí ,
PRED:	And in the midst of Egypt , and in the midst of Pharaoh , and in all the land of Egypt ,
GOLD:	They did n't see the miraculous signs and wonders he performed in Egypt against Pharaoh and all his land .

ID:	5805
INPUT:	T'áadoo bahat'aadí ałjiłnii nilį́įgo áádóó t'áá łichí'ígo naagháago , t'áá hádí doo niizį́'ígi át'éego hó ałdó' doo honiizį́į' da .
PRED:	And he rejected him as a prostitute , and the nakedness of her nakedness , as she was not ashamed .
GOLD:	“ In the same way , I became disgusted with Oholibah and rejected her , just as I had rejected her sister , because she flaunted herself before them and gave herself to satisfy their lusts .

ID:	5806
INPUT:	Ákót'éego hadine'é bitahgóó ha'áłchíní éí doo hodílzin k'ehgo át'éii doo danilį́į́góó ahoolchíił doo ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii jidiyingo áhwíínísin .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Your descendants will be holy . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	so that he will not dishonor his descendants among his clan , for I am the Lord who makes him holy . ”

ID:	5807
INPUT:	Aye' éí bizhé'é bił nilį́ , índa naal'a'í éí binanit'a'í bił nilį́ . Áko aTaa' nishłį́įgo bee nihił nishłíiniishą' háájí ? Áádóó nihiNanit'a'í nishłį́įgo bee shits'ąąh hasti'iishą' háájí ? nihiłní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii . Náá'iiłniihii danohłíinii , shízhi' daah'įįd . Nidi ádadohní , Haash yit'éego nízhi' deiit'įįd ?
PRED:	The son is his father , and his servant is his master . And what is I , the Father ? And what is my master ? And what do ye say , O Lord of hosts ?
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says to the priests : “ A son honors his father , and a servant respects his master . If I am your father and master , where are the honor and respect I deserve ? You have shown contempt for my name ! “ But you ask , ‘ How have we ever shown contempt for your name ? '

ID:	5808
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł ninádahakahgo Bóhólníihii t'áá bí náhodidoo'áłígi ninádaha<unk> go , díí bee haz'áanii éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bich'į' nídeínółtahgo dayíists'ą́ą' doo .
PRED:	And all the children of Israel shall come before the Lord your God , and they shall hear the law of the Lord their God , which he shall give to them , and hear it .
GOLD:	you must read this Book of Instruction to all the people of Israel when they assemble before the Lord your God at the place he chooses .

ID:	5809
INPUT:	Hoda'ana'í ałdó' hade ádahósingo biyaa jizhjaa'go áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	And he brought him up to the enemy , and brought him to shame .
GOLD:	Their enemies crushed themand brought them under their cruel power .

ID:	5810
INPUT:	Áádóó hool'áádę́ę́' ahóyéel'áágóó hasht'eyiilaa ; bee haz'áanii ts'ídá doo bił yóó'ahodoogáałii áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he built for ever and ever ; he made his law forever and ever .
GOLD:	He set them in place forever and ever.His decree will never be revoked .

ID:	5811
INPUT:	Kintahgóó dah da'diitiindóó t'áá ałtso wódahgo nahaz'ánígíí íinilaago áádóó níighahgóó dahidiikáhígíí bich'į' ádí'iinilkąąhígíí bee índa íłjiłgo t'óó tsé'édinda í'diinilyaaígíí bee ayóó áníínílnin yę́ę doo ni'dóldingóó í'diinilyaa .
PRED:	And thou hast made the high places of the city , and hast made thee an high place , and hast made thee a prostitute , and hast made thee a prostitute , and a prostitute .
GOLD:	On every street corner you defiled your beauty , offering your body to every passerby in an endless stream of prostitution .

ID:	5812
INPUT:	Saul haye' Jánathan índa há nidaal'a'ígíí t'áá ałtso éí David dadiyoołhééł , bizhdííniid .
PRED:	Saul said to his son Jonathan and all his servants , “ He will kill David . ”
GOLD:	Saul now urged his servants and his son Jonathan to assassinate David . But Jonathan , because of his strong affection for David ,

ID:	5813
INPUT:	Bił kéédahwiit'íinii bináádiijahgo ádanihiinilaa , áádóó nihi'ana'í danilíinii bitahgóó dloh hanáltǫǫh .
PRED:	You have set us up against our neighbor , and I will be covered with all your enemies .
GOLD:	You have made us the scorn of neighboring nations.Our enemies treat us as a joke .

ID:	5814
INPUT:	Nihii' naazíinii Bóhólníihii yiba' ádaat'é ; nihíká análwo'ii índa nihinaage' nilį́ .
PRED:	The Lord is merciful to your soul ; he is our shield and shield .
GOLD:	We put our hope in the Lord.He is our help and our shield .

ID:	5815
INPUT:	Naaki yiłkaah bijį́ dóola yázhí naakits'áadahgo , deenásts'aa' naakigo índa dibé yázhí dį́į́'ts'áadahgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	On the second day you shall offer twelve bulls , twelve rams , fourteen male lambs without blemish .
GOLD:	“ On the second day of this seven-day festival , sacrifice twelve young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	5816
INPUT:	Bizéé'dóó aa ha'niih hólǫ́ǫgo ádeeshłííł ; nízaadi áádóó t'áá áhánígi dahólóonii bich'į' hasht'ehodít'é , hasht'ehodít'ée le' , ní Bóhólníihii , áko hadaałt'é ánáhodeeshdlííł .
PRED:	I will make peace with his mouth , and peace to those who are far away , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	bringing words of praise to their lips.May they have abundant peace , both near and far , ” says the Lord , who heals them .

ID:	5817
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar éí hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii daadziihígíí áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii índa diné t'áá ałtso yisnáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áádóó Bábilan kéyahgóó iinííłkaadii éí Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah díí saad naaltsoos yikáá' áyiilaago Jerúsalemdóó ákǫ́ǫ́ yich'į' áyiilaa .
PRED:	And Jeremiah wrote this book to Jeremiah the words of the prophet , and to the priests , and to the priests , and to all the people that were taken away from Jerusalem , and to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Jeremiah wrote a letter from Jerusalem to the elders , priests , prophets , and all the people who had been exiled to Babylon by King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	5818
INPUT:	Áko bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'gi didlidgo nááhániihígíí áádóó ak'áán nááhániihígíí áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihígíí índa hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihígíí bidił yik'íístahgo nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	He poured out his blood on the altar , the grain offering , the grain offering , the grain offering , and the drink offering , and the peace offering .
GOLD:	He presented a burnt offering and a grain offering , he poured out a liquid offering , and he sprinkled the blood of peace offerings on the altar .

ID:	5819
INPUT:	Áko Sámson éí asdzání ábizhdííniid , Ałtįįtł'óól t'ah ditłée'ii tsosts'idgo bee she'astł'ǫ́ǫgo lą́ą , áko t'áá ła' diné ádaat'éhígi át'éego doo shidziil da deeshłeeł .
PRED:	Samson said to the woman , “ I will take seven root , and I will not be strong as one of them . ”
GOLD:	Samson replied , “ If I were tied up with seven new bowstrings that have not yet been dried , I would become as weak as anyone else . ”

ID:	5820
INPUT:	Záíyan bich'é'é bił dahołne' , Jó'akon , Aláahgo niNanit'a'í nilíi<unk> 'ohgo í'dólzingo télii , Jó , éí télii yázhí yik'i dahsidáago nich'į' bił yigááł .
PRED:	Tell the daughter of Zion , “ Behold , the king is coming to you , and he will sit down on a donkey . ”
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Jerusalem , ‘ Look , your King is coming to you.He is humble , riding on a donkey — riding on a donkey 's colt . ' ”

ID:	5821
INPUT:	Nihílááh t'áá nihí tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz hádaaht'į́ , nidi nihinaanishígíí doo nihá bi'oh áńdoolníił da .
PRED:	Go and prepare wheat , but you will not be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able . ”
GOLD:	Go and get it yourselves . Find it wherever you can . But you must produce just as many bricks as before ! ”

ID:	5822
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go lą'í ádadííniid , Díí áhá'nínígíí t'áá íiyisí nantł'a ; háísh ałdó' yiyíists'ą́ą' doo ?
PRED:	When the disciples heard it , many of them said , “ This is a very bad thing , and who will hear it ? ”
GOLD:	Many of his disciples said , “ This is very hard to understand . How can anyone accept it ? ”

ID:	5823
INPUT:	Páílat ánáádoo'niid , Da' ákoósh aláahgo naat'áanii nílį́ ? Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii nishłínígíí bee háínídzíí' . Jó , t'áá aaníinii baa hashne' doo biniyé shi'dizhchį́ , índa díí biniyé nahasdzáán bikáa'gi níyá . T'áá ádzíłtso t'áá aanííjí dajílíinii éí dashizdiits'a' .
PRED:	Pilate answered , “ Are you the king ? ” Jesus answered , “ I have been born to the king . I have come to tell you the truth , and all the truth are true . ”
GOLD:	Pilate said , “ So you are a king ? ” Jesus responded , “ You say I am a king . Actually , I was born and came into the world to testify to the truth . All who love the truth recognize that what I say is true . ”

ID:	5824
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad baa hashniih doo . Bóhólníihii bizaad baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise the word of God ; I will praise the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	I praise God for what he has promised ; yes , I praise the Lord for what he has promised .

ID:	5825
INPUT:	Áádóó hodiyingo haz'ánígíí índa agháago hodiyingo haz'ánígíí éí t'áá áłah ákwe'é ałts'ą́ą́hjí dáádílkał naaki dahidínil .
PRED:	And they put two doors on each side of the sanctuary and on each side .
GOLD:	Both the sanctuary and the Most Holy Place had double doorways ,

ID:	5826
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , ni éí doo kin shá ádíílíił da , nidi niye' t'áá ni ná yizhchínígíí éí kin íidoolíiłgo bii' shízhi' baa ha'niih doo , níi ni' .
PRED:	But you shall not build a house for me , but you shall build a house for your son , that he may build a house for my name .
GOLD:	but you are not the one to do it . One of your own sons will build the Temple to honor me . '

ID:	5827
INPUT:	<unk> , Áshna , Níízib ,
PRED:	He said , “ I will give you what I have done .
GOLD:	Iphtah , Ashnah , Nezib ,

ID:	5828
INPUT:	Nidi ádíshní , Doodayéi , Bóhólníihii , háálá t'áá bóhólníhígíí índa doo deidą́ą́góó bee nihá haz'áanii éí ła' ts'ídá t'ah doo yishą́ą da .
PRED:	But I said , “ No , Lord , for I do not eat anything that I eat or clean . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , Lord , ' I replied . ‘ I have never eaten anything that our Jewish laws have declared impure or unclean . '

ID:	5829
INPUT:	Łahgo át'éego tsíńdadohkees ho'doo'niid
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	5830
INPUT:	Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é dah yinéełii bich'į' yit'íní ízh'diilyaa , áádóó Filístiya dine'é ádadííniid , Shoo , Hííbrew dine'é léi' adahasdzą́ą́góó ná'ádees'į́į́'dę́ę́' haazh'áázh lá .
PRED:	Then he appeared to the Philistines , and the Philistines said to him , “ Behold , there was a Hebrew Jew in his hand . ”
GOLD:	When the Philistines saw them coming , they shouted , “ Look ! The Hebrews are crawling out of their holes ! ”

ID:	5831
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , háishą' nízhi' doo yidísin da , áádóó doo yaa haniih da doo ? Jó , t'áá ni t'éiyá t'áá sáhí diníyin . Ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' naa áłah dooleełgonich'į' nidahałáa doo , háálá t'áá ákogi ááníiłii ííshjání silį́į́' .
PRED:	O Lord , who shall not fear thy name ? For thou art alone alone alone alone alone alone , and all the nations shall worship thee ; for thy righteousness hath appeared unto thee .
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	5832
INPUT:	Zíírah biye' Éíkan wolyéii Bóhólníihii bich'į' nideet'áanii yee doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áátįįdígíí biniinaa doósh Bóhólníihii yee hashké nídzinii yee Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso atíyiilaa da ? Áádóó éí doo ákwii áát'įįdígíí t'éiyá biniinaa diné náánáła' ałdó' ádabi'disdįįd .
PRED:	“ Because he did not listen to the Lord because he did what he had done . He did not punish all the congregation of Israel because of all their sins . And there was no one left there .
GOLD:	Did n't divine anger fall on the entire community of Israel when Achan , a member of the clan of Zerah , sinned by stealing the things set apart for the Lord ? He was not the only one who died because of his sin . ”

ID:	5833
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é yich'į' ádééhodoolzįįł , áádóó t'áá éí yoołkáałdi Ííjip dine'é Bóhólníihii yéédahodoosįįł ; t'áá aaníí , náádahidoonihii áádóó náádayiiłniihii yee nidahałáa dooleeł índa yee ádee hadidoodzihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' yee ádee hadahididziihgo yida'doolííł .
PRED:	In that day the Lord will appear to Egypt , and they will know that the Egyptians will worship the Lord , and they will bow down to the Lord , and they will bow down to the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord will make himself known to the Egyptians . Yes , they will know the Lord and will give their sacrifices and offerings to him . They will make a vow to the Lord and will keep it .

ID:	5834
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné nanítinii áádóó bee hosíníł'áanii bínabiníłtinii , éí bik'ihojidlí .
PRED:	Blessed is the man , O Lord , and the words of the law , and the law .
GOLD:	Joyful are those you discipline , Lord , those you teach with your instructions .

ID:	5835
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya diné naaghalgo David yiyiiłtsą́ągo t'óó yánahałt'i'go yeidloh , háálá t'ahdii ashkii t'óó łichíi'go bííyisii jílį́ .
PRED:	When the Philistine saw David , he was afraid , because he was very beautiful .
GOLD:	sneering in contempt at this ruddy-faced boy .

ID:	5836
INPUT:	ahóyéel'áágóó bibee'aa a'ááh hasinii éí miilgo ádazhnéelą́ą'go doo ákwii ádajit'ínígíí áádóó bee haz'áanii dajiitíhígíí índa ádił nida'jiilzíhígíí há yóó'anéidiyii'aahgo hak'ijidlí , nidi ádił oodzíí' bee bihodiit'i'ii yá naatłizh yę́ę doo yénálniih da doo ; jó , da'azhé'é yę́ę doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdígíí hada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi índa dį́įdi ałk'i ná'ázhchį́įjį' bik'i hwiileehgo bá nináhwiish'nííł .
PRED:	He will forgive their sins for ever and ever . He will forgive their sins and sins . He will forgive the sins of their ancestors . He will not remember the sins of their ancestors . He will punish the third generation of their ancestors .
GOLD:	I lavish unfailing love to a thousand generations.I forgive iniquity , rebellion , and sin.But I do not excuse the guilty.I lay the sins of the parents upon their children and grandchildren ; the entire family is affected — even children in the third and fourth generations . ”

ID:	5837
INPUT:	Nidi t'óó yówehda bee haa hane'ígíí adahideezdláád , áko t'óó ahayóí deididoots'į́į́ł biniyé áádóó bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí náádabidi'doodlááł biniyé haa áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	But the news of the Good News was gathered together to hear , and to hear and be healed .
GOLD:	But despite Jesus ' instructions , the report of his power spread even faster , and vast crowds came to hear him preach and to be healed of their diseases .

ID:	5838
INPUT:	Łah kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' diné nazhnitingo , hane' yá'át'éehii baa hojilne' , nít'éé' aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii haa yíkai ,
PRED:	One day he taught them in the temple , teaching the Good News , the chief priests , the elders , and the elders .
GOLD:	One day as Jesus was teaching the people and preaching the Good News in the Temple , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders came up to him .

ID:	5839
INPUT:	Áko diyingo naal'a'í éí ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ bidááhdę́ę́' naazínígíí áyidííniid , Éé' chinii baa doołtsóosgo nahjį' kódaohłééh . Áko ánááhodi'ní , Doo ákwii é'ét'éii yę́ę ná yóó'adish'aahgo éé' ílínígíí bee handideeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	Then the angel who stood before him said to those who stood before him , “ Take away the robe and put on it . ” And he said , “ Behold , I will give you the robe of iniquity . ”
GOLD:	So the angel said to the others standing there , “ Take off his filthy clothes. ” And turning to Jeshua he said , “ See , I have taken away your sins , and now I am giving you these fine new clothes . ”

ID:	5840
INPUT:	K'ad éí kodóó ch'íhínáahgo áádóó yah anáhídáahgo ahóyéel'áágóó Bóhólníihii naa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	Now go out and go in , and the Lord will keep you forever and ever .
GOLD:	The Lord keeps watch over you as you come and go , both now and forever .

ID:	5841
INPUT:	Shíttimgi Ízrel dine'é kééhat'į́įgo Mó'ab dine'é bitsi'ké yił ajił yaa nídiikai .
PRED:	The daughters of Israel went out with the daughters of Moab , and they went out with their daughters .
GOLD:	While the Israelites were camped at Acacia Grove , some of the men defiled themselves by having sexual relations with local Moabite women .

ID:	5842
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi bijéédaahkałii éí diyingo bee ak'e'da'ashchíinii deididoots'į́į́ł , índa doo da'oo'íinii doo bá bidayeet'į́į'ii áádóó chahałheeł biyi'dę́ę́' da'iidoołtsééł .
PRED:	In those days you will hear the words of the holy ones , and the blind will see their eyes from darkness and darkness .
GOLD:	In that day the deaf will hear words read from a book , and the blind will see through the gloom and darkness .

ID:	5843
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Díí asdzání la' kóní , Díí hinánígíí éí shí shiyáázh , áádóó daaztsánígíí éí ni niyáázh nít'éé' , áádóó ła'ígíí ání , Dooda , daaztsánígíí éí ni niyáázh nít'éé' , áádóó hinánígíí éí shí shiyáázh .
PRED:	The king said , “ This woman is my son , and the other is my son , and the other said , ‘ No , you are my son , and the other is my son . '
GOLD:	Then the king said , “ Let 's get the facts straight . Both of you claim the living child is yours , and each says that the dead one belongs to the other .

ID:	5844
INPUT:	Díí ałdó' nihijéí biyi'di baa nitsídaahkees : diné biye' t'áá hashkée neinitinígi át'éego Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá hashkée nanihinitin .
PRED:	Remember this in your heart , as the Lord your God gives you victory .
GOLD:	Think about it : Just as a parent disciplines a child , the Lord your God disciplines you for your own good .

ID:	5845
INPUT:	Áádóó télii éí Béílam ííłní , Da' doósh nitélii nishłį́įgo níí' sélį́į́' bijį́į́dóó wóshdę́ę́' díí jį́įjį' tándííyį́į da ? Łahdaásh kóniishłaa ? Ákohgo , Nidaga' , jidííniid .
PRED:	But Balaam said to Balaam , “ Have I not gathered my donkey from the day that I have given to this day ? ” And they answered , “ No ! ”
GOLD:	“ But I am the same donkey you have ridden all your life , ” the donkey answered . “ Have I ever done anything like this before ? ” “ No , ” Balaam admitted .

ID:	5846
INPUT:	Shoo , Bóhólníihii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ nihaidiní'ą́ ; éí bąą hastą́ą́h jį́ ná'ádleeh bik'eh bááh naaki jį́ bíighahgo nihaa néidi'ááh ; nihá haz'ánígi hazhó'ó hasht'edínóht'é ; bíni'dii tsosts'id jį́į́ góne' diné doo ła' nahgóó ch'ídoogáał da .
PRED:	Behold , the Sabbath of the Lord has given you , therefore I have given you two days , six days of bread , for the seventh day of the seventh month ; let no man pass through it .
GOLD:	They must realize that the Sabbath is the Lord 's gift to you . That is why he gives you a two-day supply on the sixth day , so there will be enough for two days . On the Sabbath day you must each stay in your place . Do not go out to pick up food on the seventh day . ”

ID:	5847
INPUT:	Áko ákwe'é Shííba yee hóozhi' ; éí bąą kin haal'áhígíí díí jį́į́góó Bíyer-shííba hoolyé .
PRED:	And Sheba called his name , therefore , therefore , that is why it is today to Beersheba .
GOLD:	So Isaac named the well Shibah ( which means “ oath ” ) . And to this day the town that grew up there is called Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) .

ID:	5848
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Bóhólníihii ííłní , Áko haniih ákwíinilaago Ííjip dine'é yaa dahodidoots'į́į́ł ; ( jó , nibee adziilii bee éí hatahdóó díí dine'é ch'ííní'eezh , )
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ If you have made an offering , you will hear the Egyptians , for you brought this people out of your hand ,
GOLD:	But Moses objected . “ What will the Egyptians think when they hear about it ? ” he asked the Lord . “ They know full well the power you displayed in rescuing your people from Egypt .

ID:	5849
INPUT:	Áádóó hazhé'é éí Ííjip kéyahdóó yá'ádaat'éehii télii neeznáá bił bik'i nida'astł'ǫ́ǫgo áádóó télii dabi'ádígíí neeznáago , neest'áanii áádóó ch'iyáán índa bist'e'go áádę́ę́' yikiin doogáałii bił bik'i nida'astł'ǫ́ǫgo , díí yich'į' áyiilaa .
PRED:	And he gave them ten donkeys , ten donkeys , and donkeys , and donkeys , and donkeys , and bread , and bread , and bread .
GOLD:	He also sent his father ten male donkeys loaded with the finest products of Egypt , and ten female donkeys loaded with grain and bread and other supplies he would need on his journey .

ID:	5850
INPUT:	Áthenzgi Paul naaghá
PRED:	Paul in Asia
GOLD:	Paul Preaches in Athens

ID:	5851
INPUT:	Yee nidaabaahii áádóó tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó tsindaabąąs índa diné ayóó ánéelą́ą'go yił náhookǫsdę́ę'go nihaa doonééł , áko t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' naagé áádóó naagééd dah deí'aahgo áádóó béésh ch'ah dabich'ahgo anadanihidooł'įįł . Áko yee nihaa nídadóot'įįłígíí baa dideesh'ááł áádóó t'áá bí bik'ehgo nihaa nídadóot'įįł .
PRED:	And they shall come to you with chariots , chariots , chariots , and a great army , and a great army on the north , and on every side , and on every side , and on every side , and on every side ; and I will give them to you according to their ways .
GOLD:	They will all come against you from the north with chariots , wagons , and a great army prepared for attack . They will take up positions on every side , surrounding you with men armed with shields and helmets . And I will hand you over to them for punishment so they can do with you as they please .

ID:	5852
INPUT:	Áko Jiiháshafat dabizhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazhgo David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa . Áko haye' Jiihóram hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers , and was buried in the city of David his father . And Jehoram his son reigned in his place .
GOLD:	When Jehoshaphat died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Jehoram became the next king .

ID:	5853
INPUT:	Háálá Jóseph dine'é naakigo dah yikahígíí éí Manáseh áádóó Íífreiyim dine'é ádaat'į́ ; éí bąą Líívai dine'é éí kéyah íí' dooleełígíí t'áadoo ła' yaa deideez'ą́ą da , nidi kin hadaas'áii yii' kéédahat'į́į dooígíí t'éiyá ; ákwii kéyah dahootsooígíí t'áá bił éí dabilį́į́' bá índa ákwii bee dahólónígíí bá nahaz'ą́ .
PRED:	For the sons of Joseph , the sons of Joseph , and the children of Ephraim , did not give them any inheritance , but the Levites dwell in their cities , and their fields , and their fields .
GOLD:	The descendants of Joseph had become two separate tribes — Manasseh and Ephraim . And the Levites were given no land at all , only towns to live in with surrounding pasturelands for their livestock and all their possessions .

ID:	5854
INPUT:	Da' shádahałchįįhísh ? ní Bóhólníihii . T'áá bí yee atíńda'dilnéehgo ádił nídahałąąhgo baa yáńdahasįįh .
PRED:	Is it not in my anger ? The Lord has spoken to her , and they have sinned against her .
GOLD:	Am I the one they are hurting ? ” asks the Lord . “ Most of all , they hurt themselves , to their own shame . ”

ID:	5855
INPUT:	Naaltsoos yisdisii iidííłk'ą́ą́'
PRED:	The Death of the Law
GOLD:	Baruch Reads the

ID:	5856
INPUT:	Dibé áádóó béégashii bá nidootsiłgo éí t'áá daats'í bidínóołnah ? Doodaii' tónteel biyi'dę́ę́' łóó' t'áá át'é áłah ádoolníiłgo t'áá daats'í bidínóołnah ?
PRED:	Can the sheep and cattle die ? Or will all the fish be gathered together from the sea ?
GOLD:	Even if we butchered all our flocks and herds , would that satisfy them ? Even if we caught all the fish in the sea , would that be enough ? ”

ID:	5857
INPUT:	Ákót'éego bich'į' yájíłti' , nít'éé' naat'áanii léi' haa níyáago hach'į' nitsidinígo'go ání , Áníídí yee' shitsi' daaztsą́ , nidi tį' ákǫ́ǫ́ diit'ashgo bik'i dah didíílnih , áko hinááh nídoodleeł .
PRED:	And as he spake unto them , a certain man came to him , and fell down before him , and said , Thy daughter is dead , but let us go , and take her away .
GOLD:	As Jesus was saying this , the leader of a synagogue came and knelt before him . “ My daughter has just died , ” he said , “ but you can bring her back to life again if you just come and lay your hand on her . ”

ID:	5858
INPUT:	Nihita' yidoozįįłgo kojí yá'át'ééh nihididooniiłgonihá niididoo'áałii nihee ádin .
PRED:	If he may know that it is not good for you , he will know that it is not good for you .
GOLD:	If only there were a mediator between us , someone who could bring us together .

ID:	5859
INPUT:	Áádóó Géed dine'é ałdó' kéyah íí' dadooleełii Mózes beidiní'ą́ ; éí Géed dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo baa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	And Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of Gad according to their families .
GOLD:	Moses had assigned the following area to the clans of the tribe of Gad .

ID:	5860
INPUT:	Senákerib wolyéii éí anaa' hasłį́į́'
PRED:	King Hezekiah of Assyria
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	5861
INPUT:	Áko Barábas bá ch'éézhníłt'e' , nidi Jesus éí hazaad k'ehgo nibí'íltsxasgo tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' bił i'doolkał biniyé baazhdiní'ą́ .
PRED:	So Pilate gave Jesus , but he gave him the word of Jesus , and gave him to be crucified .
GOLD:	So Pilate released Barabbas to them . He ordered Jesus flogged with a lead-tipped whip , then turned him over to the Roman soldiers to be crucified .

ID:	5862
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	and one male goat for a sin offering , and their drink offering , and their drink offering , and their drink offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	5863
INPUT:	Áko Mózes nádzáago diné aląąjį' naazíinii hágo yidííniidgo dabinááł díí saad t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bił ch'íjiiz'ą́ .
PRED:	So Moses went and called the elders , and called them all these words before the Lord , and told them all these words .
GOLD:	So Moses returned from the mountain and called together the elders of the people and told them everything the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	5864
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánáábidoo'niid , Thomas , shiiniłtsánígíí bąą shiisínídląąd . Doo dashiiłtséeh da nidi dashoodlą́ągo shaa dadzólíii éí bik'idahojidlí .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ You have seen me . Blessed are those who believe in me , but those who believe in me . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ You believe because you have seen me . Blessed are those who believe without seeing me . ”

ID:	5865
INPUT:	Áádóó shił dah dii'áazhgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí binaa haz'ą́ąjį' shił niní'áázh , nít'éé' shoo , Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bich'éédą́ą'gi chaha'oh áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí bita'gi diné naadiin ashdla' yilt'éego kin bii' sohodizin yits'ą́ąjį' dadéez'į́į'go ha'a'aahjigo jį́honaa'éí yich'į' nidahałáago yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	And he took me and brought me to the court of the Lord , and behold , the shadow of the house of the Lord was between twenty men and twenty men , before the east side of the temple , and bowed down before the sun .
GOLD:	Then he brought me into the inner courtyard of the Lord 's Temple . At the entrance to the sanctuary , between the entry room and the bronze altar , there were about twenty-five men with their backs to the sanctuary of the Lord . They were facing east , bowing low to the ground , worshiping the sun !

ID:	5866
INPUT:	Háálá Diné Silį́į'ii ałdó' doo bá na'al'a' da , nidi á naal'a' doo índa be'iina' ninéidiní'ą́ągo daaztsánígíí yee lą'í ninéidiyoołnih yiniyé níyá .
PRED:	For the Son of Man has not served him , but he has come to the end of his life , and to give many .
GOLD:	For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve others and to give his life as a ransom for many . ”

ID:	5867
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , nintsíkees danilíinii dooládó' ílį́įgo baa nitsískees da ! Dooládó' ayóó ánéelą́ą' da !
PRED:	How great is my thoughts , O God ! How great is my glory !
GOLD:	How precious are your thoughts about me , O God.They can not be numbered !

ID:	5868
INPUT:	Háálá t'áadoo nánídlínígóó ho'dizhchį́ , áádóó chahałheeł góne' ahojileeh , índa házhi' t'áadoo bééhoozįįh da .
PRED:	For he was born , and he was born in darkness , and in darkness he does not know his name .
GOLD:	His birth would have been meaningless , and he would have ended in darkness . He would n't even have had a name ,

ID:	5869
INPUT:	Shigaan bee Íífreiyim dine'é ádídeíníshtą'go yikah dooleełgóó bínabiníłtą́ą́' . Hadaałt'é áńdeishdlaa , nidi t'áadoo bił béédahoozin da .
PRED:	I have taught the people of Ephraim to walk in the way of Ephraim , but they do not know what I have made .
GOLD:	I myself taught Israel how to walk , leading him along by the hand.But he does n't know or even carethat it was I who took care of him .

ID:	5870
INPUT:	nidi níyol bidziilgo hoł bééhoozingo nídzísdzííd , áko <unk> deezhtłizhgo , Bóhólníihii , yisdáshíłteeh , jiníigo hazhdoolghaazh .
PRED:	But when he saw that the wind was strong , he was afraid , and he cried out , “ Lord , save me ! ”
GOLD:	But when he saw the strong wind and the waves , he was terrified and began to sink . “ Save me , Lord ! ” he shouted .

ID:	5871
INPUT:	<unk> tsah índa látsíní hadeezhí bílátsíín sinilgo dziiłtsą́ áádóó hadeezhí Rebékah bizaad dzidiizts'ą́ą'go , Diné kóshíłní , níigo éí diné bich'į' jiníyáago tó hahadleehdi ghą́ą́'ask'idii yíighahgóó sizį́įgo baazhníyá .
PRED:	And when he saw the hand of his hand , and his sister Rebekah heard the words of Rebekah , she said to me , “ The man came near to the man , and stood beside the camels . ”
GOLD:	He had seen the nose-ring and the bracelets on his sister 's wrists , and had heard Rebekah tell what the man had said . So he rushed out to the spring , where the man was still standing beside his camels .

ID:	5872
INPUT:	Doo nahałtingóó áádóó hadoh éí yas too' néiłtsih ; t'áá ákót'éego diné ádił nida'iisíi'ii jishcháá' nídabiłtsih .
PRED:	I have seen the rain and the rain , and I have poured out the blood of the dead .
GOLD:	The grave consumes sinnersjust as drought and heat consume snow .

ID:	5873
INPUT:	Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , shik'isóó ayóó'ánihósh'níinii , jó , nihokáa'gi badahojoobá'íii oodlą' deidoot'įįłgo índa Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bíí' dadooleełgo ts'ídá nábiizláá' . Éí ayóó'ádabó'níinii bíí' dooleełgo yee nihoní'ą́ .
PRED:	Listen , brothers and sisters , because the Kingdom of God has chosen the poor and the poor . He has chosen them to possess the kingdom of God .
GOLD:	Listen to me , dear brothers and sisters . Has n't God chosen the poor in this world to be rich in faith ? Are n't they the ones who will inherit the Kingdom he promised to those who love him ?

ID:	5874
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí hódahooł'aahii doo bił ákódaat'éégóó yaa nídaat'ínígíí doo jidiizts'ą́ą' da nidi hoł bééhoozingo ábizhdííniid , Díí saadísh bik'ee nidaałtal ?
PRED:	But Jesus did not hear what had happened to his disciples , but he said to them , “ Do n't you speak these words ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus was aware that his disciples were complaining , so he said to them , “ Does this offend you ?

ID:	5875
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shich'ijí nílínígíí bee dził niłdzilgo si'ánígíí nahalingo áshiinilaa ; doo shiníníł'į́į́góó shich'į' nahwii'náá nít'éé' .
PRED:	O Lord , you have made me like the mountain of my mountain ; You have made me trouble .
GOLD:	Your favor , O Lord , made me as secure as a mountain.Then you turned away from me , and I was shattered .

ID:	5876
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haadzíi'go ání , Jiníyáhádę́ę́' ákǫ́ǫ́ t'ą́ą́' nihéézhdoodááł ; díí kin haal'áajį' doo yah azhdoogáał da .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ He will return from his way , and he will not enter this city . ”
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , says the Lord .

ID:	5877
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá ałtso bitah dzideezghalgo diné bíla' bąąh dahaz'ánígíí ábizhdííniid , K'ídílchííd . Áko ákódziidzaago hála' bąąh dahaz'áanii hadaałt'é násdlį́į́' .
PRED:	And he looked at them , and said unto the men , Take up thine hand , and said unto the man , Take up thy hand . And it came to pass , that the hand was healed .
GOLD:	He looked around at them one by one and then said to the man , “ Hold out your hand. ” So the man held out his hand , and it was restored !

ID:	5878
INPUT:	Éí bąą ándishní , Habąąhági át'éii t'óó ahayóígíí há yóó'anídoot'ą́ągo bąą , t'áá íiyisí ayóó'í'jó'ní , nidi t'áá háiida a'ohgo há yóó'anídoot'ánígíí , t'áá éí a'ohgo í'jó'ní .
PRED:	Therefore I say to you , because many sins have forgiven many , but he that loves him shall love him .
GOLD:	“ I tell you , her sins — and they are many — have been forgiven , so she has shown me much love . But a person who is forgiven little shows only little love . ”

ID:	5879
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nant'á ; ts'ídá ayóó át'éii yee hadít'é ; Bóhólníihii hadít'éego dziil yee ákászaaz . Nahasdzáán ałdó' hazhó'ó hasht'e'niiní'ą́ągo ts'ídá doo nahjį' adoot'áał da .
PRED:	The Lord is great ; the Lord is his strength ; the earth will not be cut off .
GOLD:	The Lord is king ! He is robed in majesty.Indeed , the Lord is robed in majesty and armed with strength.The world stands firmand can not be shaken .

ID:	5880
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa dahane'
PRED:	The People of Egypt
GOLD:	Messages for the Nations

ID:	5881
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádajíshóonii éí diné yá'ádaat'éehii bich'į' yaa anídajiit'įįh doo , áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii éí diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bił yah ada'iiztiingi yaa anídajiit'įįh doo .
PRED:	The wicked shall bow down before the wicked , and the wicked shall bow down at the gate of the righteous .
GOLD:	Evil people will bow before good people ; the wicked will bow at the gates of the godly .

ID:	5882
INPUT:	Tó łą́ągi áádóó yódí t'óó ahayóigi kéédahoht'íinii , adádanoołníinii k'ad nihá nidahwiizt'i' .
PRED:	And now , you inhabitants of the waters , you inhabitants of the inhabitants of the earth , have become an end for you .
GOLD:	You are a city by a great river , a great center of commerce , but your end has come.The thread of your life is cut .

ID:	5883
INPUT:	Níłtsą́ biba' nidzíiztą́ nahalingo shiba' nidaháaztą́ą łeh nít'éé' ; níłtsą́ nidayólí nahalingo yídin ádaanéehgo k'adę́ę dashidiits'į́įh łeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	They sat on me as they sat down , and they looked like a cloud .
GOLD:	They longed for me to speak as people long for rain.They drank my words like a refreshing spring rain .

ID:	5884
INPUT:	Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii éí ał'ąą dine'é kéyah bíí' dadooleełii yá ałts'áyiizoh yę́ędą́ą́' áádóó Ádam bits'ą́ą́dóó deíchíihii ałts'áyiiznil yę́ędą́ą́' Ízrel dine'é ánéelt'e'ígíí bik'ehgo kéyah bá haadzoh .
PRED:	In the beginning of the Most High God gave an inheritance to the nations , according to their families , according to the number of the nations according to their families , according to the number of the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	When the Most High assigned lands to the nations , when he divided up the human race , he established the boundaries of the peoplesaccording to the number in his heavenly court .

ID:	5885
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bá nááhidoonihígíí nizhnílóóz ; éí tł'ízí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihígíí Ízrel dine'é bá nááhániihii át'éego nízdiidzį́į́z áádóó jiisxį́įgo t'áá átséedi ádił oodzíí'jí náájiisnii'ígi át'éego náájiisnii' .
PRED:	He brought the people of Israel as a sin offering for the people of Israel . He burned them up and offered them as a sin offering before him .
GOLD:	Next Aaron presented the offerings of the people . He slaughtered the people 's goat and presented it as an offering for their sin , just as he had first done with the offering for his own sin .

ID:	5886
INPUT:	Jéshuwa éí Jóíyakim há yizhchį́ , Jóíyakim éí Iiláíyashib há yizhchį́ , Iiláíyashib éí Jóíyada há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	Ezra was the father of Zerubbabel , Hananiah was the father of Hananiah .
GOLD:	Jeshua the high priest was the father of Joiakim.Joiakim was the father of Eliashib.Eliashib was the father of Joiada .

ID:	5887
INPUT:	Háálá k'adę́ę danihiistsééh , Diyin God yee shik'ijidlíii ła' bee nihił hodeeshnihgo nihí ałdó' bee nihik'ihwiizhdoodliiłgo bee nihidziil dadoohłeeł nisin .
PRED:	For when you see him , I will give you a blessing of blessing , and you will bless you with power .
GOLD:	For I long to visit you so I can bring you some spiritual gift that will help you grow strong in the Lord .

ID:	5888
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í nítínígo dį́į́' dabinii' áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo dį́į́' dabit'a' .
PRED:	Each of them had four faces , and each had four wings .
GOLD:	except that each had four faces and four wings .

ID:	5889
INPUT:	Áádóó Peter t'áá nízaadę́ę́' hakéé' yigáałgo , aláahgo náá'iiłniihii bikin binaa haz'ą́ągi biná'ástł'iní góne' yah ííyá ; ákwe'é kǫ' léi'gi siláo yił naháaztą́ągo ná'iidzííł .
PRED:	Peter followed him from a distance , and went into the courtyard of the high priest 's house , where there was a fire with him .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and went right into the high priest 's courtyard . There he sat with the guards , warming himself by the fire .

ID:	5890
INPUT:	Éí ákódzaadóó Bóhólníihii binááhániihii nááhidoonih bijį́į́ góne' bídahólníihii áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bada'áłchíní índa doo Ízrel dine'é k'ehjí hadadít'éii t'áá ałtso atídeeshłííł .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lord , that I will punish all the princes , and the princes , and the princes , and all the house of Israel .
GOLD:	“ On that day of judgment , ” says the Lord , “ I will punish the leaders and princes of Judahand all those following pagan customs .

ID:	5891
INPUT:	Áádóó tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yindanit'a'í éí Jiiháshafat dayiiłtsą́ągo ádaaní , Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í át'į́ ; éí bąą yił da'ahidoogą́ą́ł yiniyé yináshzhiizh , nidi Jiiháshafat hadoolghaazhgo Bóhólníihii bíká eelwod , áádóó Diyin God dabidiisnáa'go hats'ą́ąjį' dah diikai .
PRED:	When the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat , they said , “ The king of Israel is against us ! ” But Jehoshaphat cried out to the Lord , and they fled from him .
GOLD:	So when the Aramean chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat in his royal robes , they went after him . “ There is the king of Israel ! ” they shouted . But Jehoshaphat called out , and the Lord saved him . God helped him by turning the attackers away from him .

ID:	5892
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii éí baa áháshyą́ ; t'áá áłahájį' tó bił neheshkaah doo ; doo ła' haada yidoolíłígíí biniyé t'áá ákwíí tł'éé' índa t'áá ákwíí jį́ baa áháshyą́ .
PRED:	I am the Lord , and I will take care of it , and I will take care of it all night and night .
GOLD:	I , the Lord , will watch over it , watering it carefully.Day and night I will watch so no one can harm it .

ID:	5893
INPUT:	Áádóó Ánas wolyéii áłtsé yich'į' dahazlóóz , háálá éí Kéíyafas haadaaní nilį́ , áko t'áá éí náháhígíí biyi' aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ałdó' nilį́ .
PRED:	And they brought him to him first , because they were John . And he was also the high priest in those who were in him .
GOLD:	First they took him to Annas , since he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas , the high priest at that time .

ID:	5894
INPUT:	Áízak bá ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígíí t'áadoo nídadoodleełí da áádóó Ízrel bihodiyingo nahaz'áanii t'áá ádzaaí nídadoodleeł índa Jerobówam baa ałk'eedóó náás ahoolchíiłii bik'ijį' nishłį́įgo diltłish bee ádahodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	And I will not destroy the high places of Isaac , nor will the high places of Israel be destroyed , and I will cut off the sword of Jeroboam .
GOLD:	The pagan shrines of your ancestors will be ruined , and the temples of Israel will be destroyed ; I will bring the dynasty of King Jeroboam to a sudden end . ”

ID:	5895
INPUT:	Jó , éí nida'iiniihgóó áłchíní nidaháaztą́ągo yił nidaanéhígíí kót'éego yich'į' ádaanínígíí nidahalin , Tsin bee í'dílzoołí nihá nidasii'ne' , nidi doo da'oołzhiizh da ; nihich'į' atídadiniidlį́į́' , nidi nihí t'áadoo daohcha da .
PRED:	For we have been like children sitting with us , and we have put our voice on us , but we have not cried out to you , but you did not weep .
GOLD:	They are like children playing a game in the public square . They complain to their friends , ‘ We played wedding songs , and you did n't dance , so we played funeral songs , and you did n't weep . '

ID:	5896
INPUT:	<unk> ahéénátł'ingo ní'áhígíí t'áá dabinááł bighá'níníiłgo niyéél bił bighá'níłjiid .
PRED:	He brought the wall in front of the wall , and brought them into the midst of the wall .
GOLD:	Dig a hole through the wall while they are watching and go out through it .

ID:	5897
INPUT:	Ákohgo díí nihada'áłchíní bee bił dahołne'go bił béédahodoozįįł , Ízrel dine'é bá díí Jórdan tooh ha'naa nihoníłtseiigo tsé'naa niníná .
PRED:	“ Tell your children , ‘ This is what you have said to them : ‘ This is the Jordan River River . ' ”
GOLD:	Then you can tell them , ‘ This is where the Israelites crossed the Jordan on dry ground . '

ID:	5898
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , T'áá háiida díí tó yoodlą́'ígíí éí dibáá' náádoodleeł ,
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ If you drink the cup of water , you will drink . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Anyone who drinks this water will soon become thirsty again .

ID:	5899
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné nílíinii , Gag bich'į' handziihgo kóbidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Éí bijį́ Ízrel shidine'é bohoníłdzilgo kééhat'į́įgo ts'ídá nił bééhózin doo .
PRED:	“ Therefore , son of man , say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord God says : ‘ On that day you will know that I will establish my people Israel .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , son of man , prophesy against Gog . Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : When my people are living in peace in their land , then you will rouse yourself .

ID:	5900
INPUT:	Béégashii dziisxíinii éí diné dziisxínígíí bił aheełt'é ; dibé yázhí náádziisnii'ii éí łééchąą'í bik'os k'ízhníti'ígíí bił aheełt'é ; ch'iyáán náájiiłniihígíí éí bisóodi bidił náájiiłniihígíí bił aheełt'é , índa t'áá háiida tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii náájiiłniihígíí éí e'elyaii bich'į' nahojiłá nahalin . T'áá aaníí , t'áá bí deinízinígíí bik'ehgo nideideez'ą́ , áádóó t'óó baa'ihii yaa naakaígíí bił dahóshǫ́ .
PRED:	The ox is like a garment , and the lamb which is in the cloud , and the blood of the dogs , and the blood of the blood of the altar is like the altar , and the altar is an offering .
GOLD:	But those who choose their own ways — delighting in their detestable sins — will not have their offerings accepted.When such people sacrifice a bull , it is no more acceptable than a human sacrifice.When they sacrifice a lamb , it 's as though they had sacrificed a dog ! When they bring an offering of grain , they might as well offer the blood of a pig.When they burn frankincense , it 's as if they had blessed an idol .

ID:	5901
INPUT:	Samériya kéyahdi dził daní'áhígíí bighą́ą́'góó ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'ináádadidoohdlééł . K'ééda'didléehii éí k'ida'didooléełgo nídeineest'áanii łikango deiyą́ą doo .
PRED:	You shall plant vineyards on the mountains of Samaria ; they shall eat the fruit of the harvest , and eat the fruit of them .
GOLD:	Again you will plant your vineyards on the mountains of Samariaand eat from your own gardens there .

ID:	5902
INPUT:	Áádóó nitsínáásíkéezgo oo'áłígíí biyaagi doo nidadilna'ii łahda t'áá baa honinééh , índa dahayóii anaa'gi łahda t'áá bik'eh hodidleeh áádóó dahóyáanii bááh łahda doo shóidoołt'eeł da índa diné ak'idadi'yiitįįhii łahda doo adoot'įįł da áádóó diné da'iichįįhii łahda doo bich'odaha'níígóó yiiłtsą́ , áko t'áá ałtso bá bik'íhwiilzhíísh áádóó bá ashja da'ale' .
PRED:	And I have turned again , and do not do anything that is under the sun , and to give bread , and to the wise , and to the wise , and to the wise , and to the wise , and to the poor , and to all the people .
GOLD:	I have observed something else under the sun . The fastest runner does n't always win the race , and the strongest warrior does n't always win the battle . The wise sometimes go hungry , and the skillful are not necessarily wealthy . And those who are educated do n't always lead successful lives . It is all decided by chance , by being in the right place at the right time .

ID:	5903
INPUT:	Táir kin haal'áagi háísh yik'ijį' nahaz'ą́ ? Éíyee' náádaałahgóó naat'áanii ninádayii'nííł ; éíyee' baa nida'iiniihí naat'áanii danilį́ ; éíyee' baa nida'iiniihí nihokáá'góó diné baa yáhásinii danilį́ .
PRED:	Who is it against Tyre ? The princes of Tyre is destroyed ; the princes of the earth is a reproach .
GOLD:	Who has brought this disaster on Tyre , that great creator of kingdoms ? Her traders were all princes , her merchants were nobles .

ID:	5904
INPUT:	Díí éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá nidaal'a' ; Júdah kéyahgi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' kin hadaas'á ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astłinígóó siláo niyiiznilígíí ałdó' aláahgo naat'áanii yá nidaal'a' .
PRED:	These are the servants of the king , who had been in all the cities of Judah , in all the cities of Judah .
GOLD:	These were the troops stationed in Jerusalem to serve the king , besides those Jehoshaphat stationed in the fortified towns throughout Judah .

ID:	5905
INPUT:	Áadi lá índa tónteel bibąąhgóó séí yíl'áhígíí biláahgo áníł<unk> doo ni ; díí lá biniinaa t'áá na'níle'dii hahásdzíi' ni .
PRED:	There you will be more than the sand of the sea , because I have spoken with you .
GOLD:	they would outweigh all the sands of the sea.That is why I spoke impulsively .

ID:	5906
INPUT:	Jó , dahináanii bitahdi diné hak'ee bił nidahooyeehgo áshłaa ; doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhii danilíinii diltłish bee nidaaztseedii bitahdi Féro áádóó t'óó ahayóí bisiláo dah yinééł nít'éé' yę́ę bił yóó'ádahodi'doolnííł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	For I have put them in the midst of the living , and the uncircumcised shall be slain in the midst of the sword , and in the midst of Pharaoh , and in the midst of his army , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	Although I have caused his terror to fall upon all the living , Pharaoh and his hordes will lie there among the outcasts who were slaughtered by the sword . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5907
INPUT:	nidi tsosts'id jínígíí éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God biháá'áyį́į́h jį́ át'é , áko éí bijį́ t'áá ha'át'éegoda doo nidoolnish da , ni lá índa niye' ałdó' dooda , nitsi' ałdó' dooda , diné ná naalte' ałdó' dooda , asdzání ná naalte' ałdó' dooda , nibéégashii nidi dooda , nitélii nidi dooda , nilį́į́' ał'ąą ádaat'éii nidi dooda , dé'éyóní t'óó átsééd nił kééhat'íinii nidi ałdó' doo nidoolnish da . Áko diné ná naal'a'í áádóó asdzání ná naal'a'í t'áá nigi át'éego hááhályį́įh doo .
PRED:	But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord your God , and you shall do no work on that day . You also your son , your daughter , your servant , your servant , your servant , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your cattle , as you live .
GOLD:	but the seventh day is a Sabbath day of rest dedicated to the Lord your God . On that day no one in your household may do any work . This includes you , your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , your oxen and donkeys and other livestock , and any foreigners living among you . All your male and female servants must rest as you do .

ID:	5908
INPUT:	I'íí'ą́ągo chaha'oh iildóhígíí nahonishłingo ááshdįįł ; nahachagiitsoh níyol yáábiiłhą́hígíí nahonishłin .
PRED:	I am like the sun , like a shadow of the sun ; I am like the locusts .
GOLD:	I am fading like a shadow at dusk ; I am brushed off like a locust .

ID:	5909
INPUT:	Yót'ááh hiníláii bich'ą́ą́h k'os nídiilkǫǫhgo ánáyiil'įįh ; nahasdzáán bá níłtsą́ hasht'ééyiil'įįh ; dziłgóó ch'il hááhinoot'į́įłgo áyósin .
PRED:	He makes the clouds of the sky ; He makes the earth ; He makes the earth grow up on the mountains .
GOLD:	He covers the heavens with clouds , provides rain for the earth , and makes the grass grow in mountain pastures .

ID:	5910
INPUT:	T'áá díkwíí nołt'éhígo doohdzih ; azhą́ yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' yíl'áhígi ánóo<unk> nít'éé' nidi , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God áníinii doo bik'eh dahonoł'į́į da .
PRED:	And ye shall speak a few days , even in the stars of heaven , but ye shall not obey the voice of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Though you become as numerous as the stars in the sky , few of you will be left because you would not listen to the Lord your God .

ID:	5911
INPUT:	Shits'in t'áá át'é yídéeshtahgo bíneesh'ą́ ; dashiníł'į́įgo dashidiniilgęęzh ;
PRED:	I have seen all my bones ; they see me , and see me .
GOLD:	I can count all my bones.My enemies stare at me and gloat .

ID:	5912
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Díí hastiin éí bee haz'áanii doo yik'eh át'éégóó Diyin God bich'į' nahadlá níigo diné yíni' yá ádahale' .
PRED:	saying , “ This man has not obeyed the law , and let the people go down to God . ”
GOLD:	They accused Paul of “ persuading people to worship God in ways that are contrary to our law . ”

ID:	5913
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii t'áá ákogi ájít'éhígíí yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo , áko doo ákwii é'ét'éii baa nijigháago , éí bik'ee dazhdootsaał ; doo ákwii ájíít'įįdii bik'ee dazhdootsaał .
PRED:	The righteous will turn away the righteous from their sins , and he will die in their iniquity .
GOLD:	When righteous people turn from their righteous behavior and start doing sinful things , they will die for it . Yes , they will die because of their sinful deeds .

ID:	5914
INPUT:	Tsį́įłgo haasdzíi'go ádííniid , Nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso dabiyooch'íidii danilį́ .
PRED:	When she came , she said , “ All the world are lies . ”
GOLD:	In my anxiety I cried out to you , “ These people are all liars ! ”

ID:	5915
INPUT:	David áádóó naat'áanii danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę éí kin bii' sohodizin yindaal'a'ii Néthinim wolyéii Líívai dine'é yíká anídaajah doo biniyé nideiznilii éí Néthinim dine'é naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin ánéelą́ą'go éí t'áá ałtso bízhi' naaltsoos dabikáá' .
PRED:	And all the princes of the princes of the house of David , were two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and two hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	and 220 Temple servants . The Temple servants were assistants to the Levites — a group of Temple workers first instituted by King David and his officials . They were all listed by name .

ID:	5916
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ázhdííniid , Ak'ah tóshjeeh t'ááłáhídi neeznádiin bee shąąh háá'á . Áádóó ánááhodoo'niid , Nąąh háá'áhígíí nídiiłtsóosgo tsį́įłgo nídaahgo , t'áá ashdladiinígo ánílééh .
PRED:	Then he said , “ I have a hundred olive oil . ” And he said , “ Take up quickly , and make five . ”
GOLD:	The man replied , ‘ I owe him 800 gallons of olive oil . ' So the manager told him , ‘ Take the bill and quickly change it to 400 gallons . '

ID:	5917
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Ííjip kéyahdi néínídzáago bik'ee t'óó ayóigo áhooníiłii nílák'edíí'ánígíí Féro binááł ádadííliił , nidi Féro bijéí deestł'isgo diné doo yéé'doołnih da .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ When you come into Egypt , you will do many wonders in the sight of Pharaoh , but Pharaoh will not let the people go . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord told Moses , “ When you arrive back in Egypt , go to Pharaoh and perform all the miracles I have empowered you to do . But I will harden his heart so he will refuse to let the people go .

ID:	5918
INPUT:	éigi át'éego doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó doo hadeesdzih da , doodaii' na'adlo' doo ła' bee hadeesdzih da .
PRED:	So I will not speak evil , neither will I speak anything .
GOLD:	my lips will speak no evil , and my tongue will speak no lies .

ID:	5919
INPUT:	Ákohgo hodílzingo doo adą́ baa nisiikai áádóó díí biniyé nihiDiyin God nídeisiikango nihisodizin nihá yidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then we cried out to our God , and he heard this prayer for us .
GOLD:	So we fasted and earnestly prayed that our God would take care of us , and he heard our prayer .

ID:	5920
INPUT:	Áko Goláíyath sizį́įgo Ízrel dine'é bisiláo dah yinéłígíí yich'į' hadoolghaazhgo ání , Ha'át'éegoshą' anaa' biniyé ch'ínooná ? Da' shíísh doo Filístiya dine'é <unk> <unk> da ? Áádóó nihíísh doo Saul binaal'a'í danohłį́į da ? Diné ła' nídadoołteehgo bíni'dii shich'į' hididááh .
PRED:	He stood in front of the army of Israel cried out to him , “ Why did you go out to battle ? Do n't you want me to go out to battle ? Do n't you be a servant of Saul ? ”
GOLD:	Goliath stood and shouted a taunt across to the Israelites . “ Why are you all coming out to fight ? ” he called . “ I am the Philistine champion , but you are only the servants of Saul . Choose one man to come down here and fight me !

ID:	5921
INPUT:	bá nijil'a'í éí ándahwii'aahii yich'į' hoł doo'ash , índa bá nijil'a'í éí ch'é'étiinjį' hoł doo'ashgo dáádílkał , doodaii' ch'é'étiin siláii bik'ijį' tsah yee hajaa' yighá'dootsih , ákót'éego t'éiyá hool'áágóó bá nijil'a' doo .
PRED:	And he shall bring him to the judges , and his servant shall bring him into the gate , and shall put his hand upon the door , or upon the door , or upon the door ; and he shall serve him forever .
GOLD:	If he does this , his master must present him before God . Then his master must take him to the door or doorpost and publicly pierce his ear with an awl . After that , the slave will serve his master for life .

ID:	5922
INPUT:	Jó'akon , t'áá ádzaagóó yik'i hodii'ą́ągo kóní , Nitsi' doo bizháán naagháa da lá . Ákondi kǫ́ǫ́ díí shitsi' éí diné bee ádingo bee bééhózinii át'é . Áádóó kin haal'áádóó hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii bidáahjį' éé' bee ééhózinígíí niidoołkał .
PRED:	Behold , it is a witness against her , and said , My daughter is not a virgin . But this man is a sign of my daughter . And the elders of the city shall put a robe before her .
GOLD:	He has accused her of shameful conduct , saying , “ I discovered that your daughter was not a virgin. ” But here is the proof of my daughter 's virginity . ' Then they must spread her bed sheet before the elders .

ID:	5923
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bibi'oh adidilyéehii kintahdóó dego dah diildohgo kin haal'áádóó ha'a'aahjígo dził si'ánígíí bikáá' niildoh .
PRED:	And the glory of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) was lifted up from the midst of the city , from the east side of the city .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord went up from the city and stopped above the mountain to the east .

ID:	5924
INPUT:	Áko Aizéíyah éí Heziikáíyah áyidííniid , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ánínígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' :
PRED:	Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to the word of the Lord of hosts ,
GOLD:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies :

ID:	5925
INPUT:	Bik'i hodiit'áanii índa ak'i dahodii'áanii t'áadoo ałch'į' nii'níłí , áádóó bik'i hodiit'áanii ák'i hadidoodzihgi t'áadoo bá ashja'aléhí , diné ninádidoot'áałgi Rome dine'é doo yee nahas'ą́ą da , dishní .
PRED:	Do n't let the prince and against them , and do n't let the prince speak against them , and I say to them , ‘ I am not able to kill a man in Asia . '
GOLD:	I pointed out to them that Roman law does not convict people without a trial . They must be given an opportunity to confront their accusers and defend themselves .

ID:	5926
INPUT:	Háálá átséedi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go áyidííniid ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	For the Lord had said to Moses ,

ID:	5927
INPUT:	Naaltsoos yisdisii ła' nínáádiitįįhgo átsédą́ą́' naaltsoos yisdisii saad bee bik'e'ashchíinii éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihóíyakim iidííłk'ą́'ígíí t'áá éí saad naaltsoos bikáa'gi bee bik'e'náá'dííłchííł .
PRED:	Take another scroll , and write it in the book of the book of the book of the book of the book of the king of Judah , which is written in the fire of the king of Judah .
GOLD:	“ Get another scroll , and write everything again just as you did on the scroll King Jehoiakim burned .

ID:	5928
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí béésh łitsoii bee <unk> <unk> béé'jiidlaago tsin adzíítsigo bąąh dah dzistį́ ; diné t'áá háiida tł'iish bishxashii éí tł'iish dah hidiilt'e'ígíí yik'i níghalii éí hináa doo .
PRED:	And Moses let them go out of bronze , and put them on a tree , and every man that hath put his hand upon the serpent shall live .
GOLD:	So Moses made a snake out of bronze and attached it to a pole . Then anyone who was bitten by a snake could look at the bronze snake and be healed !

ID:	5929
INPUT:	Áádóó náádadi'yoołnihgo bááh náádahołniihígíí bił dibé yázhí tsosts'idgo ła' béédááhaaí dabiką'ígíí hadaałt'éii áádóó dóola yázhí t'ááłá'ígo índa deenásts'aa' naakigo éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii ádaat'éego ak'áán nááhániihii áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go didlidgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' łikání halchinii át'éego náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord , seven male lambs a year old , two male lambs , one ram , and two male lambs , for a burnt offering made by fire to the Lord .
GOLD:	Along with the bread , present seven one-year-old male lambs with no defects , one young bull , and two rams as burnt offerings to the Lord . These burnt offerings , together with the grain offerings and liquid offerings , will be a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5930
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman ání , Diné ílíinii jílį́įgo hatsii' t'ááł á'í nidi doo ła' ni'jį' nidoodił da , nidi doo yá'ádaashóonii bee haho'deel'į́į'go éí dazdootsaał .
PRED:	Solomon said , “ No one is the head of a man 's head , but he will die . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	5931
INPUT:	Niha'áłchíní dadidoodliłgo Mólek diyin bidi'níinii t'áadoo bich'į' ninádahidoh'aahí , doodaii' nihiDiyin God bízhi' doo dílzingóó doo ádadoohłíił da . Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ .
PRED:	You shall not go to the name of the Lord your God , nor shall you go to the name of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not permit any of your children to be offered as a sacrifice to Molech , for you must not bring shame on the name of your God . I am the Lord .

ID:	5932
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá háiida díí áłchíní yázhígi át'éego a'ohgo ádaa nitsídzíkeesígíí , éí yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biyi'di aláahgo ayóó át'éii jílį́ .
PRED:	Therefore , everyone who is least little children , is greater than these little children , in the Kingdom of heaven .
GOLD:	So anyone who becomes as humble as this little child is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	5933
INPUT:	éí ni'ana'í danilíinii ayóó'ííní'ní índa nik'is danilíinii éí jiiníłá ; jó , díí jį́ díí bee ííshją́ą́ ádi'nilyaa : naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó nidaal'a'í danilíinii t'áadoo danilínígóó baa nitsíníkees . Jó , díí jį́ kót'éego naa ákoniizį́į́' : Ábsalam hináago áádóó nihí éí díí jį́ ałtso nanihi'diztseedgo ákót'éego t'éiyá nił bik'e'ehwiih doo nít'éé' lá .
PRED:	You love your enemies , and hate your brothers , for this day you know that the princes and his officials and his officials have been filled with you today , because you have been filled with Absalom today .
GOLD:	You seem to love those who hate you and hate those who love you . You have made it clear today that your commanders and troops mean nothing to you . It seems that if Absalom had lived and all of us had died , you would be pleased .

ID:	5934
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples
GOLD:	The Authority of Jesus Challenged

ID:	5935
INPUT:	Áádóó Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit' a'í <unk> éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' anaa' hasłį́į́' , áko Ménahem bee óhólnííh bidziilgo jótą' doo biniyé <unk> háká adoolwołgo béésh łigaii tálent wolyéhígíí t'ááłáhídi míilgo baazhnínil .
PRED:	And the king of Assyria fought against Israel ; and he gave him a thousand shekels of silver , a thousand shekels of silver .
GOLD:	Then King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria invaded the land . But Menahem paid him thirty-seven tons of silver to gain his support in tightening his grip on royal power .

ID:	5936
INPUT:	Doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhída bąą t'áá ádzaagóó ádee hazdoodzí'ígíí éí doo t'óó bíighahígo ninázh'doodléeł da , nidi bą́ą́h ílínígíí ashdla'go aháádzooígíí t'ááłá'í bínéizdoozohgo ninázh'doodlééł , áko doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii át'éego nááhániih bijį́į́ góne' éí bíí' ílíinii baa nízh'doo'nił .
PRED:	Or if he does anything , he shall not make a vow , but he shall make the fifth part of the fifth part of it , and he shall give it to him in the day of his offering .
GOLD:	or anything obtained by swearing falsely . You must make restitution by paying the full price plus an additional 20 percent to the person you have harmed . On the same day you must present a guilt offering .

ID:	5937
INPUT:	áádóó ná'áshjaa' yázhí áádóó toohjį' noołnahii índa ná'áshjaatsoh ,
PRED:	and the little , and the little , and the children of the river ,
GOLD:	the little owl , the cormorant , the great owl ,

ID:	5938
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ááníiłii índa nibee yisdá'iildéehii t'áá ákwíí jį́ baa hashne' doo , háálá ákónéelą́'ígíí doo shił bééhózin da .
PRED:	I will tell the righteous and salvation all day ; for I do not know how many things are .
GOLD:	I will tell everyone about your righteousness.All day long I will proclaim your saving power , though I am not skilled with words .

ID:	5939
INPUT:	Áádóó Het dine'é , Ámor dine'é , Píírez dine'é , Jííbas dine'é índa Háíva dine'é t'áá ałtso daadzí'ígíí éí doo Ízrel dine'é danilíinii
PRED:	And all the words of the Hittites , the Hittites , the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , and the Jebusites , which were not of Israel .
GOLD:	There were still some people living in the land who were not Israelites , including the Hittites , Amorites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	5940
INPUT:	Ba'át'e' ádaadinii bich'į' na'át'e' ádingo í'díínílzin , áádóó ák'edahal'íinii bik'ijį' nílį́įgo í'díínílzin .
PRED:	You are pure to the pure , and you are against the blind .
GOLD:	To the pure you show yourself pure , but to the crooked you show yourself shrewd .

ID:	5941
INPUT:	Áko éidí dah diikaigo , Jesus éí diné yíl'áhígíí bich'į' John baa ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní , Ha'át'íishą' dadínóoł'įįłgo honoojíígóó nidasoohkai ? Lók'aa' níyol bighádígíí daats'í ?
PRED:	So they went out and said to John , “ Why did you look at the wilderness ? How did you see the wind ? ”
GOLD:	As John 's disciples were leaving , Jesus began talking about him to the crowds . “ What kind of man did you go into the wilderness to see ? Was he a weak reed , swayed by every breath of wind ?

ID:	5942
INPUT:	Nidi Íísa hadááh yílwodgo hazénázhchid , áádóó hazts'ǫs , áko t'áá ájíłah jííchah .
PRED:	But Esau went out to meet him , and touched him , and kissed him .
GOLD:	Then Esau ran to meet him and embraced him , threw his arms around his neck , and kissed him . And they both wept .

ID:	5943
INPUT:	Nít'éé' t'áá éí bijį́ Sádjusii danilíinii haa yíkai , éí aninéédę́ę́' doo náá'di'yiijeeh da daaní , áko nidahódééłkidgo
PRED:	On that day the Pharisees came to Jesus . They said , “ The dead is not raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	That same day Jesus was approached by some Sadducees — religious leaders who say there is no resurrection from the dead . They posed this question :

ID:	5944
INPUT:	Kót'éego Sálaman éí Abáíyathar joolyéii Bóhólníihii bich'į' doo náá'iiłniihii náájídlį́į da doogo t'óó nahjį' hahóółt'e' . Éí Bóhólníihii t'áá bí bizaad bohodoolníiłgo Sháíloh haz'ánídi Íílai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii bídéét'i'go yee haadzíí' nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Solomon did not want to sacrifice to the Lord for Abiathar the priest . The word of the Lord spoke to Eli in Shiloh .
GOLD:	So Solomon deposed Abiathar from his position as priest of the Lord , thereby fulfilling the prophecy the Lord had given at Shiloh concerning the descendants of Eli .

ID:	5945
INPUT:	Jóseph hánaaíké dziiłtsą́ągo t'áá ałtso béédahodzísin , nidi bich'į' doo ádééhodzílzin da , áádóó t'áá na'níle'dii bich'į' hadziisdzíi'go ájíní , Háádę́ę'shą' naahkai ? bizhdííniid . Áko ádadííniid , Kéínan kéyahdę́ę́' ádeit'į́ . Ch'iyáán ła' nidahidiilnih biniyé niikai .
PRED:	When Joseph saw all his brothers , they did not fear him , but he came and said to them , “ Where do you come from ? ” And they said to them , “ Where are you going out of the land of Canaan ? ”
GOLD:	Joseph recognized his brothers instantly , but he pretended to be a stranger and spoke harshly to them . “ Where are you from ? ” he demanded. “ From the land of Canaan , ” they replied . “ We have come to buy food . ”

ID:	5946
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jóseph ádííniid , Nihibéeso ádaasdįįdgo nihilį́į́' shaa dahohníiłgo nihilį́į́' bideená nihadi'yeestsoł .
PRED:	Joseph said to them , “ Take the money for us , and bring you to me , and I will take you and take you away . ”
GOLD:	Joseph replied , “ Since your money is gone , bring me your livestock . I will give you food in exchange for your livestock . ”

ID:	5947
INPUT:	Niná'iilyééjí bee nahaz'áanii
PRED:	The Law of God
GOLD:	Protection of Property

ID:	5948
INPUT:	Áko ałtso ádahoséłdįįd ; tídahodiishłaago t'áadoo náádahizhdii'na' da ; t'áá aaníí shiyaajį' naa'ahizhneezdee' .
PRED:	And I destroyed them , and destroyed them , and they did not rise up ; yea , they fell down before me .
GOLD:	I consumed them ; I struck them down so they did not get up ; they fell beneath my feet .

ID:	5949
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii yigháahgo doo ił ni'íldįįh ałdó' yił yighááh , áádóó doo ił ídlį́ haleehgo ánahat'i' ałdó' haleeh .
PRED:	When the wicked come , they will die , and when they come , they will die .
GOLD:	Doing wrong leads to disgrace , and scandalous behavior brings contempt .

ID:	5950
INPUT:	Éí doodaii' awéé' t'óó atsą́ háá'éelgo yóó'ályaiit'áadoo deezghalii nahonishłin doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Or I would be like a child who has no child in the hand of a child .
GOLD:	Why was n't I buried like a stillborn child , like a baby who never lives to see the light ?

ID:	5951
INPUT:	Áádóó yá'ąąshdę́ę́' iinéé' kóníigo diséts'ą́ą́' , Díí bee ak'e'íłchí : Kodóó náásgóó Bóhólníihii dayoosdląądgo daninéhígíí bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo . Áko Níłch'i Diyinii ádííniid , T'áá aaníí éí bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo , bindaanish yits'ą́ą́dóó háádadoolyįh , háálá nidaas'a'go yee ła'dayiilaii t'áá bił dahólǫ́ǫ doo !
PRED:	And I heard a voice from heaven , saying , “ This is the words of the Lord : and the Holy Spirit shall rejoice in him . And he said to them , Surely they shall rejoice in him , because they have made him rest .
GOLD:	And I heard a voice from heaven saying , “ Write this down : Blessed are those who die in the Lord from now on . Yes , says the Spirit , they are blessed indeed , for they will rest from their hard work ; for their good deeds follow them ! ”

ID:	5952
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii lá nihahastiin ła' bił náádanihighango háádaałyį́įhgo ánéidoodlííł . Ákohgo t'óó bi<unk> noot'ą́ áádóó yéego anáádazhniicha .
PRED:	For the Lord will make another man rest in his house ; and they cried out , and wept .
GOLD:	May the Lord bless you with the security of another marriage. ” Then she kissed them good-bye , and they all broke down and wept .

ID:	5953
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Bóhólníihii éí Dził Sáínaidę́ę́' honíle' , Dził Síyerdóó hach'į' hahóóle' índa Dził Péírandóó bee adideezdláád ; éí neeznáadi mííl bidiyį́į́' yił yíkai ; nish'náájí bílák'eedóó bee haz'áanii diltłi'ii hach'į' kóyiilaa .
PRED:	He said , “ May the Lord come up from Mount Sinai to Mount Sinai , Mount Sinai , and Silas with ten thousand men , and brought them to the right hand of the saints . ”
GOLD:	“ The Lord came from Mount Sinaiand dawned upon us from Mount Seir ; he shone forth from Mount Paranand came from Meribah-kadeshwith flaming fire at his right hand .

ID:	5954
INPUT:	T'áá shí íinisingo nááhániihígíí nich'į' nááhideeshnih . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nízhi' bee naa hashniih doo , háálá éí yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	I will offer sacrifices to you . I will praise you , Lord , because it is good .
GOLD:	I will sacrifice a voluntary offering to you ; I will praise your name , O Lord , for it is good .

ID:	5955
INPUT:	Díí bąą k'ad Bóhólníihii kóní , Tsásk'eh bikáá' sínítínídóó doo nídidíí'nah da , nidi t'áá aaníí dadíítsaał . Áko Iiláíjah dah nídiidzá .
PRED:	Now this is what the Lord says : “ You will not forget yourself , but you will surely die . ” So Elijah went back .
GOLD:	Now , therefore , this is what the Lord says : You will never leave the bed you are lying on ; you will surely die . ' ” So Elijah went to deliver the message .

ID:	5956
INPUT:	Jó , shide ádzaago nááshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooii naalzheeh nahalingo shíkaní<unk> dóó t'óó bida'ayóii bee shik'ijį' nanilnish .
PRED:	For I am angry with my face , and my wonders is against me .
GOLD:	And if I hold my head high , you hunt me like a lionand display your awesome power against me .

ID:	5957
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehii bidiníná doo yá'áshóoniísh aa doolyééł ? Jó , shiniyé a'áán ádahoolaa . Béénílniih , t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego bee atí'él'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' kódeeshłííł biniyé yá'át'éehgo bá yáshti' dooleeł biniyé nidááhdóó sézį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Do you want good things to be given to me ? You have made me a pit , and I stand before him in front of the wrath of wrath .
GOLD:	Should they repay evil for good ? They have dug a pit to kill me , though I pleaded for themand tried to protect them from your anger .

ID:	5958
INPUT:	Íífreiyim ayóogo shinó'ááh áádóó Ízrel dine'é doo chohoo'į́į́góó shinda'alo' , Júdah éí Diyin God ba'ahódlíii t'ahdii yits'ą́ąjį' yigááł .
PRED:	Ephraim is very faithful , and Israel have no hope in me , but Judah is still a faithful God .
GOLD:	Israel surrounds me with lies and deceit , but Judah still obeys Godand is faithful to the Holy One .

ID:	5959
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham éí Diyin God yich'į' sodoolzin , áko Diyin God éí Abímelek néidiisá , hwe'asdzą́ą́ ałdó' , asdzání há nidaalte' ałdó' , áádóó ha'áłchíní nidahwiizlį́į́' .
PRED:	Abraham prayed to God , and God raised up Abimelech , and he also took his wife , and his children .
GOLD:	Then Abraham prayed to God , and God healed Abimelech , his wife , and his female servants , so they could have children .

ID:	5960
INPUT:	Béésh łigaii índa óola yee nideich'ąąh ; doo hidoolnáał da biniyé bee atsidí yee yił ada'ałkał .
PRED:	They make silver and gold and gold , so that they can not go with them .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	5961
INPUT:	Nidi ho'didééh bééhodoozįįł biniyé náá'iiłniihii honééł'į́į́'dóó bik'ijį' halóód nááltseígíí hakágí bii'góó náádees'nii' ládą́ą́' éí náá'iiłniihii nááhodínóoł'įįł .
PRED:	But if the priest would examine him , the priest would not spread his skin on the skin , then the priest shall examine him .
GOLD:	But if the rash continues to spread after the person has been examined by the priest and has been pronounced clean , the infected person must return to be examined again .

ID:	5962
INPUT:	Bááh bizéí ajiiłkaad nahalingo níló nihiyiiłkaad ; deesk'aazgo ánáyiil'įįhgoshą' háí yii' sizį́įgo yíneel'ą́ ?
PRED:	Who is able to stand in the morning , like the grass in the night ?
GOLD:	He hurls the hail like stones.Who can stand against his freezing cold ?

ID:	5963
INPUT:	áádóó Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah éí siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í nilį́ , índa Zéídak áádóó Abáíyathar éí náá'iiłniihii nilį́ ,
PRED:	Benaiah , the son of Jehoiada , the captain of the army , Zadok , and Abiathar the priest ;
GOLD:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was commander of the army.Zadok and Abiathar were priests .

ID:	5964
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , doo ákwii ádeiit'įįdígíí nihaa halne' nidi , nízhi' binahjį' nihá atínít'į́ , háálá t'óó ahayóidi t'ą́ą́' anáhiniidee'go nich'į' nida'ayeelzíí' .
PRED:	Lord , tell us what we have done , but punish us because we have sinned against you .
GOLD:	The people say , “ Our wickedness has caught up with us , Lord , but help us for the sake of your own reputation.We have turned away from youand sinned against you again and again .

ID:	5965
INPUT:	Éíbraham yę́ę biDiyin God índa Néíhor yę́ę biDiyin God éí hazhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God lá nihá yeinít'į́į doo . Áko Jéíkab bizhé'é Áízak biDiyin God yidósinígíí bee ádee hazdoodzíí' ,
PRED:	The God of Abraham , the God of Abraham , the God of Abraham , the God of his father , has sworn to him by the name of Isaac his father Isaac ,
GOLD:	I call on the God of our ancestors — the God of your grandfather Abraham and the God of my grandfather Nahor — to serve as a judge between us. ” So Jacob took an oath before the fearsome God of his father , Isaac , to respect the boundary line .

ID:	5966
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ,
PRED:	The offering was one silver offering , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , one hundred and thirty shekels of silver , and twenty shekels of fine flour mixed with oil .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	5967
INPUT:	Áko éí ayóó ánísht'é áshidoolííł , háálá shíhígíí éí néididooléełgo hazhó'ó yee nihił hodoolnih .
PRED:	And he will make me great , because he will take the portion of his hand , and he will declare it to you .
GOLD:	He will bring me glory by telling you whatever he receives from me .

ID:	5968
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní , t'óó kónígháníjį' nihitaashá . Shíká danohtáa dooleeł , áko Jew dine'é bich'į' haasdzí'ígi át'éego k'ad ánihidishní , Déyáágóó doo dadohkááh át'ée da .
PRED:	My children , you will look for me , and you will seek me . And now I say to you , ‘ You will not go . ' ”
GOLD:	Dear children , I will be with you only a little longer . And as I told the Jewish leaders , you will search for me , but you ca n't come where I am going .

ID:	5969
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Sálaman éí Bóhólníihii bibikáá' náá'iiniihí bidáahjigo Ízrel dine'é áłah nilínígíí yinááł yiizį'go dego yá'ąąshjigo yadidiilnii'
PRED:	And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord , and lifted up his hands before the congregation of Israel , and lifted up his hands upon heaven .
GOLD:	Then Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in front of the entire community of Israel . He lifted his hands toward heaven ,

ID:	5970
INPUT:	Łóó' bee hahaltsósí tónteel biih dzółtsósígi át'éegi ákwii hojílǫ́ǫ doo áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bá bąąh aseesyíinii jílį́į doo ; kót'éego shí Bóhólníihii Diyin God haasdzíí' .
PRED:	They will be like a fish in the sea , and they will be like a fish of fish . This is what the Sovereign Lord says .
GOLD:	It will be just a rock in the sea , a place for fishermen to spread their nets , for I have spoken , says the Sovereign Lord . Tyre will become the prey of many nations ,

ID:	5971
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá háiida shíists'ą́ą'ii doo bich'į' nahwii'náágóó kééhat'į́į doo , áádóó báádahadzidii doo bik'ee bił yéé'góó hasht'edít'éego kééhat'į́į doo .
PRED:	But whoever does not listen to me will live in trouble , and those who fear him will live in peace .
GOLD:	But all who listen to me will live in peace , untroubled by fear of harm . ”

ID:	5972
INPUT:	Áádóó Símiyan dine'é kéyah bíí' silį́'ígíí biyi' kin hadaas'áhígíí éí kódahoolyé : Bíyer-shííba , Sííba , Móladah ,
PRED:	And the cities of the tribe of Simeon , according to the inheritance of the tribe of Simeon , Beersheba ,
GOLD:	Simeon 's homeland included Beersheba , Sheba , Moladah ,

ID:	5973
INPUT:	Tónteel bikáá' názbąsgo hodeezooígíí bee adinídíín éí chahałheeł yił ałts'ánéi'nił .
PRED:	The light of the sea is the light to the sea , and he brought them out of darkness .
GOLD:	He created the horizon when he separated the waters ; he set the boundary between day and night .

ID:	5974
INPUT:	Áádóó Abímelek ádííniid , Jó , kǫ́ǫ́ shikéyah , t'áá nił yá'áhoot'éhígi kééhót'į́į doo .
PRED:	Then Abimelech said to him , “ Behold , here I will dwell in your land . ”
GOLD:	Then Abimelech said , “ Look over my land and choose any place where you would like to live . ”

ID:	5975
INPUT:	Áádóó ach'į' nahwii'ná biyi' bááh t'įįhdígo niha'doołtsoł índa nihich'į' nahwii'náa nidi , tó t'įįhdígo nihaidookááł , áádóó nahinitiní doo nídidoot'į́įł da , nidi nanihinitiní danół'į́į doo ,
PRED:	He will give you bread in trouble , and he will give you bread , but he will give you many days , but you will see , but you will see .
GOLD:	Though the Lord gave you adversity for foodand suffering for drink , he will still be with you to teach you.You will see your teacher with your own eyes .

ID:	5976
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii t'óó báhádzidgo báháchįįhgo atí'éł'íinii bee kéyahgi nahodeezk'ą́ą́' ; diné éí chizh nahalingo bee hodook'ą́ął doo ; diné yił háá'áázh doo yaa hą́ą́h dínóozįįłí da .
PRED:	The anger of the Lord of hosts is burned with fire , and the fire of the land is burned with fire ; a man shall burn it with fire , and it shall not be able to destroy the people .
GOLD:	The land will be blackenedby the fury of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people will be fuel for the fire , and no one will spare even his own brother .

ID:	5977
INPUT:	Éran bigish
PRED:	The People of Aaron
GOLD:	Aaron 's Staff Becomes a Serpent

ID:	5978
INPUT:	Bidziilígíí bąą biinéigo honíts'aa' góyaa bik'é<unk> diits'a' , áádóó atah nidoobah biniyé da'ahijigánígíí yidááh yilwo' .
PRED:	He heard the sound of his strength , and he went out to meet him .
GOLD:	It paws the earth and rejoices in its strengthwhen it charges out to battle .

ID:	5979
INPUT:	áádóó ałdó' asdzání ajiyéehii índa asdzání doo diné bee haleehii ał'ąą át'éego hayi' honít'i' . Asdzání doo ajiyéehii éí Bóhólníihii bá na'anish bízhneedlį́įgo hats'íís índa hwii' sizíinii t'áá áłah diyin dooleełgo baa nitsídzíkees , nidi asdzání éí diné hwee hólóonii haash yit'éegoda hahastiin bił hojíshǫ́ǫ dooleeł biniyé nihokáá' bił nidahazt'i'ii bízhneedlį́įgo baa nitsídzíkees .
PRED:	and in the same way , both women and women , and woman who is not a woman , is not a woman to do the work of the Lord , and the soul of the Lord , and the soul of the body , and of the soul , and of the woman , that he may please the world .
GOLD:	His interests are divided . In the same way , a woman who is no longer married or has never been married can be devoted to the Lord and holy in body and in spirit . But a married woman has to think about her earthly responsibilities and how to please her husband .

ID:	5980
INPUT:	Díík'ǫsh éí bąąhági át'éii nahalin , áko éí nahjį' kódaahłééh , áko taos'nii' ániidíii díík'ǫsh t'áágédígíí nidahonohłingo bąąhági át'éii nihitah ádin dooleeł . Háálá Christ atis'adeesdzáago bee bééhániihgo dibé yázhí nááhániihii nihá nilį́įgo nááhaaznii' .
PRED:	Take away the sin offering , so that it may be like a grain offering for you . For when Christ comes , he will offer a lamb for you .
GOLD:	Get rid of the old “ yeast ” by removing this wicked person from among you . Then you will be like a fresh batch of dough made without yeast , which is what you really are . Christ , our Passover Lamb , has been sacrificed for us .

ID:	5981
INPUT:	Áádóó bizhé'é ábíłní , Háajigoshą' ííyá ? Háálá haye'ké éí Júdahdę́ę́' Diyin God yá halne'ii níyáhígíí ííyáajigoígíí hadayíísid .
PRED:	He said to his father , “ Where did he go ? For his sons have seen the prophet from Judah ? ”
GOLD:	The old prophet asked them , “ Which way did he go ? ” So they showed their father which road the man of God had taken .

ID:	5982
INPUT:	Áko kin bii' sohodizin bich'éédą́ą'gi nish'náájígo áádóó nishtł'ajígo íí'áhígíí áyiilaa ; nish'náájígoígíí éí Jéíkin yee yiyíízhi' áádóó nishtł'ajígoígíí éí Bó'az yee yiyíízhi' .
PRED:	And he built a house at the door of the temple , and on the right hand , and on the left hand , and on the left hand , and on the left hand Boaz named Boaz .
GOLD:	Then he set up the two pillars at the entrance of the Temple , one to the south of the entrance and the other to the north . He named the one on the south Jakin , and the one on the north Boaz .

ID:	5983
INPUT:	Díidí Íísa ba'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii ádaat'į́ ( Íísa éí Íídam ałdó' wolyé ) .
PRED:	These are the families of Esau , who was Edom .
GOLD:	This is the account of the descendants of Esau ( also known as Edom ) .

ID:	5984
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bik'ijidlíi doo , índa Diyin God yisdábííłtíinii t'áá ákogi ánít'é bididooniił .
PRED:	The Lord will bless you , and you will say to your God in righteousness .
GOLD:	They will receive the Lord 's blessingand have a right relationship with God their savior .

ID:	5985
INPUT:	Diné ájít'éii t'áá ałtso yá'ádaat'ééh jinízin , nidi Bóhólníihii éí diné biniyé ájít'íinii bił bééhózin .
PRED:	All the wicked are good , but the Lord knows what is good .
GOLD:	People may be pure in their own eyes , but the Lord examines their motives .

ID:	5986
INPUT:	ninásdzidgo bąą , háálá diné hashkéii nílį́ , áádóó t'áá jíík'e sha'doolyééł t'éí nínízin índa t'áadoo k'idííníláii nánígish .
PRED:	Therefore I am afraid , because you are a man , and you will not take away the rod of understanding .
GOLD:	I was afraid because you are a hard man to deal with , taking what is n't yours and harvesting crops you did n't plant . '

ID:	5987
INPUT:	nihich'į' bádahazhchįįd yę́ędą́ą́' t'áá dahinii'náago adanihiisna' doo nít'éé' ,
PRED:	When we were angry with us , we would be angry with us .
GOLD:	They would have swallowed us alivein their burning anger .

ID:	5988
INPUT:	áko hahane' ya'oozlí'ígíí t'áá ákót'é Diyin God t'áá aaníí lá níigo yee lą́ asłį́į́' .
PRED:	And the word of God was true , and it was truth .
GOLD:	Anyone who accepts his testimony can affirm that God is true .

ID:	5989
INPUT:	Áádóó nihí éí hodiyingo haz'ánígi áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí baa ádahołyą́ą doo , ákohgo Ízrel dine'é t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'él'íinii doo bik'i nááhwiidoodleeł da .
PRED:	You shall keep the sanctuary and the altar , so that the wrath of Israel may not come upon them .
GOLD:	“ You yourselves must perform the sacred duties inside the sanctuary and at the altar . If you follow these instructions , the Lord 's anger will never again blaze against the people of Israel .

ID:	5990
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii kóní , Diné nitsinákahgo áádóó nídaaldzidgo dasidiits'ą́ą́' , áko doo hodéezyéel da .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ When the people come to you , they are afraid , and they will not be quiet .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ I hear cries of fear ; there is terror and no peace .

ID:	5991
INPUT:	Naaki góne' dáádiníbaalígíí bine'dę́ę́' ła' nááház'ą́ , éí ts'ídá aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ hoolyé .
PRED:	And they divided against the second side of the second , and they set up the sanctuary .
GOLD:	Then there was a curtain , and behind the curtain was the second room called the Most Holy Place .

ID:	5992
INPUT:	T'áá ákwíí jį́ ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii dóola yázhí nááhíłniih doo áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí doo bąąh chinígóó áníléehgo bikáa'gi bee k'ééhoodǫǫłii nááhíłniih doo índa bikáa'jį' ak'ah yeidííziłgo dólzingo ádíílííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt offer a bull for a sin offering , and shalt make atonement upon the altar , and anoint it upon it , and anoint it with oil .
GOLD:	Each day you must sacrifice a young bull as a sin offering to purify them , making them right with the Lord . Afterward , cleanse the altar by purifying it ; make it holy by anointing it with oil .

ID:	5993
INPUT:	Áko Léíban ánááhodoo'niid , Díí atsi'kéhígíí éí shitsi'ké , díí áłchíní éí sha'áłchíní , díí łį́'ígíí shilį́į́' , índa yíní'ínígíí t'áá ałtso shí . Nidi k'ad díí shitsi'ké índa ba'áłchíní nidayiishchínígíida daashdeeshłííł ?
PRED:	Laban said to them , “ This is my daughters , my children , whom they have brought to me , and have brought them to me . But now I will do all these sons and children ? ”
GOLD:	Then Laban replied to Jacob , “ These women are my daughters , these children are my grandchildren , and these flocks are my flocks — in fact , everything you see is mine . But what can I do now about my daughters and their children ?

ID:	5994
INPUT:	Jó , díí t'áá ałtso yiiłtsą́ , áádóó t'áá shí diséts'ą́ą'go bik'idiitą́ .
PRED:	For I have seen all this , and I have heard it , and I have heard it .
GOLD:	“ Look , I have seen all this with my own eyesand heard it with my own ears , and now I understand .

ID:	5995
INPUT:	Azhą́ Diyin God bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii t'óó ahayóidi binááł baa nijiyáa nidi , t'áadoo dahoosdląąd da ;
PRED:	But he did many miracles in the sight of God , but they did not believe him .
GOLD:	But despite all the miraculous signs Jesus had done , most of the people still did not believe in him .

ID:	5996
INPUT:	Háálá ání , Shinanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii danilį́ .
PRED:	For he said , All my princes are kings .
GOLD:	He will say , ‘ Each of my princes will soon be a king .

ID:	5997
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Da'nítiingóó nisoozį́įgo dasídóo'į́į́' . T'áá náshiinídą́'ídi bee nida'nitinii , éí yá'át'éehgo atiinígíí bínda'ídółkidgo ákǫ́ǫ́ deínóhkááh , áko nihii' naazíinii háá'áyį́į́h yik'ídahidookah . Nidi , Éí bik'ehgo doo dayíníikáah da doo , dadííniid .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Look at the road , stand in the way , you who live in the way , and you will find what is right , and you will find the rest of your soul . ” But they said , “ They will not walk . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Stop at the crossroads and look around.Ask for the old , godly way , and walk in it.Travel its path , and you will find rest for your souls.But you reply , ‘ No , that 's not the road we want ! '

ID:	5998
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá ałtsoní bee bilááh dazhneel'ánígíí éí lą'í adadziiznil , nidi díí asdzání t'áá íiyisí bahojoobá'í nidi , t'áá bee hólónígi ayíínil , yee hináanii nidi t'áá ałtso .
PRED:	For they have given many things more than all things , but this woman has given it to the poor woman , but all living .
GOLD:	For they gave a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she had to live on . ”

ID:	5999
INPUT:	náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízar áádóó dah oonéłígíí t'áá ałtso bidááhdóó bił nidíí'ash , áko t'áá dabinááł bee óhólnííh baa díísįįł .
PRED:	And thou shalt bring Eleazar the priest and all the congregation before him ; and thou shalt give him authority before them .
GOLD:	Present him to Eleazar the priest before the whole community , and publicly commission him to lead the people .

ID:	6000
INPUT:	náá'iiłniihii éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hakáá'góó t'áá át'é hazlį́'ígíí yinééł'į́į'go éí naałniih hodoolna'ígíí , Doo ánít'éhí da , hodidooniił ; jó , t'áá át'é łigaii silį́į́' lá , áko ho'didéeh doo .
PRED:	And the priest shall look upon all the skin of leprosy , and shall pronounce him unclean , and he shall pronounce him clean , and he shall be clean .
GOLD:	When the priest examines the infected person and finds that the disease covers the entire body , he will pronounce the person ceremonially clean . Since the skin has turned completely white , the person is clean .

ID:	6001
INPUT:	Peter díí t'ahdii yee yáłti'go , saad deidiizts'ą́'ígíí t'áá ałtso Níłch'i Diyinii bik'i dahoole' .
PRED:	While Peter was speaking these words , all these words came upon the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Even as Peter was saying these things , the Holy Spirit fell upon all who were listening to the message .

ID:	6002
INPUT:	Yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' adi'ní nahalingo Bóhólníihii haadzíí' , Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii biinéé' diists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord came out of heaven , like the voice of the Most High .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resounded .

ID:	6003
INPUT:	Hasht'e'ádadołnéehgo yéego nisoozį́ , háálá nihinaagóó diltłish adooldił , diníigo Ííjip kéyahdi áádóó Mígdal kin haal'áadi áádóó Naf kin haal'áadi índa Tahápaniiz kin haal'áadi baa nahólne' .
PRED:	Arise , stand up , for the sword shall fall by the sword , and tell you in Egypt , and in Riblah , and in Riblah .
GOLD:	“ Shout it out in Egypt ! Publish it in the cities of Migdol , Memphis , and Tahpanhes ! Mobilize for battle , for the sword will devour everyone around you .

ID:	6004
INPUT:	Nahałtingo tó danee<unk> 'ígóó tó lą'í danílį́įgo íínísin . Tó nee<unk> 'ígóó náhodííłkǫǫłgo ni' hoolzhólí ánáhóódlííł , índa nanise' nooséełgo bik'ijiinídlí .
PRED:	You will send rain to a flood , and you will make a flood , and you will make a flood , and you will bless the ground .
GOLD:	You drench the plowed ground with rain , melting the clods and leveling the ridges.You soften the earth with showersand bless its abundant crops .

ID:	6005
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é daabíhígíí yílák'ee hayíínilgo binaanish ayóó ádabóodziilgo bidine'é yił yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	He brought them into the hand of the nations , and made them strong in their hands .
GOLD:	He has shown his great power to his peopleby giving them the lands of other nations .

ID:	6006
INPUT:	Áko at'ééd bíla' jiiłtsoodgo ábijiní , Ta<unk> ha kóomii , éí , At'ééd , nídiidááh nidishní , jiníigo óolyé .
PRED:	She took her hand and said to her , “ Here is Naomi , ” she said , “ Here is what I say . ”
GOLD:	Holding her hand , he said to her , which means “ Little girl , get up ! ”

ID:	6007
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' béésh łigaii tálent wolyéii neeznádiin bíighahgo bik'é Ízrel dine'é bitahdę́ę́' neeznádiindi míilgo siláo ayóogo dahayóígíí haa yí'nil .
PRED:	And I also gave him a large number of silver , a hundred thousand men of Israel .
GOLD:	He also paid about 7,500 pounds of silver to hire 100,000 experienced fighting men from Israel .

ID:	6008
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í nishłíinii nánooshkąąhgo nizaad bik'ehgo aa a'ááh nínízinígíí bee ha'ííníshníi le' .
PRED:	I pray to thy servant according to thy word , according to thy word .
GOLD:	Now let your unfailing love comfort me , just as you promised me , your servant .

ID:	6009
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá ákogi át'éii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah sidáago ha'asídígíí yee doo yá'ádaat'éehii ałtso nahjį' kóyiił'įįh .
PRED:	A king will sit on the throne of righteousness , and he will remove all evil .
GOLD:	When a king sits in judgment , he weighs all the evidence , distinguishing the bad from the good .

ID:	6010
INPUT:	Ínáoltą'í biniyé bibéeso doo a'í'aah da łeh , áádóó diné doo ádihodiilt'i'ii bąąhági át'éii yaa nídóot'įįł biniyé aa yílyéii doo néidiilée da . Kót'éego jiináanii doo nahjį' hahodi'doolt'eeł da .
PRED:	You must not give money to the man , and you must not pay money to the sins . So you must not take away from the living .
GOLD:	Those who lend money without charging interest , and who can not be bribed to lie about the innocent.Such people will stand firm forever .

ID:	6011
INPUT:	Dahataa łígíí alą́ąjį' yikah . Akéédę́ę́' bibee na'a'néhí sin yee nidaanéhígíí yikah . Bita' góne' éí ch'ikéí ásaa' daagádígíí yee nidaanéego yikah .
PRED:	They go ahead of them , and they are in the midst of them ; they are in the midst of the young women .
GOLD:	Singers are in front , musicians behind ; between them are young women playing tambourines .

ID:	6012
INPUT:	Jó , ádaalyaii t'áá át'é díí jį́įjį' ił hodiniih yik'ee nidadi'ni'go nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	For you know that all the idols are hated by this day .
GOLD:	For we know that all creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time .

ID:	6013
INPUT:	Nidi Éíhab hwe'asdzą́ą́ Jézebel hodiyiisnáa'go Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshóonii binizhdoolnishgo biniyé niná'ázhdeet'ánígíí éí diné doo ła' ákót'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But Ahab smote her wife , and he did evil in the sight of the Lord , that no man could do any thing in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	( No one else so completely sold himself to what was evil in the Lord 's sight as Ahab did under the influence of his wife Jezebel .

ID:	6014
INPUT:	ábíłní , Nídiidááh , ashkii áádóó bimá ałdó' bił Ízrel bikéyahgóó nihéénóhkááh , háálá ashkii yida'niiłhį́ yę́ę daneezná .
PRED:	He said to him , “ Get up and go back to the land of Israel , because the boy died . ”
GOLD:	“ Get up ! ” the angel said . “ Take the child and his mother back to the land of Israel , because those who were trying to kill the child are dead . ”

ID:	6015
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham bíídíiską́ą́dóó hináago neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan ashdla' binááhai .
PRED:	And all the days of Abraham were one hundred and fifty and five years .
GOLD:	Abraham lived for 175 years ,

ID:	6016
INPUT:	Áko haye' Áízak índa Íshmeiyel éí Zóhar , Het dine'é nilíinii biye' Íífran bikéyahgi Mámre bíighahgi haz'ą́ ; éí Makpíílagi hatséníhoodzání góne' yóó'áhoolaa .
PRED:	And Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave in the cave of Ephron the Hittite , which is in the field of Ephron the Hittite .
GOLD:	His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah , near Mamre , in the field of Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite .

ID:	6017
INPUT:	Bíni'dii Ízrel dine'é Ábiilaii baa bił nidahoozhǫǫh ; bíni'dii Záíyandóó dine'é binanit'a'í t'áá íiyisí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ !
PRED:	Let the house of Israel rejoice in joy ; let the princes of Zion rejoice .
GOLD:	O Israel , rejoice in your Maker.O people of Jerusalem , exult in your King .

ID:	6018
INPUT:	Sáíman Peter éí yiyiiłtsą́ągo Jesus yiyaajį' nitsidinígo'go kójíní , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shits'ánínááh , háálá bąąhági ááníiłii nishłį́ .
PRED:	When Simon saw Peter , he fell down before Jesus , saying , “ Lord , turn away from me , for I am a sinner . ”
GOLD:	When Simon Peter realized what had happened , he fell to his knees before Jesus and said , “ Oh , Lord , please leave me — I 'm such a sinful man . ”

ID:	6019
INPUT:	Dan dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Ásher dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	And the border of Dan shall be from the east side to the east side , and the border of Asher shall be his inheritance .
GOLD:	“ Asher 's territory lies south of Dan 's and also extends from east to west .

ID:	6020
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Dah diinéehgo Béthelgóó dínééh ; áadi kénááhót'į́į doo ; ákwe'é Diyin God bich'į' náádi'yííłnih biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí ádíílííł ; nínaaí Íísa bits'ą́ą́' yóó'íínílwod yę́ędą́ą́' ákwii nich'į' yit'íní í'diishyaa .
PRED:	God said to Jacob , “ Get up , and go to Bethel , and there you will offer sacrifices to God there , where you have fled from your brother Esau . ”
GOLD:	Then God said to Jacob , “ Get ready and move to Bethel and settle there . Build an altar there to the God who appeared to you when you fled from your brother , Esau . ”

ID:	6021
INPUT:	Jit'íinii nináneel'ą́ąjį' baa hoł hózhónígíí nahalingo bee hahínídzí'ígíí bik'ehgo joogáałii éí baa shił nihoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	I rejoice in him as he did , as he had promised .
GOLD:	I have rejoiced in your lawsas much as in riches .

ID:	6022
INPUT:	Nidi diné ílíinii éí yá'ádaat'éehii yinaha'á áádóó yá'ádaat'éehii yee sizį́ .
PRED:	But the rich man stand in the way of good and good .
GOLD:	But generous people plan to do what is generous , and they stand firm in their generosity .

ID:	6023
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Diyin God be'ajooba' , índa t'áá hashkée yee atí'éł'íinii baa ákoniizįįh . Jó , Jew dine'é dajílíinii doo da'joodlánígíí biniinaa t'áá hashkée atíháł'į́ , nidi ni t'éí Diyin God bibee ajooba' yee naa jooba'ígíí baa ákoniizįįh . Áłahjį' baa dzíínílíigo hinínáago naa jooba' doo , éí doodago ni ałdó' t'óó nahjį' andi'dootih .
PRED:	Therefore , because of the mercy of God , and of the wrath of the Gentiles , because of the mercy of the Gentiles , but in the grace of God , you also will be filled with you .
GOLD:	Notice how God is both kind and severe . He is severe toward those who disobeyed , but kind to you if you continue to trust in his kindness . But if you stop trusting , you also will be cut off .

ID:	6024
INPUT:	Áko nahasdzáán bikáa'gi kéédahat'íinii t'áá ałtso , nahasdzáán niit'ą́ą́dę́ę́' Dibé Yázhí seesyį́ nilíinii iináájí naaltsoos bíhígíí bii' t'áadoo dabízhi' ádaalyaii , naayéé' yich'į' nidahodoołaał .
PRED:	And all the inhabitants of the earth shall worship the names of the Lamb who had been killed from the beginning of the world , and they shall worship the names of the Lamb .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	6025
INPUT:	Jéíkab áádóó Íísa ałch'į' k'énáhásłį́į́'
PRED:	Jacob and Esau
GOLD:	Jacob and Esau Make Peace

ID:	6026
INPUT:	T'óó báhádzidgo báhóóchįįdgo yee atí'éł'ínígíí yee nishiisdláád , áádóó shik'ee deeznih ; shich'į' biwoo' ahíideeshk'ash ; shi'ana'í náshidiniilgęsh .
PRED:	I was angry with the anger of his anger , and he sent me into the hand of his wrath , and I hate me , and I cried out to my enemies , and they came to me .
GOLD:	God hates me and angrily tears me apart.He snaps his teeth at meand pierces me with his eyes .

ID:	6027
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' ts'ídá t'áadoo bee nihik'íhót'ahí da doo .
PRED:	You shall not be found in the sight of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	But you must be blameless before the Lord your God .

ID:	6028
INPUT:	Áko Sérai éí Éíbram áyidííniid , Shoo , Bóhólníihii doo ashchį́į́góó áshósin ; t'áá shǫǫdí asdzání shá naal'a'ígíí bił ałt'ani'aash , áko daats'í sha'áłchíní hodooleeł . Áko Éíbram éí Sérai bizaad k'eh ádziidzaa .
PRED:	Abram said to Abram , “ Behold , the Lord has not been born to Abram . Please let my servant be with her . ” So Abram obeyed her words .
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her. ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	6029
INPUT:	T'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ , jó éí dibégi át'éego doo báhádzidgóó nihaa nídaakah , nidi dabiyi'di t'éí mą'iitsoh t'óó báhádzidgo dichin daazlį́į'go da'aldeełii nidahalin .
PRED:	“ Take heed to the prophets , for they will come to you like sheep , but there is a famine in the field .
GOLD:	“ Beware of false prophets who come disguised as harmless sheep but are really vicious wolves .

ID:	6030
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Teaching about Salt and Light

ID:	6031
INPUT:	Áko éí asdzání bizajííyá , áádóó hazts'ǫs , índa t'áadoo hach'į' yáníziní áháłní ,
PRED:	And the woman came to her mouth , and kissed him , and kissed him , saying ,
GOLD:	She threw her arms around him and kissed him , and with a brazen look she said ,

ID:	6032
INPUT:	Áádóó naal'a'í t'áadoo yee choo'ínígíí tł'óó'dóó nówehjį' chahałheeł góne' ahołhan ; áadi diné daachxa áádóó biwoo' ahídeidiłk'ash doo .
PRED:	And he shall not cast him into the darkness , into the darkness , where there shall be weeping and teeth .
GOLD:	Now throw this useless servant into outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . '

ID:	6033
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihó'ahaz yę́ę biye' Jó'ash nant'áago naaki náhááh góne' Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jó'ash yę́ę biye' Amazáíyah aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	In the second year of Joash the son of Joash king of Israel , Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah became king of Judah .
GOLD:	Amaziah son of Joash began to rule over Judah in the second year of the reign of King Jehoash of Israel .

ID:	6034
INPUT:	Diné ła' hak'is nilíinii bąąhági át'éii biniinaa doo da'dootsaałii áyoolíiłgo joo'į́įgo bá sozdilzin doo , áko Diyin God hinááh ánábidoodlííł . Bąąhági át'éii biniinaa doo da'dootsaałii hólǫ́ǫgo iiná haa didoot'ááł . Nidi bąąhági át'éii biniinaa da'dootsaałii hólǫ́ ; éí yee bąąhági ádzaii bá sodołzin , doo dishníigo ádíshníi da .
PRED:	If a man does wrong , he will pray for his brother . He will pray for the sins of God . He will be given to the life of life . But I will not pray for the sins of sin .
GOLD:	If you see a fellow believer sinning in a way that does not lead to death , you should pray , and God will give that person life . But there is a sin that leads to death , and I am not saying you should pray for those who commit it .

ID:	6035
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdgo tahonooskaadgo doo haa ná'áhodílt'į́į da ; dadine' é éí nááda'iiłniihii índa hastóí á naazíinii doo bił dáálįįd da .
PRED:	The Lord was angry with his anger , and they did not seek him ; they did not honor the priests , the elders , and the elders .
GOLD:	The Lord himself has scattered them , and he no longer helps them.People show no respect for the priestsand no longer honor the leaders .

ID:	6036
INPUT:	Áko Paul ání , Shik'isóó , aláahgo náá'iiłniihii jílínígíí doo shił bééhózin da lá , háálá kóníigo Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchį́ , Nidine'é binanit'a'í baa'ihgo doo bá hadíídzih da .
PRED:	Paul said , “ I do n't know that he is the high priest , because it is written , ‘ You will not speak against your people . ' ”
GOLD:	“ I 'm sorry , brothers . I did n't realize he was the high priest , ” Paul replied , “ for the Scriptures say , ‘ You must not speak evil of any of your rulers . ' ”

ID:	6037
INPUT:	Dabinii' éí díí nidahalin : bidááhdóó éí diné daalnii' , nish'náajigo dabinii'ígíí éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí daalnii' , nishtł'ahjigo dabinii'ígíí éí béégashii daalnii' , bikée'jigo dabinii'ígíí éí atsá daalnii' .
PRED:	These are the faces of their faces , which were before them : and the living creatures were the face of a lion , and their faces were like a lion , and their faces were the faces of the beast .
GOLD:	Each had a human face in the front , the face of a lion on the right side , the face of an ox on the left side , and the face of an eagle at the back .

ID:	6038
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Éíhab yę́ę biye' Eihazáíyah éí Jiiháshafat ííłní , Bíni'dii shá nidaal'a'í éí ná nidaal'a'í yił tsinaa'eeł yee dookah . Nidi Jiiháshafat doo íinízin da .
PRED:	And Ahab the son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat , Let his servants go with him into the boat . But Jehoshaphat did not want .
GOLD:	At one time Ahaziah son of Ahab had proposed to Jehoshaphat , “ Let my men sail with your men in the ships. ” But Jehoshaphat refused the request .

ID:	6039
INPUT:	háálá John éí diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii índa diyinii nilį́įgo Hérad hoł bééhózingo John béédzíldzid , éí bąą t'óó baa áhojilyą́ą́ nít'éé' . Íídą́ą́' John áháłnínígíí jidiizts'ą́ą'go bik'ee t'áá íiyisí t'óó hoł haada , ákondi baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫgo jidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	For John knew that John had been afraid of the righteous and the righteous , and John was afraid of them . But when John heard that he had said to him , he was very glad .
GOLD:	for Herod respected John ; and knowing that he was a good and holy man , he protected him . Herod was greatly disturbed whenever he talked with John , but even so , he liked to listen to him .

ID:	6040
INPUT:	Nihitahgóó diné diyoolyééł yiniyé diné yik'é ałch'į' nida'iizlá . Bił kééhót'íinii bits'ą́ą́dóó ínáóltą'í biniyé nááhíníchid ; bee bilááh níí' dooleełii ahanihínínil índa nee áchą́hwíídéeni'go bee bilááh dooleełii hasht'e'nihínínil ; kwíínít'įįdígíí bee sheisínínah , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	You have given him to be put to death . You have given him your neighbor as much as you have given to your neighbor , ” says the Lord God . “ You have given me what you have done .
GOLD:	There are hired murderers , loan racketeers , and extortioners everywhere . They never even think of me and my commands , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	6041
INPUT:	Áko ła' haa deiz'ą́ . Nít'éé' ábijiní , Díishą' háí bitsiits'iin bik'i si'ą́ , áádóó háísh bízhi' bikáá' ? Nít'éé' ádahałní , Síízar lą́ą .
PRED:	And they gave him some of them . And he said , Who is the head of his head ? And they said unto him , Caesar .
GOLD:	When they handed it to him , he asked , “ Whose picture and title are stamped on it ? ” “ Caesar 's , ” they replied .

ID:	6042
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih le' , háálá kin haal'áii ana'í bináshzhiizhii bii' góne' yee aa a'ááh nízinii ayóó ánóolninígíí shich'į' ííshjání áyiilaa .
PRED:	Blessed be the Lord : for his mercy hath showed me in the midst of the enemy .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , for he has shown me the wonders of his unfailing love.He kept me safe when my city was under attack .

ID:	6043
INPUT:	Kót'éego David habee aditł'į́į́h áádóó tsé bee Filístiya diné naa abíijíítł'ingo bik'eh dzideesdlį́į'go dziisxį́ ; David éí diltłish doo ła' neitin da nít'éé' .
PRED:	And David smote him with a stone , and smote him in the wall , and he killed him not a sword .
GOLD:	So David triumphed over the Philistine with only a sling and a stone , for he had no sword .

ID:	6044
INPUT:	Éí bąą Sárah t'áá hayi'ídi ádaa joodlohgo ájíní , Da' shí hasistihdóó bik'ijį' índa shahastiin bóhonishníihii haastihgoósh shił nááhoneeni doo ?
PRED:	Therefore Sarah said to Sarah , “ Are I old when I am old , and my husband will I be old when I am old ? ”
GOLD:	So she laughed silently to herself and said , “ How could a worn-out woman like me enjoy such pleasure , especially when my master — my husband — is also so old ? ”

ID:	6045
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , shiDiyin God nílį́ ; ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hándínísh'į́į' doo . Kéyah náhooltseii áádóó nídínéesdzáago tó ádindi shii' sizíinii níká dibáá' nilį́ áádóó shits'íís nídin nilį́ .
PRED:	O God , thou art my God ; yea , I will seek thee , and I will look upon thee ; thou art a dry land , and my flesh is full of water , and my flesh .
GOLD:	O God , you are my God ; I earnestly search for you.My soul thirsts for you ; my whole body longs for youin this parched and weary landwhere there is no water .

ID:	6046
INPUT:	Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é ak'eh dahonoł'į́ , yiłní
PRED:	Moses said to the Israelites ,
GOLD:	Moses Urges Israel to Obey

ID:	6047
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíí' ; Éran haye' nidilt'éego hats'ą́ą́' neezná ; éí Bóhólníihii yinááł náá'iisnii'go neezná .
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying , “ Aaron your two sons have heard of you , and they have died before the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord spoke to Moses after the death of Aaron 's two sons , who died after they entered the Lord 's presence and burned the wrong kind of fire before him .

ID:	6048
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin biyi'dę́ę́' iinéé' ayóó íits'a'go diyingo nidaal'a'í tsosts'idígíí kwííłníigo diséts'ą́ą́' , Nihílááh , Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo bibee até'él'íinii tsosts'idgo łeets'aa' biyi'ígíí nahasdzáán bikáá'góó yadaahkaah .
PRED:	Then I heard a loud voice from the temple , saying to the seven angels , “ Go and work on the seven vessels of God 's wrath . ”
GOLD:	Then I heard a mighty voice from the Temple say to the seven angels , “ Go your ways and pour out on the earth the seven bowls containing God 's wrath . ”

ID:	6049
INPUT:	Diné dahóyáanii t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł ; bił dahodooląąłgo dabidi'doolnééł . Shoo , Bóhólníihii bizaad doo deiniizį́į' da , ákoshą' ha'át'íí hódzą́ shį́į́ bii' dahólǫ́ ?
PRED:	The wise shall be ashamed , and they shall be ashamed ; behold , they have rejected the word of the Lord , and have rejected the word of the Lord , what wisdom is in them ?
GOLD:	These wise teachers will fallinto the trap of their own foolishness , for they have rejected the word of the Lord.Are they so wise after all ?

ID:	6050
INPUT:	Áádóó bílátahgi dah azkánígíí binahjį' t'áá ałch'ijí áliv sikaadii naakigo ałdó' íí'á .
PRED:	And the two olive trees in the midst of the midst of the midst of them were two olive trees .
GOLD:	And I see two olive trees , one on each side of the bowl . ”

ID:	6051
INPUT:	Asdzání ła' bijéí łoh áádóó tł'óół yistł'óonii át'éego bíla' éí álátsíín niná'niłí át'éego aniné biláahgo dích'íi'go hadinish'į́į́' ; t'áá háiida Diyin God yił hóshóonii éí yits'ádínóochééł , nidi diné ádił ni'iilzíihii éí asdzání azahodínóo'ah .
PRED:	I look for a woman who has a net and a net . If you do , you will escape from God , you will be a woman .
GOLD:	I discovered that a seductive woman is a trap more bitter than death . Her passion is a snare , and her soft hands are chains . Those who are pleasing to God will escape her , but sinners will be caught in her snare .

ID:	6052
INPUT:	Áádóó índa tł'óo'jigo dáń'dítį́hígíí biyi'dę́ę́' éí áádóó náwóne'di ahééhool'áhígíí éí bíighahjį' ánízahígíí yínáá'néé <unk> go t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan naaki ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ánízah ; ha'a'aahjigo índa náhookǫsjigo t'áá áłah ákóhonízah .
PRED:	And he came out of the gate of the gate , and the gate of the inner court , a hundred cubits , and a hundred and twenty cubits , and the east side of the east .
GOLD:	Then the man measured across the Temple 's outer courtyard between the outer and inner gateways ; the distance was 175 feet .

ID:	6053
INPUT:	Deíldzisgóó tó hadaazlį́į́dóó danílį́įgo áyósin , áko dah daask'idígíí bita'góó danílį́ .
PRED:	They are covered with water , and they are covered with water ; they are between the hills .
GOLD:	You make springs pour water into the ravines , so streams gush down from the mountains .

ID:	6054
INPUT:	Háálá t'ááłáhígo nináádahódídóołkiłgi nidi hach'į' dáátiid .
PRED:	For there were no more afraid to ask him , but they were afraid .
GOLD:	And then no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	6055
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii bizaad éí hool'áágóó hólǫ́ . Éí saadígíí hane' yá'át'éehii át'éego bee nidanihidi'neestą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the word of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ He Holds Onto The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ] [ The Many Powered ]
GOLD:	But the word of the Lord remains forever. ” And that word is the Good News that was preached to you .

ID:	6056
INPUT:	Áko Ásasdi nihéédiidzáago iih dasiilt'e' , áádóó Mitilíiniidi nihił aní'éél .
PRED:	And we went to Ephesus , and laid him in his place , and sailed to Cyprus .
GOLD:	He joined us there , and we sailed together to Mitylene .

ID:	6057
INPUT:	Háálá ayóó át'éego shaa a'ááh nínízin , áádóó ch'į́įdiitah nihoneel'ą́ą́dę́ę́' shii' sizíinii háíníłtį́ .
PRED:	For you have mercy on me , and you have brought my soul out of the pit .
GOLD:	for your love for me is very great.You have rescued me from the depths of death .

ID:	6058
INPUT:	Nidi asdzání éí Diyin God deidísinii yá'át'éehgo ó'oo'níiłii bee béédaho'dílzin doo .
PRED:	But the women who fear God will be holy .
GOLD:	For women who claim to be devoted to God should make themselves attractive by the good things they do .

ID:	6059
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , k'ad éiyá Níłch'i Diyinii aidii'aahii nihił béédahózin doo nihósh'ní .
PRED:	Now , brethren , I want you to know that there is a gift of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Now , dear brothers and sisters , regarding your question about the special abilities the Spirit gives us . I do n't want you to misunderstand this .

ID:	6060
INPUT:	Áko tálent t'ááłá'í ba'ít'ánígíí bits'ą́ą́' nídooh'aahgo tálent neeznáá neijaahígíí baa noh'aah .
PRED:	And thou shalt hear the tenth of one talents , and give it a tenth of ten talents .
GOLD:	“ Then he ordered , ‘ Take the money from this servant , and give it to the one with the ten bags of silver .

ID:	6061
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nahasdzáán bikáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso saad bee hahínídzíi'ii deidiizts'ą́ą'go naa dahaniih doo .
PRED:	O Lord , all the kings of the earth hear the words of your mouth , and they will praise you .
GOLD:	Every king in all the earth will thank you , Lord , for all of them will hear your words .

ID:	6062
INPUT:	Áko diyingo naal'a'í ání , Díí ts'ídá doo yá'áshóonii át'é , áko asdzání éí bee na'akáhí biyi' góne' anáyíyoo<unk> áádóó béésh diłhį́hí adáádít'áhí yidánéidiníłhan .
PRED:	And the angel said , This evil is evil , and cast out the net in the place of the woman , and cast it out .
GOLD:	The angel said , “ The woman 's name is Wickedness , ” and he pushed her back into the basket and closed the heavy lid again .

ID:	6063
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' índa hódahooł'aahii ábizhdííniid , Tį' , Judíyagóó náádiikah .
PRED:	After this , Jesus said to his disciples , “ Let 's go to Judea . ”
GOLD:	Finally , he said to his disciples , “ Let 's go back to Judea . ”

ID:	6064
INPUT:	Díí ałdó' diné dahóyáanii dabizaad . Diné ał'oh át'éego baa nízhdóot'įįłgo doo yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	This also is the words of the wise ; it is not good for the wise .
GOLD:	Here are some further sayings of the wise : It is wrong to show favoritism when passing judgment .

ID:	6065
INPUT:	Jó , tsin bee í'dílzoołí , doodaii' tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii , azhą́ éí doo hináa da nidi diits'a' , áko doo ákwii diits'a'góó haa yit'éegoshą' diits'a'ígíí bééhózin doo ?
PRED:	For if he does not hear the sound of the harp or the harp , but if he hear it , why do he hear the voice of iniquity ?
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	6066
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God éí baa nida'aldeehii t'áá ałtso , nidanil'inii t'áá ałtso t'áá bił , yá'ádaat'éehii , doodaii' doo yá'ádaat'éehii éí yee aa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	For God will judge all those who are evil , evil , evil , evil , evil .
GOLD:	God will judge us for everything we do , including every secret thing , whether good or bad .

ID:	6067
INPUT:	Diltłish bee nidanihidi'dootsiłgo Ízrel dine'é bikéyah bibąąhdi atídanihideeshłííł , áko Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will punish you by the sword , and I will destroy you in the land of Israel , and you shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	You will be slaughtered all the way to the borders of Israel . I will execute judgment on you , and you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	6068
INPUT:	Jesus Christ bibee ayóó'ó'ó'níinii bee t'áá ánółtso ayóó át'éego nihídin nishłį́įgo Diyin God shá bił bééhózin .
PRED:	God knows that I am great in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	God knows how much I love you and long for you with the tender compassion of Christ Jesus .

ID:	6069
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , diné doo áhályáanii ałdó' atiingóó yigáałgo yee ak'idi'yiitįįhígíí ádįįh , áádóó t'áá bidááh hakáhígíí t'áá ałtso yich'į' doo áháyą́ yee yit'íní í'dólzin .
PRED:	Surely a fool will pass through the road , and he will destroy all who come to meet him .
GOLD:	You can identify foolsjust by the way they walk down the street !

ID:	6070
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí diné biláahgo doo ak'idi'yiitįįhígi ánísht'é , áádóó diné ak'i'dadi'yiitįįhígi át'éego doo ak'i'diishtįįh da .
PRED:	Surely I am a man more than a man , and I do not understand understanding .
GOLD:	I am too stupid to be human , and I lack common sense .

ID:	6071
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Shínaaíké hanishtá ; t'áá shǫǫdí shił hólne' , háadi nida'niłkaad ?
PRED:	And he said , I pray thee , I pray thee , I pray thee , but where hast thou cast me ?
GOLD:	“ I 'm looking for my brothers , ” Joseph replied . “ Do you know where they are pasturing their sheep ? ”

ID:	6072
INPUT:	Zóbahdóó Néíthan biye' Áígal ałdó' , Géed dine'é Béínai ałdó' ,
PRED:	Nathan the son of Nathan , the son of Gad ,
GOLD:	Igal son of Nathan from Zobah ; Bani from Gad ;

ID:	6073
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é t'áá ałtso tooh bibąąhgóó tó doodlį́įłii yíka'da'ageed , háálá tooh nílínígíí doo dayódlą́ą́' át'ée da .
PRED:	And all the Egyptians brought water into the river , because they did not drink the rivers .
GOLD:	Then all the Egyptians dug along the riverbank to find drinking water , for they could n't drink the water from the Nile .

ID:	6074
INPUT:	Nihida'oł'į́į dooleełgi t'áá nihí nihił béédahózin . Aají nihitahgi nideiikai yę́ędą́ą́' doo ák'eh dahoniil'į́į da nít'éé' .
PRED:	We know that we were with you , that we would not obey his voice in our midst .
GOLD:	For you know that you ought to imitate us . We were not idle when we were with you .

ID:	6075
INPUT:	<unk> ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii neeznádiindóó ba'aan naakits'áadah .
PRED:	The sons of Joseph , two hundred and twelve .
GOLD:	The family of Jorah112

ID:	6076
INPUT:	Áádóó hwíighahgi deeyáago bee nidaho'diltéhígíí yideelchidgo , da'íłteehii deizį' . Áko daaztsánígíí áyidííniid , Dinééh , ándishní , Nídiidááh .
PRED:	And when he came near , he touched the man who was standing by him , he touched the dead . And he said to the man , “ I tell you , son of man ! ”
GOLD:	Then he walked over to the coffin and touched it , and the bearers stopped . “ Young man , ” he said , “ I tell you , get up . ”

ID:	6077
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné ashdlalt'éhígíí dah náádiikaigo Léíyish kin haal'áadi yíkai . Áko t'áadoo yąąh dabíni'ígóó ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí Sáídan dine'é bił hasht'ehodít'é áádóó hasih dahodiil'aahgo kéédahat'ínígi át'éego dziiłtsą́ . Éí kéyah biyi' naat'áanii doo hólǫ́ǫ dago doo baa yáhásinígi ádabi'dilnéeh da . Sáídan dine'é bits'ą́ądi nízaadi kéédahojit'į́įgo bąą dadine'é náánáła' doo bił ahaa nida'jiilniih da .
PRED:	And the five men went up and went to Kadesh . And when the inhabitants of Sidon saw that there was peace with them , the inhabitants of Sidon was peace , and the inhabitants of Sidon were far away from them .
GOLD:	So the five men went on to the town of Laish , where they noticed the people living carefree lives , like the Sidonians ; they were peaceful and secure . The people were also wealthy because their land was very fertile . And they lived a great distance from Sidon and had no allies nearby .

ID:	6078
INPUT:	Ákohgo Amazáíyah éí Éímas ábizhdííniid , Náasdi áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii nílíinii , nílááh , yówehjį' Júdah kéyahgóó nídílyeed ; áadi bááh niyą́ą le' ; áadi hólne' le' .
PRED:	Then Amaziah said to Amaziah , “ Go back to Judah , and eat bread there . ”
GOLD:	Then Amaziah sent orders to Amos : “ Get out of here , you prophet ! Go on back to the land of Judah , and earn your living by prophesying there !

ID:	6079
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Bee haz'áanii bínda'nołtinii , nihí ałdó' doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Háálá nihí bee haz'áanii diné bide ádaahłaa , nidi t'áá nihí éí nihílázhoozh t'ááłá'í nidi doo bee bidadinołníih da .
PRED:	And he said , “ Woe to you , teachers of the law ! For you have made up the law , but you have covered with hands , but you can not rule over it . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , ” said Jesus , “ what sorrow also awaits you experts in religious law ! For you crush people with unbearable religious demands , and you never lift a finger to ease the burden .

ID:	6080
INPUT:	Nidi doo nihił k'é nídahałeehgóó t'óó nihik'iijée'go binídoołzhish .
PRED:	But if you do not go out to peace against you , you will go out to meet you .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to make peace and prepare to fight , you must attack the town .

ID:	6081
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii doo ła' binoołchéeł da nidi dadíníchééh , nidi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí doo yist'i'ii át'é .
PRED:	The wicked shall not escape from them ; but the righteous shall be a lion .
GOLD:	The wicked run away when no one is chasing them , but the godly are as bold as lions .

ID:	6082
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Béílak éí naat'áanii átséhígíí bilááh ánéelą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí aláahgo ił danilíinii anááyííł'a' .
PRED:	Then Balak sent messengers more than the first of the king .
GOLD:	Then Balak tried again . This time he sent a larger number of even more distinguished officials than those he had sent the first time .

ID:	6083
INPUT:	Doo t'áadoo le'é bídin nishłį́įgo ádíshníi da , háálá t'áá shee hólónígi baa shił hózhǫ́ǫgo bóhooł'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	I do not say that I am not anything , because I have learned that I have received my joy .
GOLD:	Not that I was ever in need , for I have learned how to be content with whatever I have .

ID:	6084
INPUT:	áádóó t'áadoo bee nihik'íhót'ahígóó , áádóó ałdó' nihił ééhózinígíí , nízaadgóó ha'ííníilnínígíí , nihá áhwiinít'į́'ígíí , Níłch'i Diyinii , t'áá aaníígóó ayóó'í'ííníi'nínígíí bee yá'át'éehgo ádééhoniilzin ,
PRED:	and we have no knowledge , and we also know , and we have the Spirit of truth , and of the truth ,
GOLD:	We prove ourselves by our purity , our understanding , our patience , our kindness , by the Holy Spirit within us , and by our sincere love .

ID:	6085
INPUT:	Nidi Niiráíyah biye' Bérak éí Kaldíya dine'é yaa nihididoo'áałgo nidanihidoołtsił , éí doodaii' , yisnááh daniidlį́įgo Bábilan kéyahgóó anihidínóołkałgo biniyé nihik'ijį' nilį́įgo níni' ná áháł'į́ .
PRED:	But Baruch , the son of Shaphan , shall deliver you into the hand of the Chaldeans , or to kill you , and to bring you into Babylon , and to bring you into Babylon .
GOLD:	Baruch son of Neriah has convinced you to say this , because he wants us to stay here and be killed by the Babylonians or be carried off into exile . ”

ID:	6086
INPUT:	Díí bik'ehgo nááda'iyołniih doo , hómer wolyéii tł'oh naadą́ą́' t'ááłá'í bits'áką́ągo áádóó éí hastą́ąjį' ahádaashjaa'go t'ááłá'í bidoojaa'ígíí Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í ałdó' t'ááłá'í bidoojaa'go Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo ;
PRED:	“ You shall offer an offering to the Lord , one ephah of fine flour , and six ephah of grain offering to the Lord ; one grain offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ You must give this tax to the prince : one bushel of wheat or barley for every 60 you harvest ,

ID:	6087
INPUT:	Bidáá' gónaa biyaadóogo éí dóola bida'alyaago ashdla'áadah ké silá bíighahgo ahéénízį́ . T'ááłá'í béésh łitsoii éí dóola bééda'alyaago naakigo ałnaashiijí nít'i' .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that it was twenty cubits round about it , and it was twenty cubits round about it , and two oxen were two rings round about it .
GOLD:	It was encircled just below its rim by two rows of figures that resembled oxen . There were about six oxen per foot all the way around , and they were cast as part of the basin .

ID:	6088
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá'dóó nahat'áii aa a'ááh hasin bił yit'ihgo haz'ą́ą doo áádóó ákwii David biníbaal biyi' góne' ła' t'áá aaníinii yee dah sidáa doo , áádóó ánihwii'aahgo áádóó doo haada yit'éii hát'į́į doo , índa haneetehee t'áá ákogi ááníił doo .
PRED:	And he shall have mercy upon the throne , and shall sit in the tent of David , and in the tent of David , and judgment , and righteousness , and righteousness .
GOLD:	then God will establish one of David 's descendants as king.He will rule with mercy and truth.He will always do what is justand be eager to do what is right .

ID:	6089
INPUT:	Áko Mózes áádóó Éran índa Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso Péíran honoojíigi Kéídesh hoolyéedi baa níjíkaigo hane' baa nídadziz'ą́ , áádóó Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso éí kéyahdóó aneest'ą' nídajizhjaa'ígíí bich'į' ííshjání ádajiilaago deinééł'į́į́' .
PRED:	Moses , Aaron , Aaron , and all the congregation of Israel came to Kadesh in the wilderness of Kadesh , and they showed it to them in the wilderness of Kadesh , and showed them all the multitude of Israel .
GOLD:	to Moses , Aaron , and the whole community of Israel at Kadesh in the wilderness of Paran . They reported to the whole community what they had seen and showed them the fruit they had taken from the land .

ID:	6090
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Biizáliyel índa Ahóliyab bíni' bíighahgo iichįįhgo át'é hwiindzin bii' hólǫ́ǫgo áyiilaa , áko éí nidilt'éego naanish ał'ąą ádaat'éii íidoolíiłgo ts'ídá t'áá át'éegi bił bééhózin silį́į́' : éí atsidjí lá , na'ach'ąąh áádóó yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí áádóó áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii biyi'jį' yistł'ǫ́ǫgo naashch'ąą'go atł'óó lá , áko t'áá ha'át'íhída yindoolnishii yiyiichįįh áádóó yinaha'áago binaanish ííł'į́ .
PRED:	God made the work of Benaiah , and Abiram , to make the work of the work of the work , and to make the work of work , and to work in scarlet , and in scarlet , and in scarlet , and in scarlet , and in scarlet , and in scarlet .
GOLD:	The Lord has given them special skills as engravers , designers , embroiderers in blue , purple , and scarlet thread on fine linen cloth , and weavers . They excel as craftsmen and as designers .

ID:	6091
INPUT:	Nida'niłkaadii éí cha nidahałe'go hodiists'ą́ą́' , háálá yee ayóó ádaat'éii bił ahóóyá . Náshdóí yáázh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí biyi' nidahodi'ni'go hodiists'ą́ą́' , háálá Jórdan tooh yee ádaa ha'niih yę́ę t'áadoo biniyéhí da silį́į́' .
PRED:	The shepherds cried out with a loud voice , because the sound of the lions are like a lion in the midst of the land ; for the glory of the Jordan was become desolate .
GOLD:	Listen to the wailing of the shepherds , for their rich pastures are destroyed.Hear the young lions roaring , for their thickets in the Jordan Valley are ruined .

ID:	6092
INPUT:	Haa nízádígi shį́į́ kéyah bił hóóchxǫ'go hanályį́įh doo , háálá bikáá' kéédahoht'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ędą́ą́' háá'áyį́į́h baa náhwiilzhíishgo t'áadoo hanáályį́į' da .
PRED:	How long will the land be desolate , because you dwell in it , and there will be no rest in rest .
GOLD:	As long as the land lies in ruins , it will enjoy the rest you never allowed it to take every seventh year while you lived in it .

ID:	6093
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ídahooł'aahii éí Jesus t'áá sáhí yaa yíkaigo ádeidííniid , Hait'éegoshą' nihí hadaniilchéehgo ch'ééh ádeiil'įįd ?
PRED:	The disciples came to Jesus alone , and said , “ How did we not cast us out ? ”
GOLD:	Afterward the disciples asked Jesus privately , “ Why could n't we cast out that demon ? ”

ID:	6094
INPUT:	Bijaa' dahólǫ́ǫ nidi doo yee da'diits'a' da . Bizéé' dahólǫ́ǫ nidi yee nídadidzihii ádaadin .
PRED:	They have ears , but they have ears ; they have ears , but they do not hear .
GOLD:	They have ears but can not hear , and mouths but can not breathe .

ID:	6095
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí kin haal'áajį' nídoo' néełgo bee bich'į' hadeesdzih . <unk> náago kin haal'áagi hoł da'ahidoogą́ą́ł áádóó deidoołnééł índa yidahodidooniłgo adeididoołk'ą́ą́ł , áko Júdah kéyahgi kints'iil t'éí dah naazhjaa'go doo naagháhígóó áhodeeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord : Behold , I will speak unto this city , and they shall fight against it , and they shall burn them with fire , and they shall burn them with fire , and I will make them a desolation .
GOLD:	I will call the Babylonian armies back again . They will fight against this city and will capture it and burn it down . I will see to it that all the towns of Judah are destroyed , with no one living there . ”

ID:	6096
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá ałtso hwéédahósinii Diyin God yá dahalne'ii éí bił Diyin God bá hojilne'go dahoołtsą́ , áko díí diné áda'ahidoo'niid , Kish biye'shą' ha'át'íí yee atah náánásdlį́į́' ? Saul wolyéiísh ałdó' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yidiiyáá lá ?
PRED:	And all the people saw that he was a prophet , and they said unto him , What is Saul among the prophets ?
GOLD:	When those who knew Saul heard about it , they exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? How did the son of Kish become a prophet ? ”

ID:	6097
INPUT:	Áłchíní bizhé'é bąąh ádaasdįįdígíí bíni' t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nidaakaigo shí baa áháshyą́ą doo , áádóó asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii nii' kéédahat'íinii háni'dii shaa dadzólí .
PRED:	Let the fatherless go with me , and I will take care of the fatherless , and let them trust in me .
GOLD:	But I will protect the orphans who remain among you.Your widows , too , can depend on me for help . ”

ID:	6098
INPUT:	áko níłch'i bida'iiníziinii diné yii'dę́ę́' hahaazhjée'go bisóodi yiih heezhjéé' , áko éí bisóodi bidah ch'ééjée'go be'ek'id yiih heezhjéé' , áko tó bííghą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the devil fled out of the devil , and they entered into the sea , and they fled into the sea , and they fell down in the sea .
GOLD:	Then the demons came out of the man and entered the pigs , and the entire herd plunged down the steep hillside into the lake and drowned .

ID:	6099
INPUT:	Índa bikéé'dóó naat'áanii danilíinii bił dahadlee'go diné áádóó nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é yada'iiznil . Hilkáíyah áádóó Zekaráíyah índa Jáíyel éí Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizingi bídahólníihii éí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii nááhidoonih biniyé naakidi mííldóó ba'aan hastą́diin dibé yázhí áádóó tł'ízí yázhí índa táadi neeznádiin dóola éí nááda'iiłniihii yaa deiznil .
PRED:	And they gave to the princes , and to the priests , and to the Levites , and to the Levites , and to Zechariah , and for the Passover of the Lord in the house of God , three hundred goats , and three hundred goats , and three hundred goats , and three hundred goats .
GOLD:	The king 's officials also made willing contributions to the people , priests , and Levites . Hilkiah , Zechariah , and Jehiel , the administrators of God 's Temple , gave the priests 2,600 lambs and young goats and 300 cattle as Passover offerings .

ID:	6100
INPUT:	Ákohgo Esther éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá naal'a'í ła' bik'i hodiinii'ii éí Esther yá naal'a'í Héítak hágo bizhdííniid , áko ha'át'íí biniyé áádóó ha'át'íí biniinaa Mórdiikai hach'į' áhóót'įįdígíí hazhó'ó shił bééhodoozįįł , nízingo hach'į' i'ííł'a' .
PRED:	Esther called Esther the servant of the king 's servant , and he said to Esther , “ Why do you know what Mordecai has done to him ? ”
GOLD:	Then Esther sent for Hathach , one of the king 's eunuchs who had been appointed as her attendant . She ordered him to go to Mordecai and find out what was troubling him and why he was in mourning .

ID:	6101
INPUT:	Áádóó yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Bénjamin dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik' ehgo bikéyah bééhoozin ; nít'éé' Júdah dine'é bikéyah áádóó Jóseph dine'é bikéyah bita' gónaa kéyah haadzooígíí bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the tribe of Benjamin according to their families , according to their families , according to their families : and the land of Judah and the tribe of Joseph according to their inheritance .
GOLD:	The first allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Benjamin . It lay between the territory assigned to the tribes of Judah and Joseph .

ID:	6102
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bąą doo nił hats'íid da ? Áádóó ha'át'íí lá bąą ádił nitsééníltłi' ? Diyin God bee nił chohoo'į́ , háálá shíká análwo'go shił hózhǫ́ǫgo ánáshoodlíłígíí éí shiDiyin God baa nááhásh'niih doo .
PRED:	My soul , why are you sick ? Why are you afraid ? Why are you afraid ? For I will praise my God , for I will praise my God .
GOLD:	Why am I discouraged ? Why is my heart so sad ? I will put my hope in God ! I will praise him again — my Savior and my God !

ID:	6103
INPUT:	Áádóó Kéínan kéyahgi tsosts'idgo ał'ąą dine'é íísdįįdgo , kéyah daahó doogo hataideez'ą́ .
PRED:	He destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan , and gave them the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then he destroyed seven nations in Canaan and gave their land to Israel as an inheritance .

ID:	6104
INPUT:	Ha'át'íishą' biniyé nanít'ingo shits'ą́ą́' anííníchą́ą́' , áádóó shee aníní'į́į́' lá , áádóó t'áadoo shił hwíínílne' da ? Shił hwíínílne'go t'éí sin áádóó ásaa' yilghaałígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii índa nihi ł dahózhǫ́ǫgo shits'ą́ą́' dah doonáa dooleeł nít'éé' .
PRED:	Why have you fled from me ? You have hid me in a place , and do n't tell me what I have done ? Do n't tell me what I have told you ? Do n't tell me what I am going to do .
GOLD:	Why did you slip away secretly ? Why did you deceive me ? And why did n't you say you wanted to leave ? I would have given you a farewell feast , with singing and music , accompanied by tambourines and harps .

ID:	6105
INPUT:	áádóó bidiyin dabidi'níinii adeideesk'ą́ą́' ; jó , éí doo diyin da nít'éé' , nidi tsé índa tsin ádaat'éego diné ádabiilaa ; éí bąą ádeisdįįd .
PRED:	and burned them with fire ; for they did not make them gods , but they destroyed them , and they destroyed them . Therefore they destroyed them .
GOLD:	And they have thrown the gods of these nations into the fire and burned them . But of course the Assyrians could destroy them ! They were not gods at all — only idols of wood and stone shaped by human hands .

ID:	6106
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áágéédísh díí haz'ánígíí ádeeshdįįłgo níyá ? Bóhólníihii áshíłní , Nílááh , díí kéyah bik'ijį' hasínáahgo áhółdįįh .
PRED:	The Lord says to me , “ Go and destroy this place . Go and destroy this land . ”
GOLD:	What 's more , do you think we have invaded your land without the Lord 's direction ? The Lord himself told us , ‘ Attack this land and destroy it ! ' ”

ID:	6107
INPUT:	She'asdzą́ą́ baa níyá , áádóó i'niiltsąądgo ashkii yishchį́ . Áko Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Mei<unk> <unk> bee yidíízhiił .
PRED:	I went to my wife , and bore birth to a son . And the Lord said to me , “ Let him call a name . ”
GOLD:	Then I slept with my wife , and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son . And the Lord said , “ Call him Maher-shalal-hash-baz .

ID:	6108
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánáádoo'niid , T'áá shí ts'ídá ayóó ánísht'é í'díshnéehgo ts'ídá ayóó ánísht'é í'díshnéhígíí éí t'áadoo shá nídoodleełí da , nidi shiTaa' ayóó ánísht'éego áshósinígíí , Éí nihí nihiDiyin God , dadohní .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I am great and great , but I do n't trust in my Father , but you say , ‘ The Father is great . '
GOLD:	Jesus answered , “ If I want glory for myself , it does n't count . But it is my Father who will glorify me . You say , ‘ He is our God , '

ID:	6109
INPUT:	Dilní tsosts'id góne'ígíí
PRED:	The Death of the Temple
GOLD:	The Seventh Trumpet Brings the Third Terror

ID:	6110
INPUT:	Hach'il na'atł'o'ii índa hatsin fig naazkaadii hats'ą́ą́' deeshchǫǫł ; éí , Bił ałch'į' dah daashwo'ii shich'į' nidayiiléego shaa dayiiznil , jiníigo baa yájííłti' , nidi t'áá ałtsoní bee hodíłch'ilgo ádeeshłííł áádóó nidaaldlooshii yaa nahodidookah .
PRED:	I will destroy the vine and the fig tree , and the fig tree which they sent to me ; but they have spoken to me , but I will make them afraid , and they will come to me , and the beasts of the field .
GOLD:	I will destroy her grapevines and fig trees , things she claims her lovers gave her.I will let them grow into tangled thickets , where only wild animals will eat the fruit .

ID:	6111
INPUT:	Áko shinanit'a'í ádandii'niid , Nihizhé'é hólǫ́ ; t'áá hazhó'ó haastih , índa haastihgo bá yizhchínígíí éí t'ah ániid naaghá ; bínaaí ádin , áko bí t'éí bimá yę́ę yits'ą́ą́dóó yidziih , áko bizhé'é ayóó'ábó'ní .
PRED:	And we said unto my lord , We have our father , and he is old , and his firstborn was old , and he hath no son , and he hath not spoken of his brother ; and his mother loved him .
GOLD:	And we responded , ‘ Yes , my lord , we have a father who is an old man , and his youngest son is a child of his old age . His full brother is dead , and he alone is left of his mother 's children , and his father loves him very much . '

ID:	6112
INPUT:	Nidi bik'ee háhóóchįįdgo , doo t'áá k'ad yah ajííyáa da . Éí bąą hazhé'é ch'íníyáago náhooskan .
PRED:	But he was angry with them , but he did not go in . So he went out and called out to his father .
GOLD:	“ The older brother was angry and would n't go in . His father came out and begged him ,

ID:	6113
INPUT:	Nidi dóola yázhí bitsį' áádóó bikágí índa bichaan éí níbaal haal'áhídóó bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi didííłił ; ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'é .
PRED:	But you shall burn the bull , the flesh , the flesh , and the skin of the camp , and burn it out of the camp ; it is a sin offering .
GOLD:	Then take the rest of the bull , including its hide , meat , and dung , and burn it outside the camp as a sin offering .

ID:	6114
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehii hádaaht'į́ , doo yá'át'éehii éí dooda ; ákódaaht'į́įgo t'éí dahinohnáa doo . Índa t'áá ádadooniidígi át'éego t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God nihił hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	If you do good , you will live , and you will live , just as the Lord God of hosts is with you .
GOLD:	Do what is good and run from evilso that you may live ! Then the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies will be your helper , just as you have claimed .

ID:	6115
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo Ííjip dine'é hoł béédahodoozįįł biniyé Ííjip kéyah bik'ijį' dah didiish'nii'go hatahdę́ę́' Ízrel dine'é ch'ídeesh'ish .
PRED:	I have set my hand against the Egyptians , that they may know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	When I raise my powerful hand and bring out the Israelites , the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	6116
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David ádííniid , Néíhash yę́ę shaa joozba'ígi át'éego biye' Héínan baa jiideeshbaał . Áko David éí bá nidaal'a'í hadadi'yoołnih biniyé hazhé'é ádinígíí hach'į' ayiis'a' . Áádóó David bá nidaal'a'í Áman dine'é bikéyahdi yíkai .
PRED:	David said , “ I will have mercy on you , just as you have seen . ” So David sent messengers to his servants , and David sent messengers to his servants in the land of Ammon .
GOLD:	David said , “ I am going to show loyalty to Hanun just as his father , Nahash , was always loyal to me. ” So David sent ambassadors to express sympathy to Hanun about his father 's death.But when David 's ambassadors arrived in the land of Ammon ,

ID:	6117
INPUT:	áádóó éí hoodzo dooígíí Béíyala kin shijaa'dóó e'e'aahjí Dził Sí<unk> hodeesdzo áádóó Dził Jíyarim náhookǫsjí hodeesdzo ; t'áá éí Késalan hoolyé áádóó Beth-shíímesh kin shijaa' góyaa índa Tímnah kin shijaa' bíighahgóó hodeesdzo ;
PRED:	And the border set up the border from the east side of Baal , and the border of the hill country of Ephraim , and the border went down to Gibeon , and at Gibeon .
GOLD:	The boundary circled west of Baalah to Mount Seir , passed along to the town of Kesalon on the northern slope of Mount Jearim , and went down to Beth-shemesh and on to Timnah .

ID:	6118
INPUT:	T'áá háiida bił kééhojit'íinii t'áá nahont'inee dziisxíinii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	Cursed be he that kills his neighbor , and all the people shall say , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who attacks a neighbor in secret . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	6119
INPUT:	Áádóó David éí naal'a'í dashdiił'a'go Jéíbesh-gíliyadóó dine'é ííłní , Bóhólníihii nihik'izhdoodliił , háálá nihinanit'a'í nilíinii Saul yę́ę baa dajiinohba'go yóó'ádaohłaa .
PRED:	David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh , saying , “ May the Lord bless you , because you have loved Saul your master . ”
GOLD:	he sent them this message : “ May the Lord bless you for being so loyal to your master Saul and giving him a decent burial .

ID:	6120
INPUT:	K'ad ákódaohłééh , háálá Bóhólníihii éí David yee haadzíi'go ádííniid , Shá naal'a'í David binahjį' shidine'é Ízrel éí Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' áádóó ana'í t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ąjį' yisdádeeshnił .
PRED:	Now do this , because the Lord said to David , “ My servant David has said , ‘ I will deliver Israel from the Philistines and from all their enemies . ' ”
GOLD:	Now is the time ! For the Lord has said , ‘ I have chosen David to save my people Israel from the hands of the Philistines and from all their other enemies . ' ”

ID:	6121
INPUT:	Jóseph éí Ííjip binanit'a'í ábi'diilyaa
PRED:	Joseph 's King
GOLD:	Joseph Made Ruler of Egypt

ID:	6122
INPUT:	( azhą́ Jesus t'áá bí doo tó yee asį́įh da nidi , bídahooł'aahii t'éiyá ) .
PRED:	Jesus did not believe with water , but only the disciples .
GOLD:	( though Jesus himself did n't baptize them — his disciples did ) .

ID:	6123
INPUT:	Nidi télii alą́ąjį' nidahachíhígíí bitsásk'ehgi dibé yázhígo bee t'ą́ą́' náádahidoołnih , doodaii' bitsásk'ehgi doo ła' nááhideeshnih da danohsingo éí t'óó bik'os dahohtíih doo . Nihiye'ké alą́ąjį' nidahachíhígíí t'áá ałtso éí dibé yázhí bee t'ą́ą́' náádahidoołnih . Áko nááhániihii t'áágéedgo doo ła' shich'į' nizhdoogáał da .
PRED:	But if you offer the firstborn in your place , you shall offer no lamb in your place , or in your place ; and all your sons shall offer a burnt offering to me .
GOLD:	A firstborn donkey may be bought back from the Lord by presenting a lamb or young goat in its place . But if you do not buy it back , you must break its neck . However , you must buy back every firstborn son. “ No one may appear before me without an offering .

ID:	6124
INPUT:	Naaki góne' yéé' silį́į'ii bibanááhodooshzhiizh ; jó'akon , táá' góne' yéé' náádoodleełii k'adę́ę baa nááhoolzhíísh !
PRED:	And the second hour came , and behold , the third hour came .
GOLD:	The second terror is past , but look , the third terror is coming quickly .

ID:	6125
INPUT:	Kin haal'áádóó ayóó íits'a'go diné nidadi'ni' , áádóó diné tídáánáanii chaał hadahoyiinííh , nidi Diyin God doo yaa ná'áhodílt'į́į da .
PRED:	And the people of the city cried out , and cry out , but they cry not to God .
GOLD:	The groans of the dying rise from the city , and the wounded cry for help , yet God ignores their moaning .

ID:	6126
INPUT:	Diyin k'ehgo hojooba' ádaat'éego ádaa nitsídaakeesii bik'idahojidlí , háálá yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii daabíí' .
PRED:	Blessed are those who are poor , for the Kingdom of heaven belongs to them .
GOLD:	“ God blesses those who are poor and realize their need for him , for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs .

ID:	6127
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ yiizį'go ádííniid , Shaa honohłóós , áko diné doo oo'íinii t'áá áyídídę́ę́' niníyáago áyidííniid ,
PRED:	Jesus stood up and said to them , “ Bring me to me ! ” He said to the blind man who was blind ,
GOLD:	When Jesus heard him , he stopped and ordered that the man be brought to him . As the man came near , Jesus asked him ,

ID:	6128
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii nihił da'ílį́
PRED:	The Lord 's Law
GOLD:	Heth

ID:	6129
INPUT:	Díí jį́ Ar hoolyéhíjį' ha'naa ninohnééh ; éí Mó'ab kéyah bibąąhgóó áhoolyé .
PRED:	“ Get up today , as far as the border of Moab .
GOLD:	‘ Today you will cross the border of Moab at Ar

ID:	6130
INPUT:	Háálá ha'a'aahdę́ę́' índa e'e'aahdę́ę́' áádóó shádi'ááhdę́ę́' ayóó át'é á'doolíiłii ádin .
PRED:	For there is no one to come from the east and the south , and the south .
GOLD:	For no one on earth — from east or west , or even from the wilderness — should raise a defiant fist .

ID:	6131
INPUT:	áádóó níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'jį' Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é áłah ádíílííł .
PRED:	And thou shalt gather all the children of Israel together at the entrance of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	and call the entire community of Israel together at the entrance of the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	6132
INPUT:	Éí bąą atídanihishłéhígíí ałdó' bik'ee nihitah doo dahats'íid da doo , índa ádił nida'ayohsííh biniinaa nihinaagi doo siláhígóó ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	Therefore , I will punish you , and you are sick , and I will make you desolate because of your sins .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will wound you ! I will bring you to ruin for all your sins .

ID:	6133
INPUT:	Tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii doo dílzinígíí áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii díí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi ts'ídá doo didoodlił da , índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii doo bik'i yeidooził da .
PRED:	He shall burn incense on this altar , and the burnt offering , and the grain offering , and the drink offering , and the drink offering shall not pour out .
GOLD:	Do not offer any unholy incense on this altar , or any burnt offerings , grain offerings , or liquid offerings .

ID:	6134
INPUT:	Áko díí kin hadaas'áii nideidiyiiz'ą́ : éí Kíídesh kin haal'áii Gálilii kéyah biyi' , t'áá éí Náftalai dine'é bikéyah át'éego dah daask'idígi , áádóó Shííkem kin haal'áii Íífreiyim dine'é bikéyah dah daask'idígi , índa Kírjath-árba kin haal'áii , t'áá éí Hííbran ałdó' hoolyé ; éí Júdah dine'é bikéyah dah daask'idígi ,
PRED:	And they gave these cities unto them : in the land of Naphtali , and in the cities of Naphtali , and the cities of Ephraim , and the cities of Ephraim , and the cities of Hebron , Hebron , Hebron , and Hebron .
GOLD:	The following cities were designated as cities of refuge : Kedesh of Galilee , in the hill country of Naphtali ; Shechem , in the hill country of Ephraim ; and Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah .

ID:	6135
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí yee bits'ádi'nílíidii éí t'áá sahdii át'é , tł'éhonaa'éí bee bits'ádi'nídíinii éí t'áá sahdii ánáánát'é , índa sǫ' bee bits'áda'deezdíinii ałdó' t'áá sahdii ánáádaat'é ; jó , sǫ' yee ayóó ádanóolninígíí t'áá da'níł'ąą ádaat'é .
PRED:	The light of the sun is holy , and all the light of the sun , and the stars , and the stars of the stars , for all the stars were of the stars .
GOLD:	The sun has one kind of glory , while the moon and stars each have another kind . And even the stars differ from each other in their glory .

ID:	6136
INPUT:	Háálá doo t'áá nihí ádaa hwiilne' da , nidi Christ Jesus éí Bóhólníihii nilį́įgo baa hwiilne' , índa nihí éí Jesus bá nihinaal'a'í niidlį́įgo hwiilne' .
PRED:	For we do not speak to us , but to the Lord Jesus Christ , and to our servant Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	You see , we do n't go around preaching about ourselves . We preach that Jesus Christ is Lord , and we ourselves are your servants for Jesus ' sake .

ID:	6137
INPUT:	Áko chérabim bit'a' t'áá ahótą'go tádiin ké silá áníłnééz , ła' chérab bit'a' łahjí tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá éí kin neelkálíjį' biní'á . Áádóó łahjígo bit'a'ígíí ałdó' tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá éí łahjí chérab bit'a'ígíí bił ahidii'á .
PRED:	And the wings of the cherubim were twenty cubits high , and the height of the cherubim was five cubits high ; and the height of the one side was five cubits high .
GOLD:	The total wingspan of the two cherubim standing side by side was 30 feet . One wing of the first figure was 71/2 feet long , and it touched the Temple wall . The other wing , also 71/2 feet long , touched one of the wings of the second figure .

ID:	6138
INPUT:	Nít'éé' hayííłką́ągo tábąąhgi Jesus sizį́įgo dajiiłtsą́ , nidi ídahooł'aahii Jesus át'į́įgo t'áadoo yéédahoosįįd da .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the same day , that Jesus saw them standing by the sea , but the disciples did not know that Jesus was standing by the sea .
GOLD:	At dawn Jesus was standing on the beach , but the disciples could n't see who he was .

ID:	6139
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate

ID:	6140
INPUT:	T'óó áhodi'į́ bits'ąą ádaa áháyą́ągi bee i'ílnii'
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	A Warning against Hypocrisy

ID:	6141
INPUT:	doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó baa nahodeeshnih biniyé biYe' shił yit'íní áyiilaa . Íídą́ą́' ats'íís áádóó bidił dahólóonii doo ła' bił baa nísíst'įįd da .
PRED:	He made me known among the Gentiles , that I might declare to them in that time , that I would not judge any of the flesh and blood .
GOLD:	to reveal his Son to me so that I would proclaim the Good News about Jesus to the Gentiles.When this happened , I did not rush out to consult with any human being .

ID:	6142
INPUT:	Nidi ni'ílnii'go , ákǫ́ǫ́ díínáałgo t'áá a'ohgo ádaat'éii dah nídinibįįhgi dah díníídaał , áko ni'níłnii'ígíí ándidooniił , Shik'is , aláahgo ádaat'éii dah nídinibįįhgi dah nídaah , áko nił da'ayánígíí t'áá ałtso bił nílį́į doo .
PRED:	But when you go , go and sit down in the field , and you will say to him , “ My brother , sit down on the throne , and you will be with all the good things you have done . ”
GOLD:	“ Instead , take the lowest place at the foot of the table . Then when your host sees you , he will come and say , ‘ Friend , we have a better place for you ! ' Then you will be honored in front of all the other guests .

ID:	6143
INPUT:	Héírim ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii ła' : Eliyíízer , Aisháíjah , Malkáíyah , Shiiméíyah , Shímiyan ,
PRED:	And of the sons of Persia : Shemaiah , and Shimei , and Shimei , and Shimei ;
GOLD:	From the family of Harim : Eliezer , Ishijah , Malkijah , Shemaiah , Shimeon ,

ID:	6144
INPUT:	Doo áhályáanii nishłį́į́ nít'éé' ! Jó , nihí ákónísht'ée dooleeł góne' adashinooyood , nihíjígo yee' yá'át'éehgo shá hadahidoohdzih nít'éé' . Háálá daal'aadii aláahdi ádaat'éii dabidohnínígíí doo bi'ohgo ánísht'ée da , azháánee' t'áadoo nishłíní da nidi .
PRED:	I was a fool , and I sent you into the wilderness , and you would speak good to me . For I am not greater than the apostles . ”
GOLD:	You have made me act like a fool . You ought to be writing commendations for me , for I am not at all inferior to these “ super apostles , ” even though I am nothing at all .

ID:	6145
INPUT:	Áko ła' hak'ídahidizheehgo áádóó hanák'e nináda'ałbałgo índa yéego nínádahodiika'go , Diyin God yá halne'ii nílį́įgo háishą' nándííłts'in bee nihił hólne' , dahałníigo haa nídiikai . Áádóó siláo dah dahodiilóozgo yéego hoł dzinídeidika'go yaa naaskai .
PRED:	And they found some of them in the midst of the midst of the field , and cast him on him , and cast him on him , and said unto us , Who is the man of God ? And they took him away , and cast him into the hands of the army .
GOLD:	Then some of them began to spit at him , and they blindfolded him and beat him with their fists . “ Prophesy to us , ” they jeered . And the guards slapped him as they took him away .

ID:	6146
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad Diyin God ch'ééh shideesá ; sha'áłchíní ałtso ásíníłdįįd .
PRED:	But now God has helped me , and you have destroyed my children .
GOLD:	“ O God , you have ground me downand devastated my family .

ID:	6147
INPUT:	Áádóó Líívai dine'é bigish bikáa'gi éí Éran bízhi' ádíílííł ; Ízrel dine'é dahazhé'é yę́ę náás ahoolchíiłii bá aląąjį' nidzizíinii gish t'ááłá'í hak'eh nítą́ą doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt set it upon Aaron 's rod , and thou shalt take a rod of the sons of Israel according to their fathers ' houses .
GOLD:	Inscribe Aaron 's name on the staff of the tribe of Levi , for there must be one staff for the leader of each ancestral tribe .

ID:	6148
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Diné hóyáanii bibee hódzą' t'áadoo yee ádaa ha'niihí áádóó diné ayóó át'éii nilíinii yee ayóó át'éhígíí t'áadoo yee ádaa ha'niihí índa diné at'íinii biyódí t'áadoo yee ádaa ha'niihí ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The wise man is not proud , and the glory of the wise , and the rich man 's glory ,
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't let the wise boast in their wisdom , or the powerful boast in their power , or the rich boast in their riches .

ID:	6149
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' béégashii yáázh yida'iilaa , áko be'elyaii yich'į' nááda'iiłniih áádóó t'áá bí bíla' yee ádayiilaii yaa bił dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	And they made a calf at that time , and they offered sacrifices to the image of their hands , and their own hands were glad .
GOLD:	So they made an idol shaped like a calf , and they sacrificed to it and celebrated over this thing they had made .

ID:	6150
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' índa Ha<unk> dóó Ízrel dine'é dah náádii'náago Péíran honoojíigi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	And after these things the children of Israel departed from there , and encamped in the wilderness of Goshen .
GOLD:	Then they left Hazeroth and camped in the wilderness of Paran .

ID:	6151
INPUT:	Áko Férisii danilíinii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo hódahooł'aahii ádeidííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' nanihizhnitinígíí tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii índa bąąhági ádaaníiłii bił da'jiyą́ ?
PRED:	When the Pharisees saw it , they said to his disciples , “ Why do you eat with us ? Why do you eat the tax floor and drink ? ”
GOLD:	But when the Pharisees saw this , they asked his disciples , “ Why does your teacher eat with such scum ? ”

ID:	6152
INPUT:	Ákondi k'ad chánah danohłį́ nihidishní , háálá ła'da nihitahdóó doo yóó'adootłishí da , nidi tsinaa'eeł t'éiyá ałtso nihidooltǫǫł .
PRED:	But now I say to you , for no one will be cut off from you , but the ship will be broken .
GOLD:	But take courage ! None of you will lose your lives , even though the ship will go down .

ID:	6153
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í jinítínígo éí béésh łigaii áádóó béésh łitsoii hwee dahólónígíí Bóhólníihii baa dahizdeez'ánígíí nidajiizhjaa' , áko Bóhólníihii baa nídahizdeez'ą́ . Áádóó t'ááłá'í jinítínígo tsin nitł'izii hwee dahólónígíí chodeidoo'įįł biniyé nidajiizhjaa' .
PRED:	They brought all the vessels of silver , silver , and bronze , and gave them to the Lord ; and every man brought it to the Lord .
GOLD:	And all who had silver and bronze objects gave them as a sacred offering to the Lord . And those who had acacia wood brought it for use in the project .

ID:	6154
INPUT:	Jónah ahééh nízingo bisodizin
PRED:	Jonah 's People
GOLD:	Jonah 's Prayer

ID:	6155
INPUT:	Atsiniltł'ish ahíł<unk> go bee tanoołkaad ; yíníłkáahgo bił ałtaa hó'aah !
PRED:	And thou shalt cast them into the clay , and cast them with him .
GOLD:	Hurl your lightning bolts and scatter your enemies ! Shoot your arrows and confuse them !

ID:	6156
INPUT:	Áko David éí Abísheiyai áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso áyidííniid , Shoo , shiye' shits'ą́ą́dóó hazlį́į'ii , she'iina' niidoołt'ihgo yiniyé hát'į́ ; t'ah biláhídi át'éego díí Bénjamin dine'é nilíinii kót'éego yaa naaghá . Bíni'dii t'áadoo baa nídaot'íní , bíni'dii ódziih , háálá Bóhólníihii ákóbíłníigo át'į́ .
PRED:	David said to Abishai and all his servants , “ Behold , my son is a man of my son , that he may lay down his life , so much more than the people of Benjamin , for the Lord said to him , “ Let him speak to him . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants , “ My own son is trying to kill me . Does n't this relative of Saul have even more reason to do so ? Leave him alone and let him curse , for the Lord has told him to do it .

ID:	6157
INPUT:	Áko Éíbram éí Lat hats'ánínáádóó bik'ijį' Bóhólníihii áhodííniid , Náhookǫsjigo áádóó shádi'áahjigo áádóó ha'a'aahjigo índa e'e'aahjigo díní'į́į́' .
PRED:	And Abram turned away from him , and the Lord said unto him , Behold , the north , and the east , and the east , and the east .
GOLD:	After Lot had gone , the Lord said to Abram , “ Look as far as you can see in every direction — north and south , east and west .

ID:	6158
INPUT:	Áko Dan dine'é yich'į' dadilwosh . Nít'éé' Máíkah bich'į'go nídadzizyizgo ádabijiní , Haa lá yinidzaago diné t'óó ahayóí nikéé' nooyééł ?
PRED:	And they cried out unto Dan . And they turned unto Micah , and said , What is the multitude of many men followed thee ?
GOLD:	They were shouting as they caught up with them . The men of Dan turned around and said to Micah , “ What 's the matter ? Why have you called these men together and chased after us like this ? ”

ID:	6159
INPUT:	Ádanóolninígíí t'áadoo bééníldzidí , háálá yisdándeeshtéełgo biniyé nił honishłǫ́ , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , for I am with you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	And do n't be afraid of the people , for I will be with you and will protect you . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	6160
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes bił dahojoolne'go ádajiní , Kéyah bich'į' nihííníł'aadígíí baa niikai ; t'áá aaníí éí kéyah yá'áhoot'éehgi abe' índa tsés'ná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįdgo haz'ą́ą́ lá , áko díí aneest'ą' áádę́ę́' nídashiijaa' .
PRED:	They told Moses , “ We have brought us to the land you gave us , a good land full of honey and honey . ”
GOLD:	This was their report to Moses : “ We entered the land you sent us to explore , and it is indeed a bountiful country — a land flowing with milk and honey . Here is the kind of fruit it produces .

ID:	6161
INPUT:	Jesus éí náá'diijeeh índa iiná nilį́
PRED:	Jesus and the Death
GOLD:	The Plot to Kill Jesus

ID:	6162
INPUT:	Ts'ídá dooda lą́ą ! Bąąhági át'éii bits'ąą danee'náago haash yit'éego t'ahdii t'áá éí bii' dahinii'náa doo ?
PRED:	No ! If we have died from sin , how can we live in him ?
GOLD:	Of course not ! Since we have died to sin , how can we continue to live in it ?

ID:	6163
INPUT:	Hazéé' bee ajilįhígi át'éego ajółts'ą́ą́' bee saad hoł nibééhwiizįįh .
PRED:	As the mouth of his mouth is understanding , so is the words of his mouth .
GOLD:	Job said , ‘ The ear tests the words it hearsjust as the mouth distinguishes between foods . '

ID:	6164
INPUT:	T'áá háiida daz'diits'a'ii Níłch'i Diyinii éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii kwííłníigo yee yił halne'ígíí háni'dii dajíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	If anyone has ears , let him hear what the Spirit says to the church .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches .

ID:	6165
INPUT:	Áko doo t'áá nihí nihindaanishígíí t'éiyá yidoołchǫǫł dagi át'é , nidi ayóó át'é asdzą́ą́ diyinii Daiyána wolyéii kin bii' bich'į' nahadláhígíí ałdó' doo ílį́į da dooleeł , áko doo bił ádaa hólníi da dooleełgi át'é , jó , éí Éízhagi índa nihokáá' dine'é t'áá át'é k'ad deidísin .
PRED:	You are not able to destroy all your work , but you will not be able to be ashamed in the house of the woman , so that they will be ashamed , and all the world will fear him .
GOLD:	Of course , I 'm not just talking about the loss of public respect for our business . I 'm also concerned that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will lose its influence and that Artemis — this magnificent goddess worshiped throughout the province of Asia and all around the world — will be robbed of her great prestige ! ”

ID:	6166
INPUT:	Dził bąąhdóó tsé doo yílá bee haalne'ii e'elyaii bístałgo yiniłtsáanii éí béésh nitł'izii , béésh łitsoii , hashtł'ish , béésh łigaii índa óola ałtso yidííséí . Áko , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , Diyin God Ayóó'át'éii éí náásgóó ádahodooníłígíí yaa halne'go baa neisíníyeel ; t'áádóo nídí ádooníiłii baa neisíníyeelgo yaa halne' .
PRED:	And he broke down the stone that had been cut down from the mountain , iron , and silver , and silver , and silver , and silver , and silver , and gold , O king , and the vision of the Most High God . And it was a dream to the vision .
GOLD:	That is the meaning of the rock cut from the mountain , though not by human hands , that crushed to pieces the statue of iron , bronze , clay , silver , and gold . The great God was showing the king what will happen in the future . The dream is true , and its meaning is certain . ”

ID:	6167
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago dį́į́' náhááh góne' Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah éí Niiráíyah biye' Bérak díí saad yee yich'į' yáłti'go naaltsoos yikáá' níyíí<unk> go ání ,
PRED:	In the fourth year of Josiah the son of Josiah , king of Judah , he sent a book to Baruch the son of Shaphan the prophet , saying ,
GOLD:	The prophet Jeremiah gave a message to Baruch son of Neriah in the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah , after Baruch had written down everything Jeremiah had dictated to him . He said ,

ID:	6168
INPUT:	Bízhi' diyinii bee baa dahohniih le' ! Bóhólníihii há daat'íinii bijéí bił nidahoozhǫǫh le' !
PRED:	Praise the name of his name ! Let the Lord rejoice in his heart .
GOLD:	Exult in his holy name ; rejoice , you who worship the Lord .

ID:	6169
INPUT:	Doo áháyą' éí áłchíní bijéí bii'di hólǫ́ , nidi tsin bee áłchíní nánílghałgo bee hasht'e'nehedlóosii éí doo áháyą' yę́ę nízaadgóó ayízdínóołhał .
PRED:	A little child is in his heart , but the tongue of the wicked shall devour the earth .
GOLD:	A youngster 's heart is filled with foolishness , but physical discipline will drive it far away .

ID:	6170
INPUT:	dabidiyoołhééł , áádóó tágí jį́ aleeh góne' náábidi'doodlááł . Áko t'áá íiyisí bąąh daháni' .
PRED:	He will kill them on the third day , and on the third day . And they were troubled .
GOLD:	He will be killed , but on the third day he will be raised from the dead. ” And the disciples were filled with grief .

ID:	6171
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Kin hadaas'á yę́ęgóó diné doo kéédahat'ínígíí nahalingo kin haal'áii ánihiséłdįįdgo tónteeldę́ę́' tó ayóó ánéelą́ą́' nik'i didoolkǫǫł .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord God : The cities of the cities shall be desolate , as I have destroyed thee , and the sea shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	6172
INPUT:	Háálá tł'óo'di áłchíní nidaakaígíí índa kintaa da'nítiingóó tsíłkéí nidaakaígíí nidadootsił biniyé nihitsédaasǫ' góne' índa aláahgo nihinanit'a'í bighan naaznil yę́ęgóó aniné yah ahóóle' .
PRED:	For the man entered into your houses , and in your houses , to kill the young men in the streets , to kill them , to kill them .
GOLD:	For death has crept in through our windowsand has entered our mansions.It has killed off the flower of our youth : Children no longer play in the streets , and young men no longer gather in the squares .

ID:	6173
INPUT:	Háálá t'ááłá'í jinítínígo dajókeedii éí haa dahalyé , hádajit'ínígíí bik'ídajiikááh , índa dáádílkał nídazniłts'inígíí há ąą ádaalne' .
PRED:	For they that seek him shall find him , and the door shall be opened , and the door shall be opened .
GOLD:	For everyone who asks , receives . Everyone who seeks , finds . And to everyone who knocks , the door will be opened .

ID:	6174
INPUT:	Áko Líbna kin haal'áádę́ę́' Jáshowa dah diiyáago Léíkish kin haal'áajį' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso hoł yíkaigo kin haal'áii biníjíshzhiizh áádóó bik'i jiijéé' ,
PRED:	So Joshua went out from Libnah , and all Israel with him , and came to Hebron , and fought against it .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	6175
INPUT:	Yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Diyin God déé'į́į'go éí nihokáá' dine'é ła'da daats'í ak'i'diitįįh , áádóó ła'da daats'í Diyin God hádaat'į́ nízingo háidéez'į́į́' .
PRED:	When I looked up from heaven , there is no one in the world , and there is none to seek God .
GOLD:	God looks down from heavenon the entire human race ; he looks to see if anyone is truly wise , if anyone seeks God .

ID:	6176
INPUT:	áádóó nihich'į' díigi át'éhígíí hazhó'ó danół'į́ , áko díí béédaałniih dooígíí éí Bóhólníihii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é bida'íínóhsin doo , áko danihijéí bik'ehgo índa daah'ínígíí bik'ehgo doo ádaahníił da doo ; jó , éí ajiłda bee t'óó ádee nidaahnéé nít'éé' ; shoo , díí béédaałniih .
PRED:	and see what you do to you , that you may remember all these commandments , that you may do according to all the commandments of the Lord , and do not do according to all your heart and according to your heart , and you shall die .
GOLD:	When you see the tassels , you will remember and obey all the commands of the Lord instead of following your own desires and defiling yourselves , as you are prone to do .

ID:	6177
INPUT:	K'ad hágo haa'íshą' díí baa nídíit'įįł , ní Bóhólníihii . Azhą́ nihibąąhági át'éii éí t'áá íiyisí łichxíí' nidi , yas nahalingo łigai dooleeł ; azhą́ diłhiłgo łichxíí' nidi , aghaałgaiigi át'éego łigai doo .
PRED:	Now therefore , let these things be done unto them , saith the Lord : even if thy sin is great , he shall be white , even if he is white , even if he is white , he shall be white , and white .
GOLD:	“ Come now , let 's settle this , ” says the Lord. “ Though your sins are like scarlet , I will make them as white as snow.Though they are red like crimson , I will make them as white as wool .

ID:	6178
INPUT:	áko ájíní , T'áá łinishchí'ígo shimá shishchį́ , áádóó t'áá łinishchí'ígo dah nídideeshdááł ; Bóhólníihii sheidiní'ą́ , Bóhólníihii shaa nááyiisdláá' ; Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee bi'dójíigo baa ha'niih le' .
PRED:	He said , “ I have been my mother 's sister , and I will take my nakedness . The Lord has given me the name of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ I came naked from my mother 's womb , and I will be naked when I leave.The Lord gave me what I had , and the Lord has taken it away.Praise the name of the Lord ! ”

ID:	6179
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii áháłní , Ákǫ́ǫ́ dínááh , háálá ats'áhoníłtį́įgo chohwiideesh'įįłii jílį́ , áko doo Jew dine'é danilíinii índa naat'áanii danilíinii , áádóó Ízrel dine'é bich'į' shízhi' bééhózingo ádajile' doo ,
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ Go , for he is a thief and a thief , so that they may know that my name will be known to the Jews and princes of Israel .
GOLD:	But the Lord said , “ Go , for Saul is my chosen instrument to take my message to the Gentiles and to kings , as well as to the people of Israel .

ID:	6180
INPUT:	Áko shidził diyinii bighą́ą'di íínídlą́'ígi át'éego ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso da'adlą́ą dooleeł ; idadí'nóodlį́įłgo nídadí'nóodlį́į́ł índa ts'ídá t'áadoo nidahaazhchį́į da nidahalin doo .
PRED:	And all the nations shall drink the cup of my holy mountain , and drink , and drink , and drink , and drink , and drink not .
GOLD:	Just as you swallowed up my peopleon my holy mountain , so you and the surrounding nationswill swallow the punishment I pour out on you.Yes , all you nations will drink and staggerand disappear from history .

ID:	6181
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii bik'ah éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidiłi' doo .
PRED:	And the fat of the sin offering shall be burned upon the altar .
GOLD:	He must then burn all the fat of the sin offering on the altar .

ID:	6182
INPUT:	Bénjamin dine'é nilíinii Iiláíyada , éí diné hayóii nilį́ ; éí naakidi neeznádiindi mííl siláo éí k'aa' áádóó naagé nideijaahii yił dah yinééł .
PRED:	The tribe of Benjamin was Elijah , who was a mighty man , two hundred thousand , and two hundred thousand men with him .
GOLD:	From Benjamin there were 200,000 troops equipped with bows and shields . They were under the command of Eliada , a veteran soldier .

ID:	6183
INPUT:	Nidi , Diyin God Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nich'į' dísh'į́į́' ; niniit'aajį' adínéeshchéełgo nich'į' cho'oosh'į́ ; t'áá ákohígo shidóóchííd yíila' !
PRED:	But I have seen you , O Lord God , and I pray to you ; do not let me go to a place .
GOLD:	I look to you for help , O Sovereign Lord.You are my refuge ; do n't let them kill me .

ID:	6184
INPUT:	ádahodííniid , Diné doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhígíí baa yíníyáago bił da'ííníyą́ą́' .
PRED:	They said to him , “ When the uncircumcised came to the uncircumcised , they ate it . ”
GOLD:	“ You entered the home of Gentiles and even ate with them ! ” they said .

ID:	6185
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo danéél'į́į'go yá'ádaat'éehgo bééhoozin ; baa dadzólíii éí yá naagé nilį́ .
PRED:	The word of God is good , and they are a shield of shield .
GOLD:	Every word of God proves true.He is a shield to all who come to him for protection .

ID:	6186
INPUT:	Jéíkab éí Réíchel áádóó Líyah bik'é Léíban yá naashnish
PRED:	Jacob and Leah
GOLD:	Jacob Arrives at Paddan-Aram

ID:	6187
INPUT:	Ła'da nish'náájígo t'áadoo le'é yąąh dah neeshjį́įdgo , nidi t'óó dichin bidí'nóołhééł , áádóó nishtł'ajígo yee ííyą́ą' nidi , doo hwiih nilį́į da doo ; diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'áá hó hagaan nijílghał doo .
PRED:	If anyone has fallen on his right hand , he will eat the hungry , but he will not be filled with the left , but everyone will eat his own arm .
GOLD:	They will attack their neighbor on the rightbut will still be hungry.They will devour their neighbor on the leftbut will not be satisfied.In the end they will even eat their own children .

ID:	6188
INPUT:	Áádóó Kóhath dine'é łahjį'ígíí yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Íífreiyim dine'é áádóó Dan dine'é índa Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí éí bada'áłchíní ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bikin hadaas'áii neeznáá kin haal'á bíighahgo bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	And the rest of the sons of Kohath , the rest of the sons of Ephraim , and of the tribe of Manasseh , and of the tribe of Manasseh , ten cities .
GOLD:	The other families of the Kohathite clan were allotted ten towns from the tribes of Ephraim , Dan , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	6189
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph áhodííniid , Díí ááhyiłní , Táá' bits'áoz'a'ígíí éí táá' yidoołkááł .
PRED:	Joseph said to them , “ This is the third three branches , and three days will be three . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph said . “ The three branches represent three days .

ID:	6190
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'áhígi dahólónígíí , diné áádóó asdzání ániid nidaakaii áádóó hadaastihii , béégashiida , dibéda índa téliida ts'ídá ałtso diltłish yee ádeisdįįd .
PRED:	And the city was in the city , and the young men , and the young men , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the donkeys , and the edge of the sword .
GOLD:	They completely destroyed everything in it with their swords — men and women , young and old , cattle , sheep , goats , and donkeys .

ID:	6191
INPUT:	Áko Jesus éí ashkii bizhé'é nayízhdééłkidgo ábijiní , Hádą́ą'shą' kót'į́ silį́į́' ? Áko ájíní , T'áá áłchíní nilį́į́dą́ą́' .
PRED:	Jesus asked his father , “ Where are you ? ” He answered , “ The child was old . ”
GOLD:	“ How long has this been happening ? ” Jesus asked the boy 's father.He replied , “ Since he was a little boy .

ID:	6192
INPUT:	Aghánáhóó'áádę́ę́' Diyin God éí Christ Jesus bee shíizhi'ígíí hodínéeshnééł biniyé t'áá shizááká nihoneel'ą́ąjį' yishwoł .
PRED:	I am able to help me from above to come to the name of God Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I press on to reach the end of the race and receive the heavenly prize for which God , through Christ Jesus , is calling us .

ID:	6193
INPUT:	Diné doo hóyáanii éí saad t'áá ałtso yoodlą́ , nidi diné hóyáanii éí yigááłgóó álą́ąjį' déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	All the words of the wise have faith , but the wise is in front of him .
GOLD:	Only simpletons believe everything they 're told ! The prudent carefully consider their steps .

ID:	6194
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jew dine'é bi'atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii k'adę́ę baa hoolzhíishgo , Jerúsalem góde Jesus dah diiyá .
PRED:	At the end of the Passover , Jesus went up to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	It was nearly time for the Jewish Passover celebration , so Jesus went to Jerusalem .

ID:	6195
INPUT:	Ade áhoot'é doo łeeshtahdóó haleeh da , índa ach'į' nahwii'ná doo łeeyi'dę́ę́' haniséeh da ;
PRED:	And the dust shall rise up from the dust , and the dust shall not grow in the dust .
GOLD:	But evil does not spring from the soil , and trouble does not sprout from the earth .

ID:	6196
INPUT:	Háálá Jáshowa éí t'áadoo t'ą́ą́' anídílníhí tsiidétáán t'áá yił dah doolnihgo Éí'aigi kéédahat'íinii ałtso ádeisdįįdjį' yił dah doolnih nít'éé' .
PRED:	For Joshua stretched out his spear , and put it on his spear , and cut off all the inhabitants of Ai until he had destroyed them .
GOLD:	For Joshua kept holding out his spear until everyone who had lived in Ai was completely destroyed .

ID:	6197
INPUT:	Áko Áízak haye' Jéíkab dashdiił'a' , áádóó Péídan-éíramgóó Síriya dine'é Biithúwel biye' éí Jéíkab áádóó Íísa bimá Rebékah bínaaí Léíban bich'į' ajííyá .
PRED:	And Isaac sent Jacob his son , and came to Laban the son of Esau , and Esau the son of Esau , and Rebekah his brother .
GOLD:	So Isaac sent Jacob away , and he went to Paddan-aram to stay with his uncle Laban , his mother 's brother , the son of Bethuel the Aramean .

ID:	6198
INPUT:	Áádóó David éí Filístiya diné áyidííniid , Ni éí diltłish áádóó tsiidétáán índa naagé bił shich'į' híídááł , nidi t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bisiláo biDiyin God nabí'í'įįhii bízhi' bee nich'į' heeshdááł .
PRED:	David said to the Philistines , “ You are a sword , sword , and shield , but the Lord of hosts has sent you to the army of Israel . ”
GOLD:	David replied to the Philistine , “ You come to me with sword , spear , and javelin , but I come to you in the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies — the God of the armies of Israel , whom you have defied .

ID:	6199
INPUT:	Díí haz'ánígi índa ákwii kééhojit'ínígíí t'áá bił ts'ídá díigi át'éego áhodeeshłííł , áko díí kin haal'áhígíí t'áá Tófetgi át'éego áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will do as I will do to this place and the inhabitants of this place , so that I will make them as I will do to this city . ”
GOLD:	This is what I will do to this place and its people , says the Lord . I will cause this city to become defiled like Topheth .

ID:	6200
INPUT:	Bich'il na'atł'o'ii índa fig deíl'áhígíí atíyiilaa , áádóó bikéyah bikáa'gi t'áá níłtéél nít'éé' tsin naazkaadii niyiizti' .
PRED:	He destroyed the fig trees and the fig trees , and he broke them on every tree .
GOLD:	He ruined their grapevines and fig treesand shattered all the trees .

ID:	6201
INPUT:	Áko ádadííniid , Da' díísh doo Jesus , Jóseph biye' át'į́į da ? Bizhé'é áádóó bimá béédahoniilzin . Ha'át'éegoshą' áko k'ad , Shí yá'ąąshdę́ę́' hadááyá , jiní ?
PRED:	They answered , “ Is n't this not Joseph 's son ? We know his father and mother ? Why do you come down from heaven ? ”
GOLD:	They said , “ Is n't this Jesus , the son of Joseph ? We know his father and mother . How can he say , ‘ I came down from heaven ' ? ”

ID:	6202
INPUT:	Náshan éí Amínadab biye' , Amínadab éí Ram biye' , Ram éí Hézran biye' , Hézran éí Píírez biye' , Píírez éí Júdah biye' ,
PRED:	The son of Amminadab , the son of Amminadab , the son of Amminadab , the son of Zerah , the son of Zerah , the son of Kohath ,
GOLD:	Nahshon was the son of Amminadab.Amminadab was the son of Admin.Admin was the son of Arni.Arni was the son of Hezron.Hezron was the son of Perez.Perez was the son of Judah .

ID:	6203
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí yaa ákoniizį́į'go yik'ee doo bił hóózhǫǫd da , áko áhodííniid , Bíni'dii áłchíní shaa hakááh , t'áadoo shich'į' nidanoh'iní , háálá ákódaat'éhígíí Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bíí' ádaat'é .
PRED:	But when Jesus saw that he was glad , he said to them , “ Let the children come to me , and do n't let them come to me , for these are the kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus saw what was happening , he was angry with his disciples . He said to them , “ Let the children come to me . Do n't stop them ! For the Kingdom of God belongs to those who are like these children .

ID:	6204
INPUT:	Áko tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí bijáád yits'ą́ą́' yeidiyiiníiłgo nidahidinikááh silį́į́' ; éí bąą Ííjip dine'é ádadííniid , Bíni'dii Ízrel dine'é bits'ą́ąjigo t'ą́ąjį' dah didiijah , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é yich'į' anaa' ííł'į́ .
PRED:	And he gave us his chariots , and they became our way ; therefore the Egyptians said unto them , Let the Egyptians turn away from them , for the Lord hath fought against the Egyptians .
GOLD:	He twisted their chariot wheels , making their chariots difficult to drive . “ Let 's get out of here — away from these Israelites ! ” the Egyptians shouted . “ The Lord is fighting for them against Egypt ! ”

ID:	6205
INPUT:	Áádóó óola bee na'ats'ǫǫsí bééda'alyaii náádayiisnii' : Filístiya dine'é yinanit'a'í ashdlalt'éego bikin hadaas'áii t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo , ła' ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'inii áádóó kin dashijaa' éí yá náádayiisnii' ; tsé ayóó áníłtso si'áníjį' Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádayiisnii' . Díí tsé ayóó áníłtsoígíí bikáa'gi Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii dah dadziz'ánígíí éí tsé díí jį́įdi t'ahdii Beth-shíímesh kin shijaa'dóó diné nilíinii , Jáshowa wolyéii bidá'ák'ehgi si'ą́ .
PRED:	And they sacrificed the gold rings of gold , five kings of the Philistines , according to all the cities of the Philistines ; and they offered them to the wall , and to the great stone , and to the great stone , and they offered it upon the ark of the Lord , which is on this day .
GOLD:	The five gold rats represented the five Philistine towns and their surrounding villages , which were controlled by the five rulers . The large rock at Beth-shemesh , where they set the Ark of the Lord , still stands in the field of Joshua as a witness to what happened there .

ID:	6206
INPUT:	Húshai biye' Béíyanah éí Ásher dine'é bikéyahdę́ę́' áádóó Éílath nahós'a'dę́ę́' ch'iyáán nináyiijááh .
PRED:	And Hushai the son of Hushai , from the tribe of Asher , and from the land of Asher ;
GOLD:	Baana son of Hushai , in Asher and in Aloth .

ID:	6207
INPUT:	Dį́į́' góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Ísakar dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin .
PRED:	And there was a fourth hour for the sons of Issachar according to their families , according to their families .
GOLD:	The fourth allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Issachar .

ID:	6208
INPUT:	Adónai-bíízek deisná
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Israel Fails to Conquer the Land

ID:	6209
INPUT:	Áko Nóah bił énáhoosdzingo haye' akéédę́'ígíí áhóół'įįdígíí hoł bééhoozingo
PRED:	When Noah saw that the son of Noah had come to him , he saw what the boy had done .
GOLD:	When Noah woke up from his stupor , he learned what Ham , his youngest son , had done .

ID:	6210
INPUT:	Háá'áyį́į́h jį́ aleeh góne' diné bąąh náhineeshgizhgo , ákondi Mózes yee has'áanii doo k'éti' da nilį́įgo , da' ákoósh háá'áyį́į́h jį́ aleeh góne' diné hazhó'ó hadaałt'é ánáshdlaaígíí biniinaa shich'į' nihádahazhchįįd ?
PRED:	On the Sabbath day , when a man was circumcised , he was circumcised , but Moses did not accept the law of Moses , but now would they be angry with me for the Sabbath day ?
GOLD:	For if the correct time for circumcising your son falls on the Sabbath , you go ahead and do it so as not to break the law of Moses . So why should you be angry with me for healing a man on the Sabbath ?

ID:	6211
INPUT:	Daniel éí Bélteshazar ałdó' joolyéego aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Da' baa neisíyeelii áádóó ááhyiłníinii shił bééhodíísįįłgoósh bíninil'ą́ ?
PRED:	Daniel said to the king , “ Do you want me to know the dream and its interpretation ? ”
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	6212
INPUT:	Shí Jude , Jesus Christ yá naal'a'í , James yił háá'áázh nishłíinii , Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii diyingo ádahoolaii , Jesus Christ haa áhályą́ągo bíí' dajílínígíí , Diyin God háká ádííniidii , hach'į' naaltsoos áshłééh :
PRED:	I am the servant of James , the servant of James , the Father of Jesus Christ , whom he has called to him , who is in the holy place of God Jesus Christ ,
GOLD:	This letter is from Jude , a slave of Jesus Christ and a brother of James.I am writing to all who have been called by God the Father , who loves you and keeps you safe in the care of Jesus Christ .

ID:	6213
INPUT:	Nidi hwe'asdzą́ą́ jijoołáhígíí biyáázh alą́ąjį' há yizhchíinii baa ákoznízingo hwee hólóonii t'áá át'é naakidi ahą́ą́h nániiláago baazhdidoo'ááł , háálá bitsxe'ii bineest'ą' bee deezt'i'ii nilį́ ; alą́ąjį' bi'dizhchíinii nilį́įgo bíi'ii bíí' dooleełgo bee bá haz'ą́ .
PRED:	But if his wife knows that he is born , he will give him two times for all that he has , because he has given him the fruit of the firstborn , because he is the firstborn of the firstborn .
GOLD:	He must recognize the rights of his oldest son , the son of the wife he does not love , by giving him a double portion . He is the first son of his father 's virility , and the rights of the firstborn belong to him .

ID:	6214
INPUT:	Áko díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh bijį́ atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihgo dibé yázhí nááhániihii baa hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	And the feast of unleavened bread was at the feast of unleavened bread .
GOLD:	Now the Festival of Unleavened Bread arrived , when the Passover lamb is sacrificed .

ID:	6215
INPUT:	Shefatáíyah ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	The sons of Jeshua , three hundred and two .
GOLD:	The family of Shephatiah372

ID:	6216
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii kóshíłníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	6217
INPUT:	Ahídajikadígi át'éego tooh ahínídadiilk'ołgo índa dził t'áá ahąąh bił nidahoozhǫǫhgo
PRED:	As the waters of the sea were glad , and the mountains were glad ,
GOLD:	Let the rivers clap their hands in glee ! Let the hills sing out their songs of joy

ID:	6218
INPUT:	Nidi ídahooł'aahii haa áłah silį́į́' , nít'éé' nízhdii'na' , áko kin haal'áajį' náádzídzá , áádóó biiskání Bárnabas bił Dérbiigóó jiní'áázh .
PRED:	But the disciples gathered together together , and rose up , and went back to the city , and Barnabas went with him on the next day .
GOLD:	But as the believers gathered around him , he got up and went back into the town . The next day he left with Barnabas for Derbe .

ID:	6219
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é éí ahoodzą́ągo ádahoolaaí góyaa nahodits'ǫ' ííłdááz ; tł'óół bee ódleehí nídeidees'į́į'ii t'áá bí yiih nídahaaskai .
PRED:	The nations are cast into a pit , and they have come into their own net .
GOLD:	The nations have fallen into the pit they dug for others.Their own feet have been caught in the trap they set .

ID:	6220
INPUT:	Aa hwiinít'įįh beidoołkááł t'áá áyídí hadziih
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	A Call to Faithfulness

ID:	6221
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áago wáin łichíi'go bits'ą́ą́dóó ál'íinii baa dahohtaał .
PRED:	Sing to him in those days , from the wine of wine .
GOLD:	“ In that day , sing about the fruitful vineyard .

ID:	6222
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii bídahooł'aahígíí éí Béthelgi Iiláísha yaa yíkaigo ádeiłní , Bóhólníihii díí jį́ bóhoníłníihii nits'ą́ą́' néididoołtéełgoósh nił bééhózin ? Aoo' , shił bééhózin ; t'áadoo ádadohníní .
PRED:	Then the disciples of the prophets came to Elisha at Bethel , and said to him , “ Do you know that the Lord will give you this day ? ” They said , “ Yes , I know not . ”
GOLD:	The group of prophets from Bethel came to Elisha and asked him , “ Did you know that the Lord is going to take your master away from you today ? ” “ Of course I know , ” Elisha answered . “ But be quiet about it . ”

ID:	6223
INPUT:	áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi ha'át'íhígíida doo naalyée da doogo bee hojiił'a' .
PRED:	and he sent it not to be called the temple .
GOLD:	and he stopped everyone from using the Temple as a marketplace .

ID:	6224
INPUT:	Óola áłts'óózígo neheeshgizhígíí áádóó yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí áádóó łichxí'ígíí índa áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii baa dahidoo'nił .
PRED:	And they shall be of gold , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	So give them fine linen cloth , gold thread , and blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	6225
INPUT:	Ákohgo Mózes hach'į' yee haadzíi'go níbaal haal'áhígóó t'áá át'é hazhó'ó baa nídahojoolne'go diné áádóó asdzání éí níbaal bii' hodílzinii bee adoolnííł biniyé bá nidahizhdi'aahígíí k'adí doo ; t'áadoo nidahohjáhí , deidííniid . Áko Mózes yee haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo doo ła' náádeíjáah da ,
PRED:	And Moses commanded them all the camp , and told them all the congregation , and the woman , and the woman , that they may make a covenant ; and they said unto Moses , Take no more .
GOLD:	So Moses gave the command , and this message was sent throughout the camp : “ Men and women , do n't prepare any more gifts for the sanctuary . We have enough ! ” So the people stopped bringing their sacred offerings .

ID:	6226
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii haye'ké ła' hatsásk'ehgi naal'a' doo biniyé ak'ah bik'i yaadziidgo bi'doolzį́'ígíí díí nááhániihii nááyiiłniih dooleeł ; díí hool'áágóó yee nihoní'áanii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' ałtso nídídli' doo .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer one of his sons , that he may serve him in his place , that he may offer this burnt offering unto the Lord for ever .
GOLD:	In each generation , the high priest who succeeds Aaron must prepare this same offering . It belongs to the Lord and must be burned up completely . This is a permanent law .

ID:	6227
INPUT:	Dadine'é bitahgóó díí baa dahołne' : Anaa' biniyé hasht'e'ádadołnééh , diné ayóó ádaat'éii bee bida'nołnííh . Bíni' diné t'áá ałtso nidaabaahii yit'ááh nájah ; bíni' ákǫ́ǫ́ dah hidikááh .
PRED:	Tell the people , “ Be ready for battle ! Let all the people go out to battle . ”
GOLD:	Say to the nations far and wide : “ Get ready for war ! Call out your best warriors.Let all your fighting men advance for the attack .

ID:	6228
INPUT:	Shiye' , shizaad nídiniláago , áádóó shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii hasht'e'nihidí'níiłgo ,
PRED:	My son , if you are my words , and keep my commandments ,
GOLD:	My child , listen to what I say , and treasure my commands .

ID:	6229
INPUT:	Diné éí chahałheeł yii' dayíkááh yę́ę ayóó át'éego adinídíingo dayiiłtsą́ ; kéyahgóó anoonééł bichaha'ohgi kéédahat'ínígíí ayóó át'éego bił ch'ída'deezdláád .
PRED:	I have seen a great light in darkness , and the inhabitants of the land is heard in the shadow of death .
GOLD:	The people who walk in darknesswill see a great light.For those who live in a land of deep darkness , a light will shine .

ID:	6230
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Bóhólníihii éí Aháíjah ííłní , Jerobówam be'asdzą́ą́ biyáázh yá t'áadoo le'é níídóokił biniyé aadę́ę́' yigááł , háálá biyáázh daatsaah ; éí kót'éego bich'į' hadíídzih , háálá éí yah ííyáago asdzání náánáła' í'díl'į́į doo .
PRED:	At that time the Lord said to Jeroboam , “ He will come out to ask the son of Nebat , because he is sick , because he has come in , and you will speak to another woman . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord had told Ahijah , “ Jeroboam 's wife will come here , pretending to be someone else . She will ask you about her son , for he is very sick . Give her the answer I give you . ”

ID:	6231
INPUT:	Áko naaldlooshii dį́į'go ayóó ádaat'éé léi' tónteel biyi'dę́ę́' haaskai ; éí ádaat'éhígíí t'áá ał'ąą ádaat'é .
PRED:	And there came a great beast out of the sea , and every kind of every kind of every kind .
GOLD:	Then four huge beasts came up out of the water , each different from the others .

ID:	6232
INPUT:	Áko Jesus naakits'áadah binááhaigo , Jerúsalemgóó ałnááda'aldahígíí bik'ehgo hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehgóó bił jíkai ,
PRED:	Jesus was twelve years old when he went with him to Jerusalem according to their idols .
GOLD:	When Jesus was twelve years old , they attended the festival as usual .

ID:	6233
INPUT:	Bíyor biye' Bííla éí Íídam kéyahgi naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; bikin haal'áhígíí éí <unk> habah hoolyéé nít'éé' .
PRED:	The son of Amoz was the leader of Edom . The city was called “ The city of Edom . ”
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	6234
INPUT:	Áádóó Éran índa biye'ké bá bee ádííniidígíí t'áá át'é bik'ehgo ádíílííł ; tsosts'id jį́ diyingo hats'ąą hasti' doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt do according to all the words of Aaron and his sons , according to all that he commanded : for seven days shall be holy .
GOLD:	“ This is how you will ordain Aaron and his sons to their offices , just as I have commanded you . The ordination ceremony will go on for seven days .

ID:	6235
INPUT:	Diné ił ééhózin bee hólǫ́ǫgo éí bizaad ááyoosįįł , áádóó diné ak'idi'yiitįįhii doo ádił nídiiltéeh da .
PRED:	The words of a man is the word of knowledge , and the soul of the understanding is the life of the man .
GOLD:	A truly wise person uses few words ; a person with understanding is even-tempered .

ID:	6236
INPUT:	Bee shide áhoot'éii t'áá ałtso bee bił hweeshne' ; bee shich'į' nahwii'náanii binááł baa hweeshne' .
PRED:	I have told all my troubles , and I have told them in trouble .
GOLD:	I pour out my complaints before himand tell him all my troubles .

ID:	6237
INPUT:	T'áá áko hałóó' bee hahaltsósí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nizhnínilgo bikéé' dashdii'áázh .
PRED:	So they left their nets , and followed him .
GOLD:	And they left their nets at once and followed him .

ID:	6238
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí díí dine'é yich'į' ał<unk> dzihgo áádóó náánáła' bizaad yee yáłti' doo .
PRED:	Surely he shall speak to this people , and his words shall speak against him .
GOLD:	So now God will have to speak to his peoplethrough foreign oppressors who speak a strange language !

ID:	6239
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii ayóó'óósh'nínígíí bíká dah dideesh'nih , áádóó índa bee nihoyíní'áanii nabik'ítséskees doo .
PRED:	In the morning I love your commandments , and I will test your statutes .
GOLD:	I honor and love your commands.I meditate on your decrees .

ID:	6240
INPUT:	Éí naadiin ashdla' binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo hahoolzhiizh , áádóó naadiin náhást'éí nááhaijį' Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nant'áá nít'éé' . Áko bimá éí Jerúsalemdóó naagháago Jiihó'adan wolyéé nít'éé' .
PRED:	And he was twenty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned thirty years in Jerusalem . And his mother 's name was known from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years . His mother was Jehoaddin from Jerusalem .

ID:	6241
INPUT:	Diné doo ła'da bee hool'iní yidiiłtłi'go ásaa' yił yaa nií'aah da , doo nidi tsásk'eh yiyaa ii'aah da , nidi bá ya'ii'áhígi dah yi'ááh , áko yah adahakáhígíí éí bá adinídíingo da'oo'į́į dooleeł .
PRED:	No one will put a lamp in a lamp , but does not put it on his bed , but on the altar , and those who come in shall see the light .
GOLD:	“ No one lights a lamp and then covers it with a bowl or hides it under a bed . A lamp is placed on a stand , where its light can be seen by all who enter the house .

ID:	6242
INPUT:	Áádóó nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii kin bii' sohodizin biyi' t'áá bá haz'ą́ąjį' ts'ídá agháago hodiyingo haz'ánígíí diyingo naal'a'í chérabim bit'a' biyaajį' nideiz'ą́ .
PRED:	And the priests took the ark of the covenant of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) in the sanctuary of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) [ The Many Powered ] , and put it under the wings of the Lord-Yehōvah ( Messiah Pre-Incarnate ) .
GOLD:	Then the priests carried the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant into the inner sanctuary of the Temple — the Most Holy Place — and placed it beneath the wings of the cherubim .

ID:	6243
INPUT:	éí doodago , Háishą' Christ daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' bił háázhdoot'ash biniyé nahasdzáán biyi' góyaa ahozhdooleeł ?
PRED:	or who will be raised from the dead ? Who will return to the world ?
GOLD:	And do n't say , ‘ Who will go down to the place of the dead ? ' ( to bring Christ back to life again ) . ”

ID:	6244
INPUT:	Áko Kéína tó nílínígíí shádi'áahjigo haz'áníjį' hodeesdzo . Ákwii Manáseh dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígíí bitahgi Íífreiyim dine' é ałdó' bikin hadaas'á . Áko Manáseh dine'é bihoodzooígíí náhookǫsjigo tó nílíníjį' hodeesdzo áádóó tónteel siyíníjį' nihoodzo ,
PRED:	And the border went up to the south side of Manasseh . And the border of Manasseh was also in the cities of Manasseh . And Manasseh came to the north side of the sea .
GOLD:	From the spring of Tappuah , the boundary of Manasseh followed the Kanah Ravine to the Mediterranean Sea . Several towns south of the ravine were inside Manasseh 's territory , but they actually belonged to the tribe of Ephraim .

ID:	6245
INPUT:	Áko Heziikáíyah éí Aizéíyah ábizhdííniid , Bóhólníihii áníinii bee háínídzí'ígíí éí yá'át'ééh . Áádóó hanáádzoodzíí' , Háálá shíyooł<unk> ígíí biyi' hasht'ehodít'é áádóó t'áá aaníinii bee haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ The word of the Lord is good . ” And he answered , “ It will be a time for rest , and the truth will be established . ”
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ This message you have given me from the Lord is good. ” For the king was thinking , “ At least there will be peace and security during my lifetime . ”

ID:	6246
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii éí yiníł'į́įgo , jó , łóód haní'íí<unk> lá áádóó hatáshtł'oh ákwii dah yiigaiigo náá'iiłniihii , Doo ni'didéeh da lá , hodidoonii ł ; jishch'ozhígíí bii'dóó łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hááłnii'ígíí át'é .
PRED:	And the priest shall look at him , and behold , the hair has spread in the skin , and the priest shall pronounce him unclean , and the priest shall pronounce him unclean .
GOLD:	If the priest examines it and finds it to be more than skin-deep , and if the hair in the affected area has turned white , the priest must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . The boil has become a serious skin disease .

ID:	6247
INPUT:	Áko nidahódééłkid , Háishą' diné shį́į́ , Bik'i nítéhí nídiiłtsóosgo dah diinááh , nidííniid ?
PRED:	They asked him , “ Who is this man who says , ‘ Get up your bed and walk ? '
GOLD:	“ Who said such a thing as that ? ” they demanded .

ID:	6248
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel dine'é éí doo yildinígi át'éégóó ádił nida'iisí'ígíí t'áá ałtso biniinaa atihíláane' ! diníigo bik'ee ahínéika' áádóó nihínídiiltał , háálá diltłish bee , dichin bee índa naałniih bee atího'dilnééh .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord God : “ Because of all the sins of Israel , the house of Israel , ‘ Because of all their sins , ' says the Lord God , ‘ Because of the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , by the sword , and by the sword .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Clap your hands in horror , and stamp your feet . Cry out because of all the detestable sins the people of Israel have committed . Now they are going to die from war and famine and disease .

ID:	6249
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é atíidoolííł , áádóó hadaałt'é ánéidoodlííł ; ákohgo Bóhólníihii yich'į' nináhidookah áádóó bisodizin yiyíists'ą́ą'go hadaałt'é ánéidoodlííł .
PRED:	And the Lord will make Egypt , and he will repay them ; and he will return to the Lord , and he will turn back to you , and will listen to his prayer .
GOLD:	The Lord will strike Egypt , and then he will bring healing . For the Egyptians will turn to the Lord , and he will listen to their pleas and heal them .

ID:	6250
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shoo , shá nidaal'a'í da'dooyį́į́ł , nidi nihí éí dichin danohłį́į doo ; shoo , shá nidaal'a'í da'doodlį́į́ł , nidi nihí éí dibáá' danohłį́į doo ; shoo , shá nidaal'a'í bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo , nidi nihí ádaa yádanohdzin doo ;
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold , my servants shall eat , but ye shall eat , and ye shall drink , and ye shall drink ; behold , ye shall be thirsty , and ye shall rejoice , but ye shall rejoice .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ My servants will eat , but you will starve.My servants will drink , but you will be thirsty.My servants will rejoice , but you will be sad and ashamed .

ID:	6251
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii índa bimá asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nilíinii ábidiní , Nihinaat'á ch'ah nahjį' nihits'ą́ą́' kólyaa biniinaa ádaa hojiinołbá'í , í'dółnééh áádóó noohkeeh .
PRED:	The king and his mother said to the queen of the queen , “ Be proud because of the crown of your head , and be proud . ”
GOLD:	Say to the king and his mother , “ Come down from your thronesand sit in the dust , for your glorious crownswill soon be snatched from your heads . ”

ID:	6252
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Mózes bizaad yik'eh dahóół'įįdgo béésh łigaii áádóó óola yódí ádaat'éii índa <unk> da éí Ííjip dine'é bídajííkeed .
PRED:	The Israelites obeyed the word of Moses . They asked for silver , gold , gold , gold , and gold .
GOLD:	And the people of Israel did as Moses had instructed ; they asked the Egyptians for clothing and articles of silver and gold .

ID:	6253
INPUT:	Nizhé'é yę́ę nihiyéél nidaazgo áyósin nít'éé' ; éí bąą k'ad , nizhé'é yę́ę bik'ee ti'dahwii'níihgo bá nidasiil'a'ígíí áádóó hééł nidaazgo nihá áyósin nít'éé' yę́ę ászólígo nihá áníléehgo ná nideiil'a' dooleeł .
PRED:	He made our father 's yoke on us . Now therefore , therefore , let us serve you , and put on our yoke , and on our yoke .
GOLD:	“ Your father was a hard master , ” they said . “ Lighten the harsh labor demands and heavy taxes that your father imposed on us . Then we will be your loyal subjects . ”

ID:	6254
INPUT:	Bee aha'deet'áanii bił ádajiilaadóó bik'ijį' táá' yiską́ągo t'áá hoł kéédahat'íinii danilį́įgo índa hatahgóó kéédahat'į́įgo baa dahozdiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	After three days he made a covenant with them , and they heard it , and they dwelt among them .
GOLD:	Three days after making the treaty , they learned that these people actually lived nearby !

ID:	6255
INPUT:	Kót'éego dííníniidígíí baa ha'niih le' áádóó nik'ihojidlíi le' , háálá díí jį́ diné séłhį́įgo bidił bits'ánílį́įgo índa ádá k'éhodee'nééh bits'ąą jé'ííníshnáago áshiinilaa .
PRED:	Blessed be he that hath spoken , and bless thee , for thou hast taken me away from the hand of men , and hast taken me away from the hand of the young man .
GOLD:	Thank God for your good sense ! Bless you for keeping me from murder and from carrying out vengeance with my own hands .

ID:	6256
INPUT:	Áko bik'ijį' ak'ah yanídaohdzi'go fránkinsens wolyéii bikáá' dah dadoohjih ; díí ak'áán nááhániihii át'ée doo .
PRED:	And thou shalt pour oil upon it , and put it on it : this is the grain offering .
GOLD:	Put olive oil on this grain offering , and sprinkle it with frankincense .

ID:	6257
INPUT:	Áko díidíígíí bee hadzoodzíi'go , hak'i dahodii'aahii t'áá ałtso ádaa yádaniidzį́į́' , áádóó ayóó ádaat'éii ájoolíłígíí biniinaa diné áłah silį́'ígíí t'áá ałtso baa bił dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	And when he had said these things , all the disciples were ashamed , and all the multitude were glad because of the great deeds .
GOLD:	This shamed his enemies , but all the people rejoiced at the wonderful things he did .

ID:	6258
INPUT:	Kintah nida'aztiingóó tł'oh azis yił áká daaszaaz ; kin dabighą́ą́'góó áádóó diné áłah ádaat'į́įgi t'ááłá'í nítínígo chaał hadahoyiiníihgo nida<unk> <unk> .
PRED:	The city is covered with sackcloth , and all the people of the assembly cry out for help .
GOLD:	They will wear burlap as they wander the streets.From every home and public square will come the sound of wailing .

ID:	6259
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' áłah nída'adleehí naaznilgóó , áádóó naat'áanii índa bídahólníihii naazdáágóó nidanihii'éeshgo , ha'át'éegoda , doodaii' ha'át'íhída bee hadadoohdzihígíí , doodaii' ha'át'íhída dadidoohniiłígíí , t'áadoo bik'ee ádił nídahodołchiłí ,
PRED:	And they brought them into the synagogue , and princes , and princes , and princes , and do not be afraid of what you say , or what you say ,
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	6260
INPUT:	Áko t'áá íiyisí hodichinígíí bąą kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' biyi' ch'iyáán ádaasdįįd , áko Ííjip kéyahgi índa Kéínan kéyahgi dine'é t'áá íiyisí dichin yik'ee ti'dahoonííh .
PRED:	And there was no food in all the land of Egypt , and there was a famine in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the famine became so severe that all the food was used up , and people were starving throughout the lands of Egypt and Canaan .

ID:	6261
INPUT:	Áádóó bii' tá'ádígisí bá naaznilígíí bikáa'gi bii' tá'ádígisí dah naaznilgo ałdó' áyiilaa .
PRED:	He also made the pillars on the sides of the sea .
GOLD:	the water carts holding the basins ;

ID:	6262
INPUT:	Éidí bee haa hwiinít'íinii nideeshkahgi doo shił bééhózingóó , Da' Jerúsalem gódeésh díínáałgo áadi bee shaa náhódóot'įįł nínízin ? hodííniid .
PRED:	I do n't know where I am going to go with you . Do you want to go up to Jerusalem and meet me there ? ” he answered .
GOLD:	I was at a loss to know how to investigate these things , so I asked him whether he would be willing to stand trial on these charges in Jerusalem .

ID:	6263
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo dah yinéłígíí éí Jerúsalem áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'á , t'áá éí Léíkish áádóó Azííkah kin hadaas'á ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'inii daadziihígíí yił da'ahoogą́ą́' .
PRED:	And the army of the king of Babylon fought against the army of Judah , and its cities , and its cities .
GOLD:	At this time the Babylonian army was besieging Jerusalem , Lachish , and Azekah — the only fortified cities of Judah not yet captured .

ID:	6264
INPUT:	E'e'áahgo dah diighááh áádóó biiłkáhí índa e'asdzą́ą́ yíl'į́ baa ádahayą́ągo haz'áníjí náánádááh ; aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í Sheiyáshgaz , éí e'asdzą́ą́ daól'íinii yaa áhályáanii nilíinii yaa yighááh ; aláahgo naat'áanii éí doo bił yah anáázhdoodáał da , t'áá hazhó'ó aláahgo naat'áanii bił hojíshǫ́ǫgo háká áho'doo'niidgo t'éiyá ákǫ́ǫ́ jidoogááł .
PRED:	And he went out to the evening , and saw the camels , and the wives of the king 's wife , and the king 's wife , and went in to the king , and he would not go in , but he would go in to the king .
GOLD:	That evening she was taken to the king 's private rooms , and the next morning she was brought to the second harem , where the king 's wives lived . There she would be under the care of Shaashgaz , the king 's eunuch in charge of the concubines . She would never go to the king again unless he had especially enjoyed her and requested her by name .

ID:	6265
INPUT:	Nihainísht'į́įgo yidiiską́ądi daats'í hada'íínóhníigo bídanoł'ą́ą dooleeł , índa bich'į' daats'í danihidziil dooleeł ; ts'ídá bi'deeshłíłí , shí Bóhólníihii haasdzíí' .
PRED:	If I am about to judge you , you will be strong and strong . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	How strong and courageous will you be in my day of reckoning ? I , the Lord , have spoken , and I will do what I said .

ID:	6266
INPUT:	E'elyaii bitsiits'iin óola t'éí bee ályaa , bijéíts'iin índa bigaan éí béésh łigaii bee ályaa áádóó biníí'dóó yaago bigodjį' béésh łitsoii bee ályaa .
PRED:	And the head of gold was made of gold , and the head of silver , and of brass , and of brass , and of brass .
GOLD:	The head of the statue was made of fine gold . Its chest and arms were silver , its belly and thighs were bronze ,

ID:	6267
INPUT:	t'ááłáhíjį' áłah silį́į́' ; Jáshowa áádóó Ízrel dine'é yik'iidoojah yiniyé łá'í daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	They gathered together together together together , Joshua , and Israel became one .
GOLD:	These kings combined their armies to fight as one against Joshua and the Israelites .

ID:	6268
INPUT:	Éí bijį́į́dą́ą́' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso dabinááł Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa ayóó át'éii nilį́įgo áyiilaa , áádóó Jáshowa deidísin nít'éé' ; Mózes deidísin yę́ęgi át'éego Jáshowa abíyííłką́ąjį' bił danilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	On that day the Lord made Joshua great in the sight of all Israel , and they served Joshua , as Moses had commanded .
GOLD:	That day the Lord made Joshua a great leader in the eyes of all the Israelites , and for the rest of his life they revered him as much as they had revered Moses .

ID:	6269
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jáshowa ádííniid , Tsé'áán ąą ádaahłéehgo áádę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii ashdlalt'éhígíí shich'į' ninoh'éésh .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ Bring up the cave and bring them to me five kings . ”
GOLD:	Then Joshua said , “ Remove the rocks covering the opening of the cave , and bring the five kings to me . ”

ID:	6270
INPUT:	áko dibé éí binish'náájígo niidoonił , tł'ízí éí binishtł'ajígo niidoonił .
PRED:	And he shall give the goat to the right hand of the goats , and to the left hand of the goats .
GOLD:	He will place the sheep at his right hand and the goats at his left .

ID:	6271
INPUT:	háálá Bóhólníihii yee haadzí'ígíí éí Béthelgi bikáá' náá'iiniihí áádóó Samériya kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaaígi kin naaznilii yik'ijį' haadzíi'ii t'áá aaníí bohodoolnííł .
PRED:	For the word of the Lord shall come to pass , as the Lord had spoken to Bethel , and to the high places of Samaria , and to the high places which he had built in Samaria .
GOLD:	For the message the Lord told him to proclaim against the altar in Bethel and against the pagan shrines in the towns of Samaria will certainly come true . ”

ID:	6272
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , Christ Jesus binahjį' nihaa jííníshłíigo t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá ákwíí jį́ shidiyoołhéełii kǫ́ǫ́ hólǫ́ .
PRED:	I say to you , brothers and sisters , in Christ Jesus , I say to you all day , there is none to kill me .
GOLD:	For I swear , dear brothers and sisters , that I face death daily . This is as certain as my pride in what Christ Jesus our Lord has done in you .

ID:	6273
INPUT:	Áko Stephen haadzíi'go ání : Shik'isóó , shahastóí danohłíinii , dashíínółts'ą́ą́' . Nihizhé'é yę́ę Éíbraham , t'ah doo Héíranjį' iinééhgóó , Mesopotéímiyagi naaghá yę́ędą́ą́' , Diyin God bits'ádi'nílíidii bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaa ,
PRED:	Then he said , “ Listen to me , my brothers , and listen to me , my father Abraham , when he was in Asia ,
GOLD:	This was Stephen 's reply : “ Brothers and fathers , listen to me . Our glorious God appeared to our ancestor Abraham in Mesopotamia before he settled in Haran .

ID:	6274
INPUT:	Áádóó diné bąąh háálínígíí éí t'áá ha'át'íhída bik'i dah ná'niłí yik'i dah neezdáago éí t'óó baa'ih dooleeł .
PRED:	And the man who is unclean shall sit upon him shall be unclean .
GOLD:	Any saddle blanket on which the man rides will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	6275
INPUT:	Áádóó Néíyathjį' Réímah nahós'a'góó dashdiiyá , áko hó ałdó' Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii hak'i hoole'go Réímah nahós'a'gi Néíyathdi jiníyáajį' Diyin God bá hojilne' .
PRED:	And he went to Ramah , and the Spirit of God came upon him at Ramah , at Ramah .
GOLD:	But on the way to Naioth in Ramah the Spirit of God came even upon Saul , and he , too , began to prophesy all the way to Naioth !

ID:	6276
INPUT:	Bidáyi' jishcháá' ąą áhoot'é nidahalin , dabiyooch'íidgo binda'adlo' . Biwooshtł'ah góne' tł'iish bibik'asda' naaziid nahalingo bizaad dabizǫ́ǫ́z .
PRED:	They are like the pit of the pit , and they speak lies ; I believe in their words like a serpent .
GOLD:	“ Their talk is foul , like the stench from an open grave.Their tongues are filled with lies. ” “ Snake venom drips from their lips . ”

ID:	6277
INPUT:	Áko ánááhodoo'niid , T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Diyin God yá halne'ii doo ła'da t'áá bí bikéyahgi ts'ídá doo hodi'nidzin da .
PRED:	And he said unto them , I say unto you , No prophet is not able to give himself in his own land .
GOLD:	But I tell you the truth , no prophet is accepted in his own hometown .

ID:	6278
INPUT:	Éí Ííjip kéyahdi bee éédahózinii áyiilaa índa Zówan hoolyéedi t'óó bik'eda'ayóii yaa naayá .
PRED:	And he made signs in Egypt , and his wonders in Midian .
GOLD:	They did not remember his miraculous signs in Egypt , his wonders on the plain of Zoan .

ID:	6279
INPUT:	Hanítáa doo , nidi doo bik'ídíínáał da ; nił nidaabaahgo nik'ijį' danilíinii éí t'áadoo nídandlíní da índa t'áadoo le'é t'áadoo násdlį́'ígíí nidahalin doo .
PRED:	He will look for him , but you will not find him ; the princes of war will be like a vain .
GOLD:	You will look in vainfor those who tried to conquer you.Those who attack youwill come to nothing .

ID:	6280
INPUT:	Áko diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo aa deidooléełii nidayiijááh nít'éé' : éí béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaii áádóó óola bee ádaalyaii áádóó éé' ádaat'éii áádóó deezlá índa spáis daolyéhígíí , łį́į'da índa dzaanéezda t'ááłá'í nináháhááh bik'eh aa dajiinííł nít'éé' .
PRED:	And every man brought gifts to him , of silver , and of gold , and of gold , and of spices , and of the year , and of the year of each year .
GOLD:	Year after year everyone who visited brought him gifts of silver and gold , clothing , weapons , spices , horses , and mules .

ID:	6281
INPUT:	T'ááká diyin náánáła' dahólǫ́ǫgo íínísin yíila' .
PRED:	You shall not have any other gods .
GOLD:	“ You must not have any other god but me .

ID:	6282
INPUT:	yá'ąąshdi bisodizin índa biná'ookąąh bá didííts'į́įłgo índa yiniyé ádaaníinii bá bich'ą́ą́h nihidi'nił'áa doo .
PRED:	Listen to the prayer of heaven and to the voice of their prayer , and hear them for their cause , and for their cause .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers from heaven and uphold their cause .

ID:	6283
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Séítan áyidííniid , Háádę́ę'shą' yínááł ? Ákohgo Séítan éí Bóhólníihii áyidííniidgo ání , Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó táhodishłeeh áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'góó háádiishdááh .
PRED:	The Lord said to Satan , “ Where do you come from ? ” Satan answered , “ I am going to meet the earth and earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Where have you come from ? ” the Lord asked Satan.Satan answered the Lord , “ I have been patrolling the earth , watching everything that 's going on . ”

ID:	6284
INPUT:	Doodago , t'ah nízaadę́ę́' yinéełgo , diné dzisnilii k'é náhodoodleeł jiníigo bich'į' jidooł'aał .
PRED:	If they are far from a distance , they will send peace to him .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	6285
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bitahgi dílzingo nidahideest'áanii t'áá ałtso níí' dooleeł .
PRED:	And all your princes shall be holy in the midst of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Everything in Israel that is specially set apart for the Lord also belongs to you .

ID:	6286
INPUT:	Nidi Saul , t'áá éí Paul yolyéii , Níłch'i Diyinii bii' hadeezbingo , t'áá íiyisí honíł'į́įgo
PRED:	But Saul , Paul , full of the Holy Spirit , full of the Holy Spirit ,
GOLD:	Saul , also known as Paul , was filled with the Holy Spirit , and he looked the sorcerer in the eye .

ID:	6287
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hazhé'é be'asdzą́ą́ bił jineezhtéezhii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih , háálá hazhé'é baazhdíílá : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	Cursed be he that lies with his father 's wife , for he hath given to his father ; and all the people shall say , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with one of his father 's wives , for he has violated his father . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	6288
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii éí asdzání nayízhdééłkidgo hoł hoolne' . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí naat'áanii danilínígíí ła' há yik'i diilnii'go ííłní , Hakéyahdóó dashdiiyá yę́ędą́ą́' áádóó díí jį́įjį' kéyah chooz'įįd áádóó bikáá' dahazlį́į'ii bą́ą́h nida'iizlį́į'ii bíighahgo t'áá ałtso haa nídinooh'aah .
PRED:	Then the king asked the woman , and the king stretched out his hand on her hand , and said to her , “ Give it to her , and to this day , and to this day you are given to all the land . ”
GOLD:	“ Is this true ? ” the king asked her . And she told him the story . So he directed one of his officials to see that everything she had lost was restored to her , including the value of any crops that had been harvested during her absence .

ID:	6289
INPUT:	T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá háiida doo áłchíní yázhí nahalingo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ádaazhdeet'ánígíí ts'ídá doo biishdoogáał da .
PRED:	I say to you , whoever does not enter the Kingdom of God like a little child .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , anyone who does n't receive the Kingdom of God like a child will never enter it . ”

ID:	6290
INPUT:	Dooládó' t'óó dadíínółyéel dooleeł nisin , áko éí bee dahonohsą́ą doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	How can you be at peace , and you would be wise .
GOLD:	If only you could be silent ! That 's the wisest thing you could do .

ID:	6291
INPUT:	Jó , aniné t'éí nihidada'ałtł'in ; tó ni'jį' yaaką́ągo łeesinootseedii doo áłah ánáolne' át'éegi ádaniit'é , índa Diyin God éí diné doo ła' a'ohgo yaa nitsíkees da , áko bits'ą́ą́' yóó'abi'dool'a'ígíí éí doo nahjį' niidó'ááł át'éégóó yaa nitsíkees .
PRED:	For we are in the midst of the pit , as the waters of the pit , and there is no man in the sight of God , and God does not turn away from them .
GOLD:	All of us must die eventually . Our lives are like water spilled out on the ground , which can not be gathered up again . But God does not just sweep life away ; instead , he devises ways to bring us back when we have been separated from him .

ID:	6292
INPUT:	áádóó náádahidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii ádaat'éego éí béégashii naakigo , deenásts'aa' ashdla'go , tł'ízíchǫǫh ashdla'go , dibé yázhí biką'ii ła' béédááhaii ashdla'go , díí éí Zúrishádai biye' Shiilúmiyel nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	and for the sacrifice of peace offerings , two oxen , five male goats , five male goats , five male lambs a year old , and five male lambs a year old . This was the offering of them .
GOLD:	For a peace offering he brought two bulls , five rams , five male goats , and five one-year-old male lambs . This was the offering brought by Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai .

ID:	6293
INPUT:	Áádóó naaldlooshii bikéshgaan dahałgizhii nidi doo bita'nideezbaalii áádóó doo nída'at'aałii éí nihił t'óó badaa'ih ; t'ááłá'í jinítínígo éí bídahizhdiyii'náhígíí bee doo hoda'didoodah da .
PRED:	And the beast that hath not divided the flesh , and the flesh that is unclean , and the unclean thing which is unclean , shall be unclean unto you : every man that is unclean shall not be unclean .
GOLD:	“ Any animal that has split hooves that are not evenly divided or that does not chew the cud is unclean for you . If you touch the carcass of such an animal , you will be defiled .

ID:	6294
INPUT:	Áádóó David ánáádoo'niid , Bóhólníihii éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'oii índa shash ałdó' bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshííłtį́ ; t'áá ákót'éego ałdó' díí Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshidoołtééł . Áádóó Saul éí David áyidííniid , Nílááhánee' , Bóhólníihii nił hólǫ́ǫgo bich'į' hidídááh .
PRED:	David said , “ The Lord will save me from a lion and from a bear . He will deliver me from the Philistines . ” David said to David , “ May the Lord be with you . ”
GOLD:	The Lord who rescued me from the claws of the lion and the bear will rescue me from this Philistine ! ” Saul finally consented . “ All right , go ahead , ” he said . “ And may the Lord be with you ! ”

ID:	6295
INPUT:	Nich'į' nahwii'náanii áádóó níyol yáhoołgohii índa doo níká a'alyeedii nílíinii , tsé nitł'izii nitł'ááh nástł'ingo áádóó tsé da'ílíinii bee kingo ándeeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	Behold , behold , I will give thee the wind , and the wind , and the foundations thereof , and the foundations thereof , and the walls thereof .
GOLD:	“ O storm-battered city , troubled and desolate ! I will rebuild you with precious jewelsand make your foundations from lapis lazuli .

ID:	6296
INPUT:	Áko nił hózhǫ́ǫgo yidííłtsééł , áádóó ił hózhǫ́ nijéí nayiiłnáa doo , háálá tónteel tsé'naadę́ę́' daat'íinii lą'í bee ákinidláa doo ; ał'ąą dine'é yee da'at'íinii naa hindéeh doo .
PRED:	Then you will see joy , and your heart will be glad , because many great things are from the sea , and many nations will rule over you .
GOLD:	Your eyes will shine , and your heart will thrill with joy , for merchants from around the world will come to you.They will bring you the wealth of many lands .

ID:	6297
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Díí jį́ Shéífat biye' Iiláísha t'ahdii bitsiits'iin hólǫ́ǫ́ ládą́ą́' Bóhólníihii t'ah yówehgo t'óó tsé'édinda atíshidoolííł .
PRED:	And he said , “ If there is no longer a son of Elisha , the head of Elisha , the Lord will punish me more . ”
GOLD:	“ May God strike me and even kill me if I do n't separate Elisha 's head from his shoulders this very day , ” the king vowed .

ID:	6298
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' t'áá aaníí shił nanilnishí nílíinii , díí asdzání t'áá áłah bíká anánílwo' doogo baa nánooshkąąh , háálá shíká aná'ahi'nilchéehgo hane' yá'át'éehii baa hane'gi t'áá awołí bee shił naashnish , áádóó <unk> <unk> índa náádaała' shił nidaashnishígíí ałdó' t'áá ákódaat'į́ . Éí t'áá ałtso iiná naaltsoos biyi' bízhi' bik'idaasdzoh .
PRED:	And I also , behold , I pray thee , I pray thee , I pray thee , that thou hast been able to stand in the way of the gospel , and the rest of them that are in the book of all my life .
GOLD:	And I ask you , my true partner , to help these two women , for they worked hard with me in telling others the Good News . They worked along with Clement and the rest of my co-workers , whose names are written in the Book of Life .

ID:	6299
INPUT:	Áádóó Jánathan éí bizhé'é Saul áyidííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniinaa hodi'yoolyééł ? Haash jíít'įįd ?
PRED:	Jonathan said to Saul his father , “ Why do you kill him because of his death ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why should he be put to death ? ” Jonathan asked his father . “ What has he done ? ”

ID:	6300
INPUT:	Índa kin bii' sohodizin bidááhdóó ałdó' naakigo íí'áa dooígíí ashdladiindóó ba'aan naakidóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá áníłnéezgo éí bílátahdi t'áá ał'ąą dah sinilígíí éí tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá áníłtso .
PRED:	The length of the temple was two cubits long and twenty cubits wide .
GOLD:	For the front of the Temple , he made two pillars that were 27 feet tall , each topped by a capital extending upward another 71/2 feet .

ID:	6301
INPUT:	Tsé yítł'inii ahiih náháłdaas nahalingo ahiih náshííyiizh ; yé'iitsoh ak'ijį' dah diilwod nahalingo shik'ijį' dah nídiilwo' .
PRED:	The wall has fallen down like a wall , and the enemy has fallen on me .
GOLD:	Again and again he smashes against me , charging at me like a warrior .

ID:	6302
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ha'át'éhígoda shidine'é , Jew dine'é danilíinii , da'oołch'į́įdgo ádadeeshłíiłgo binahjį' yisdáhidookah nisin .
PRED:	And if it is good , then , I will make the Jews , and they will deliver you out of their hand .
GOLD:	for I want somehow to make the people of Israel jealous of what you Gentiles have , so I might save some of them .

ID:	6303
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Building the Incense Altar

ID:	6304
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné t'áá ałtso binááł nihá nahat'i'go ánihiishłaa , háálá ánísht'éii doo bik'ehgo deínóhkáah da , nidi bee haz'áanii doo bik'ehgóó ał'oh át'éego baa nitsídasookééz lá .
PRED:	Therefore I have made you a reproach before all men , because you have not walked according to my ways , but you have thought that you are not according to the law .
GOLD:	“ So I have made you despised and humiliated in the eyes of all the people . For you have not obeyed me but have shown favoritism in the way you carry out my instructions . ”

ID:	6305
INPUT:	Éí bąą , Agrípa aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , yá'ąąshdę́ę́' shił áhoodzaaígíí t'áá bik'ehgóó ásdzaa .
PRED:	Therefore , King Agrippa , I have done according to what I have done from heaven .
GOLD:	“ And so , King Agrippa , I obeyed that vision from heaven .

ID:	6306
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá bighąądígi nihił béédahózin , áádóó Diyin God bá hane'ii t'áá bighąądígi nihił béédahózingo baa dahwiilne' .
PRED:	For we know what is in your ears , and we know that the word of God is in your ears .
GOLD:	Now our knowledge is partial and incomplete , and even the gift of prophecy reveals only part of the whole picture !

ID:	6307
INPUT:	Béésh łigaii náneesne'go áłt'ą́ą́'í ádaalyaii éí Társhish haz'ánídę́ę́' nináhaashjaa' áádóó óola éí <unk> hoolyéédę́ę́' nináhaashjaa' ; éí béésh łigaii deitsidii binaanishgo ádaat'é , áádóó óola yee nidaalnishii binaanishgo ádaat'é . E'elyaii dabi'éé' éí yá nahalingo dootł'izh áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí , áko éí t'áá ałtso diné da'iichįįhii binaanish ádaat'é .
PRED:	And he took the silver of gold , and the gold of gold , and the gold , and the gold , and the gold , and the work of gold , and the work of gold , and the work of all the work of the people , and all the work of the people .
GOLD:	They bring beaten sheets of silver from Tarshishand gold from Uphaz , and they give these materials to skillful craftsmenwho make their idols.Then they dress these gods in royal blue and purple robesmade by expert tailors .

ID:	6308
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ła' éí Bóhólníihii bá kéyah nayiis'nii'go dílzingo niidiní'ą́ą́ ládą́ą́' éí doo t'áá bí bikéyahígíí ła' ííł'į́į́góó ,
PRED:	If a man has sold a field to the Lord , he must not give it to his own land .
GOLD:	“ If someone dedicates to the Lord a field he has purchased but which is not part of his family property ,

ID:	6309
INPUT:	Bee ach'į' hózhóonii nideíníidlíí nít'éé' , t'áadoo nihaa yílyáa da . Ní'dooldzihígíí baa hodoolzhish daniidzin nít'éé' , ach'į' nahwii'ná nihaa honíle' !
PRED:	My peace was not come to you , but the time of trouble came to you .
GOLD:	We hoped for peace , but no peace came.We hoped for a time of healing , but found only terror . '

ID:	6310
INPUT:	Nihí ałdó' t'áá ákódanoht'é ; álílee k'ehgo yáti' bee yádaałti'go , baa yádaałti'ígíishą' haa yit'éego bééhózin doo ? Háálá éí ákót'éego t'óó dzólníígóó yádaałti'go át'é .
PRED:	You also are all these things . What do you know ? What do you know ? For the words of truth is beautiful .
GOLD:	It 's the same for you . If you speak to people in words they do n't understand , how will they know what you are saying ? You might as well be talking into empty space .

ID:	6311
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii Riihobówam éí hastóí danilíinii éí hazhé'é Sálaman yę́ę t'ah hiná yę́ędą́ą́' yidááhdóó naazį́į́ nít'é'ígíí bił baa nídadzist'įįdgo ííłní , Haash yit'éego díí diné bich'į' t'ą́ą́' háádeesdzihgo bee bił nídahodeeshnihígíí bee shił dahołne' ?
PRED:	King Rehoboam asked the elders of his father Solomon , who stood before his father Solomon , and said to him , “ How can I speak to this people ? ”
GOLD:	Then King Rehoboam discussed the matter with the older men who had counseled his father , Solomon . “ What is your advice ? ” he asked . “ How should I answer these people ? ”

ID:	6312
INPUT:	Áadi índída dził kódeiłníi dooleeł , Nihik'i daołdaas , áádóó dah daask'idígíí , Nídanihidoł'įįh , daaníigo yaa nídidookah .
PRED:	Then they will say to the mountains , “ Come down ! ” And they will say , “ us ! ”
GOLD:	People will beg the mountains , ‘ Fall on us , ' and plead with the hills , ‘ Bury us . '

ID:	6313
INPUT:	Áádóó Áízak hwe'asdzą́ą́ doo ałchíi dago biniinaa Bóhólníihii nídzooskan , áko Bóhólníihii hodiizts'ą́ą'go hwe'asdzą́ą́ Rebékah i'niiltsąąd .
PRED:	And Isaac called to the Lord because they had no wife , and when the Lord heard it , she conceived Rebekah .
GOLD:	Isaac pleaded with the Lord on behalf of his wife , because she was unable to have children . The Lord answered Isaac 's prayer , and Rebekah became pregnant with twins .

ID:	6314
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Dį́į́' nídízííd binih áádóó ashdla' nídízííd binih áádóó tsosts'id nídízííd binih índa neeznáá nídízííd binih hodílzingo doo adánígíí nídaoł'aahgo Júdah dine'é yaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo . Hodílzingo áłah nída'adleeh t'áá íiyisí yaa bił nidahoozhǫǫh dooleeł ; éí bąą t'áá aaníinii índa k'é hwiindzin ayóó'ádeínóh'ní .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord of hosts : In the fifth month , in the fifth month , in the tenth month , in the tenth month , in the tenth month , in the tenth month , you shall rejoice , and rejoice in joy .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The traditional fasts and times of mourning you have kept in early summer , midsummer , autumn , and winter are now ended . They will become festivals of joy and celebration for the people of Judah . So love truth and peace .

ID:	6315
INPUT:	Kót'éego ayóó át'éii nishłínígíí áádóó t'áá íiyisí dinishyinígíí ííshją́ą́ ádeeshłííł índa ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí binááł ííshją́ą́ ídi'deeshnííł , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And I will show that I am great and great , and I will show them many nations before them , and they shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	In this way , I will show my greatness and holiness , and I will make myself known to all the nations of the world . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	6316
INPUT:	Biyol éí tsííd dook'ą́łígíí nahalinínda bizéé'dę́ę́' kǫ' hadino' nahalin .
PRED:	His mouth is burned with fire , and his mouth is like fire .
GOLD:	Its breath would kindle coals , for flames shoot from its mouth .

ID:	6317
INPUT:	Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í éí ał tįįtł'óól t'ah ditłée'ii tsosts'idgo asdzání yaa deiznil , áko yee hwe'aztł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	And the princes of the Philistines gave seven wives , and they put them to a woman , and bound him .
GOLD:	So the Philistine rulers brought Delilah seven new bowstrings , and she tied Samson up with them .

ID:	6318
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii éí diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yinahagiz , áádóó yich'į' biwoo' ahíidiłk'ash ;
PRED:	The wicked are filled with the righteous , and the teeth of the righteous are gathered together .
GOLD:	The wicked plot against the godly ; they snarl at them in defiance .

ID:	6319
INPUT:	Áko éidí siláo yinanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan éí Ríblahjį' Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yich'į' yiní'eezh .
PRED:	So he brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	6320
INPUT:	Áko dahóyáanii éí yádiłhiłdę́ę́' da'diníłdíinii nahalingo da'diníłdíin doo áádóó t'óó ahayóí t'áá ákogi át'éejį' nináda'iizh'eezhii sǫ'ígi ádaat'éego bits'áda'deezlíidgo hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	And the wise shall give light as the stars of heaven , and the stars shall give them light as the stars of the stars forever .
GOLD:	Those who are wise will shine as bright as the sky , and those who lead many to righteousness will shine like the stars forever .

ID:	6321
INPUT:	Áádóó dáń'dítį́į́hdóó bits'ání'áhígíí éí wóne'dę́ę́' yí'nééł'ąądgo lók'aa' bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsoígi ákónízah .
PRED:	And he measured the gate of the gate , and measured the breadth of the gate .
GOLD:	He also measured the entry room of the gateway .

ID:	6322
INPUT:	bijéí tł'áahdi ák'eh ha'į́ hólǫ́ ; t'áá áłahíjį' doo yá'át'ééh áhodoonííł yinaha'á ; diné yił dahodiiłtáahgo naaghá .
PRED:	He is in the heart of his heart , and he will do good , and test him .
GOLD:	Their perverted hearts plot evil , and they constantly stir up trouble .

ID:	6323
INPUT:	éí bąą t'óó shaa'ihgo índa łeezh dibahí áádóó łeeshch'iih ádééhésjáahgoDiyin God bich'į' łahgo át'éego tsíndíkééz .
PRED:	Therefore I have turned my face against God , and ashes , and ashes , and ashes .
GOLD:	I take back everything I said , and I sit in dust and ashes to show my repentance . ”

ID:	6324
INPUT:	Áko ííshją́ą́ háadida léi' niye' nanídééłkidgo kóníigo , Díishą' ha'át'íí biniyé kódaaht'į́ ? Áko kót'éego bich'į' hadíídzih , Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii yee Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' daniidlį́ yę́ędóó háánihíí'eezh .
PRED:	Then a certain man asked him , “ Why do you do this ? ” He said , “ We have brought us out of the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ And in the future , your children will ask you , ‘ What does all this mean ? ' Then you will tell them , ‘ With the power of his mighty hand , the Lord brought us out of Egypt , the place of our slavery .

ID:	6325
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Nihinanit'a'í nílíinii , éí anó'áahii t'ah hiná yę́ędą́ą́' , Táá' yiską́ągo náádideeshdááł , dííniidii béédeiilniih .
PRED:	They said , “ My lord , we will remember that if we live three days . ”
GOLD:	They told him , “ Sir , we remember what that deceiver once said while he was still alive : ‘ After three days I will rise from the dead . '

ID:	6326
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Júdah kéyahgi diné áádóó Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'ínígíí áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Diyin God yá dahalne'ii áádóó diné a'ohgo ádaat'éii índa ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso yił Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizingóó haaskai ; éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' saad bee aha'deet'áanii naaltsoos nídiit'ánígíí bii'dóó saad t'áá át'é bich'į' jííłta' .
PRED:	And the king sent all the people of Judah , and all the people of Jerusalem , and the priests , and the great , and the great , and the great , and the great , and the great , and all the words of the covenant of the Lord , from the book of the covenant of the Lord .
GOLD:	And the king went up to the Temple of the Lord with all the people of Judah and Jerusalem , along with the priests and the prophets — all the people from the least to the greatest . There the king read to them the entire Book of the Covenant that had been found in the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	6327
INPUT:	Áko da'oosdląądii éí t'ááłá'í iiná áádóó t'ááłá'í nitsáhákees yee dah ahoojih daazlį́į́' , áko t'áadoo le'é bee dahólóonii t'áadoo , T'áá sáhí shí dooleeł , dadííniid da , nidi t'áá ałtso aheełt'éego chodayoos'įįd .
PRED:	And those who believed in him were life and one life ; and they said , I am not alone , but all those who believed in him .
GOLD:	All the believers were united in heart and mind . And they felt that what they owned was not their own , so they shared everything they had .

ID:	6328
INPUT:	Bá'doogehii áádóó adooyehii
PRED:	The Woman and the Woman
GOLD:	1:1

ID:	6329
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí atsą́ siláí ak'ah daabąąhígíí t'áá át'é áádóó azid bíighahgi ak'ahígíí índa atsą́ áshk'azhí bąąh ak'ahígíí t'áá bił néidiinilgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' yiidííłid .
PRED:	And Moses took all the fat that is on the fat , and the fat that is by the liver , and the fat that is on the altar , and burned it on the altar .
GOLD:	Then Moses took all the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , and he burned it all on the altar .

ID:	6330
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jó'ab dah diiyáago Ábsalam bighandi Ábsalam yaa níyáago ííłní , Ha'át'éegoshą' ná nidaal'a'í éí shidá'ák'ehgi k'idííláhígíí yiih dah hodeeznil ?
PRED:	Then Joab went and went to Absalom 's house , and said to Absalom , “ Why have you put my servants in the field ? ”
GOLD:	Then Joab came to Absalom at his house and demanded , “ Why did your servants set my field on fire ? ”

ID:	6331
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' ałní'ní'ą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' t'áá nidahidilgháashgo hííłch'į'go náá'iiniihjį' ahoolzhiizhgo doo nidi háádę́ę'da iinéé' dazdiizts'ą́ą' da , doo nidi háádę́ę'da ha'oodzíi' da , índa t'áadoo haa ákoniizį́į' da .
PRED:	After the next morning , they cried out with a loud voice , but they did not hear a voice from them , but he did not listen .
GOLD:	They raved all afternoon until the time of the evening sacrifice , but still there was no sound , no reply , no response .

ID:	6332
INPUT:	Áko binaagóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso haal'áhígíí éí hadazhdeeshghaazhgo hak'ee dah diijée'go ádaaní , Nihí éí ni' doo adanihidoołnah da .
PRED:	And all the men of Israel cried out with a loud voice , saying , We will not destroy us .
GOLD:	All the people around them fled when they heard their screams . “ The earth will swallow us , too ! ” they cried .

ID:	6333
INPUT:	Ádaa dadzódlíii bich'į' diltłish deez'á , áko doo ádahodoolyąął da ; bidine'é dahayóii bich'į' diltłish deez'á , áádóó nitsidadookah .
PRED:	The proud is a sword , and when he is old , his sword shall come upon his people , and they shall come into battle .
GOLD:	The sword will strike her wise counselors , and they will become fools.The sword will strike her mightiest warriors , and panic will seize them .

ID:	6334
INPUT:	Haash yit'éego shibóhólníihii binaal'a'í nishłíinii nił ałch'į' yáshti' doo ? Háálá shitah doo hwiina'góó ch'ééh disdziih .
PRED:	How can I speak to my lord , my lord ? For I am not able to speak with me .
GOLD:	How can someone like me , your servant , talk to you , my lord ? My strength is gone , and I can hardly breathe . ”

ID:	6335
INPUT:	Éí bee nihodziiz'áanii ayóó ádaat'éii áádóó ílíinii bee nihá hadzoodzíí' , áko nihokáá' dine'é bitahgóó adáhonooní ni'iiłchxǫǫhii bits'ą́ąjį' nihá yisdáhóót'i'go bąą , diyingo bee ájít'éii hoł ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz .
PRED:	This is what he commanded you to do . He has saved you from the world . He has saved you from the power of the world , because you are holy .
GOLD:	And because of his glory and excellence , he has given us great and precious promises . These are the promises that enable you to share his divine nature and escape the world 's corruption caused by human desires .

ID:	6336
INPUT:	Mózes índa Éran éí Ízrel dine'é kwíidííniid , I'íí'ą́ągo ííshją́ą́ díí nihił béédahodoozįįł ; jó , Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'éénihiní'eezhgo át'é ,
PRED:	Moses and Aaron said to the people of Israel , “ You will know that the Lord brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron said to all the people of Israel , “ By evening you will realize it was the Lord who brought you out of the land of Egypt .

ID:	6337
INPUT:	Áádóó aa nídahat'į́įjį' adanihidiyoo'ishgo , t'áá bítséedi ha'át'íhída dadidoohniiłígíí t'áadoo biniinaa ádił nídahodołchiłí ; áajį' ahoolzhiizhgo índa t'áá nihiih yilyáhígíí éí bee hadoohdzih , háálá nihí doo hadoohdzih da , nidi Níłch'i Diyinii éí hanihidiyoołdzih .
PRED:	And he shall bring you near to you , and ye shall not suffer any of you , because of what ye shall do , and the end shall speak , and the end shall be spoken , but the Holy Spirit shall speak .
GOLD:	But when you are arrested and stand trial , do n't worry in advance about what to say . Just say what God tells you at that time , for it is not you who will be speaking , but the Holy Spirit .

ID:	6338
INPUT:	Azhą́ bee ach'oha'níinii diné doo yá'áshóonii bee bíká o'oolwodnidi , t'áá ákogi át'éii doo yíhwiidooł'áał da ; kéyah na'adlo' bąąh ádingo k'éhézdon iináadi t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ éí áát'įįłgo bina'adlo' doo , áádóó Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii doo t'áá k'ad yaa ákoniizį́į' da .
PRED:	Though the wicked is near to the wicked , you will not judge the righteous , but you will not take away the land of justice , but you have rejected the Lord 's glory .
GOLD:	Your kindness to the wickeddoes not make them do good.Although others do right , the wicked keep doing wrongand take no notice of the Lord 's majesty .

ID:	6339
INPUT:	Hinishnánígíí jooshłxá , doo hool'áágóó hinishnáa da doo , t'áadoo shaa nánít'íní ; t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee' shíyoołkááł .
PRED:	I hate what I hate , and I live forever ; do n't let me live forever .
GOLD:	I hate my life and do n't want to go on living.Oh , leave me alone for my few remaining days .

ID:	6340
INPUT:	Índa dine'é danohłíinii kéyah danihíí' dadooleełígíí yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo nihikéyah ałtaa doohdzoh ; lą'í danołt'éhígíí bik'ehgo kéyah dahótsaago hadahidoohsoh áádóó ádanołch'į́dígíí bik'ehgo kéyah t'áá nihidahoníłtsóhígo hadahidoohsoh ; yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo diné hakéyah hóó' nidahaleeh ; dine'é danohłíinii bik'ehgo kéyah danihíí' nidahaleeh doo .
PRED:	And you shall have an inheritance according to the inheritance of your tribes , according to the number of your inheritance , according to the number of your inheritance , and ye shall possess your inheritance , and ye shall possess your inheritance according to their inheritance .
GOLD:	You must distribute the land among the clans by sacred lot and in proportion to their size . A larger portion of land will be allotted to each of the larger clans , and a smaller portion will be allotted to each of the smaller clans . The decision of the sacred lot is final . In this way , the portions of land will be divided among your ancestral tribes .

ID:	6341
INPUT:	Náásgóó nihe'iina' t'áá naaki nilį́įgo bá haz'ą́ą doo ; jį́įgo áádóó tł'ée'go nihił daayée' doo , índa nihe'iina' doo bá hasihgóó haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	Your life will be for two days , and you will be afraid and night and night .
GOLD:	Your life will constantly hang in the balance . You will live night and day in fear , unsure if you will survive .

ID:	6342
INPUT:	Áádóó náábík'ijį' ła'ts'áadahígíí da'ayą́ągo bich'į' yit'íní ánáázh'diilyaa , áko dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náázdiidzáádóó dahoołtsánígíí doo dayoodlą́ą́góó áádóó bijéí doo binídahaz'áhígíí biniinaa dzideezteh .
PRED:	After this , Jesus appeared to the twelve disciples , and he was raised from the dead , because they did not believe him from the dead .
GOLD:	Still later he appeared to the eleven disciples as they were eating together . He rebuked them for their stubborn unbelief because they refused to believe those who had seen him after he had been raised from the dead .

ID:	6343
INPUT:	Éíbram éí Lat yił ałts'ázná
PRED:	Abram and Lot
GOLD:	Abram and Lot Separate

ID:	6344
INPUT:	Asdzání tsosts'idi ashchíinii nidi , doo bidziil da silį́į́' . Doo bitah hwiina' da , t'ahdii jį́įgo bee i'íí'ą́ . Yánízin áádóó t'óó baa yáhásin nít'éé' . Daadzí'ígíí binahjį' bida'ana'í binááł diltłish baa hodideesh'áá ł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	The seven women are weak , but they are not strong . I will bring them to the sword in the day of the evening , and I will bring them to the sword of their enemies .
GOLD:	The mother of seven grows faint and gasps for breath ; her sun has gone down while it is still day.She sits childless now , disgraced and humiliated.And I will hand over those who are leftto be killed by the enemy.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	6345
INPUT:	Nidi Kítim tábąąhdę́ę́' tsinaa'eeł nihidoo'ołgo Ásher dine'é áádóó Ííber dine'é yich'į' nahodiyoołnaał , áko hó ałdó' hool'áágóó áhodi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	But you shall come out of the sea , Asher , Asher , and Sidon ; and he shall be destroyed forever .
GOLD:	Ships will come from the coasts of Cyprus ; they will oppress Assyria and afflict Eber , but they , too , will be utterly destroyed . ”

ID:	6346
INPUT:	Áko dashdiiyáago kéyah Diikápolis hoolyéégóó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' Jesus ayóó át'éii há yaa naayáhígíí baa hojilne'go tázhdíghááh , áko diné t'áá ałtso t'óó bił adahayóí .
PRED:	So he went out and told the great things that Jesus had done for him throughout the whole region of the whole region of the whole region . And all the people were amazed .
GOLD:	So the man started off to visit the Ten Towns of that region and began to proclaim the great things Jesus had done for him ; and everyone was amazed at what he told them .

ID:	6347
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́įhii néidiiką́ągo níbaal bii' hodílzinii áádóó bii' góne' naaznilii t'áá át'é yiyíísį́į'go dílzingo áyiilaa .
PRED:	And Moses took the anointing oil , and anointed him with all the vessels of the tabernacle , and all the vessels of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the Tabernacle and everything in it , making them holy .

ID:	6348
INPUT:	(
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Teaching about Money and Possessions

ID:	6349
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Éí bąą bich'į' yoołkááł , jó'akon , Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íiní'eezhii hiná , doo nááhá'níi da doo .
PRED:	Therefore , behold , the days come , saith the Lord , Behold , the days that I brought out of the land of Egypt , and they shall no more say , ‘ I brought you out of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ when people are taking an oath , they will no longer say , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , who rescued the people of Israel from the land of Egypt . '

ID:	6350
INPUT:	Áádóó kéyah shádi'ááhjí hoolyéédę́ę'go hadziskaigo Hííbran kin haal'áajį' jíkai ; ákwii Éínak ba'áłchíní Aháíman , Shííshai índa Tálmai daolyéii kéédahat'į́į́ lá . ( Hííbran kin haal'áii ályaadóó bik'ijį' tsosts'id nááhaigo Ííjip kéyah nahós'a'gi Zówan kin haal'áago áhoolyaa . )
PRED:	And they came to the south side of the south , and came to Hebron ; and the sons of Kohath , and Shebna , and Shebna , and Abiram , and its inhabitants were seven years in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	6351
INPUT:	Rúben , ni alą́ąjį' shá yizhchíinii nílį́ ; shidziil áádóó <unk> xe' bee deezt'i'ii nílį́ ; Diné aláahgo baa ha'niihii índa alą́ąjį' hoo'áałii nílį́ .
PRED:	“ You are my firstborn firstborn son , and you are my strength ; you are the glory and the firstborn .
GOLD:	“ Reuben , you are my firstborn , my strength , the child of my vigorous youth.You are first in rank and first in power .

ID:	6352
INPUT:	Háálá diné hojooba' has'áanii bich'į' ániihgo yisdéíłtééh . Índa diné badahojoobá'íii áádóó t'áadoo bíká oolyeedíii bich'į' ániihgo yisdéinił .
PRED:	For I will bless the poor , and I will not answer the poor and needy .
GOLD:	He will rescue the poor when they cry to him ; he will help the oppressed , who have no one to defend them .

ID:	6353
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' asdzání haa áhályánígíí bił nahodi'nil'ingo hastą́ą́h nááhai . Áádóó Athaláíyah éí kéyah yii' kéédahat'íinii yinant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	And she was six years old when she was in the house of the Lord , and she reigned over the land .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of God for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	6354
INPUT:	Ákohgo Fíniyas yiizį'go yá nihwiiz'ą́ągo naałniih áhodiilzee' .
PRED:	Then Phinehas stood up and stood up , and there was a plague on him .
GOLD:	But Phinehas had the courage to intervene , and the plague was stopped .

ID:	6355
INPUT:	Ayóó'óósh'níinii bá ąą áshłaa , nít'éé' ayóó'óósh'níinii dah náádiidzáá lá , áko doo naagháhí da . Haadzíí' yę́ędą́ą́' k'asdą́ą́' shíni' ásdįįd ; hanítą́ą́' , nidi t'áadoo bik'íníyáa da ; bíká ádííniid , nidi t'áadoo shich'į' haadzíi' da .
PRED:	I opened my beloved , and I loved him , and he was not far away ; and when he came , I found him ; but he did not answer me , but he answered me .
GOLD:	I opened to my lover , but he was gone ! My heart sank.I searched for himbut could not find him anywhere.I called to him , but there was no reply .

ID:	6356
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' nida'iiłniihí bikéyahdi Kaldíya dine'é bich'į' íłjił nít'éé' ; azhą́ kónít'į́į́ nít'éé' nidi , t'áadoo hwiih sínílį́į' da .
PRED:	You did not have been filled with the Chaldeans , but you did not have filled with them .
GOLD:	You added to your lovers by embracing Babylonia , the land of merchants , but you still were n't satisfied .

ID:	6357
INPUT:	2
PRED:	Jesus and the People
GOLD:	The Burial of Jesus

ID:	6358
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí atsį' yee há nihoní'ą́
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The People Complain to Moses

ID:	6359
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ab éí David yits'ą́ą́' dah nídiidzáago , t'áá áko bá nidaal'a'í Ábner yikéé' ayiis'a'go <unk> tó hahadleehdóó t'ą́ą́' hoł nídaaskai , nidi ákódzaaígíí David t'áadoo baa ákozniizį́į' da .
PRED:	And Joab departed from David , and he sent messengers after Abner , and sent him out of the well , but he did not know what David had done .
GOLD:	Joab then left David and sent messengers to catch up with Abner , asking him to return . They found him at the well of Sirah and brought him back , though David knew nothing about it .

ID:	6360
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii niDiyin God éí deíníikáah dooleełgóó índa baa nideiikai dooleełígíí nihił yit'íní íidoolííł .
PRED:	He will show us what the Lord our God will do to us and to do .
GOLD:	Pray that the Lord your God will show us what to do and where to go . ”

ID:	6361
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Bee hoséł'áanii t'áá át'é áádóó bee haz'áanii t'áá át'é éí shá naal'a'í Mózes hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bik'eh dahojíł'į́įgo dahazhé'é yę́ę kéyah baa diní'áanii bits'ą́ą́dóó doo nahjį' kónááhodeeshdlíił da .
PRED:	And the Lord said , All my statutes , and all the law , and all the law which Moses my servant commanded him , I will not turn away from the land which I gave to their fathers .
GOLD:	If the Israelites will be careful to obey my commands — all the laws my servant Moses gave them — I will not send them into exile from this land that I gave their ancestors . ”

ID:	6362
INPUT:	Áko David bidah na'ayizii yiih doolnii'go tsé hayíí'ą́ągo yee adzíítł'in , nít'éé' Filístiya diné bítáá' góne' yił dzideeztł'ingo bítáá' góne' tsé baa aalwodgo ni'jį' íítłizh .
PRED:	And when David heard it , he put it in his hand , and put it on a stone , and he went into the midst of the Philistines three times , and he fell down to the ground .
GOLD:	Reaching into his shepherd 's bag and taking out a stone , he hurled it with his sling and hit the Philistine in the forehead . The stone sank in , and Goliath stumbled and fell face down on the ground .

ID:	6363
INPUT:	Áádóó náázdeeskaigo , kin sinil léi'gi Jesus jiníyá , áko asdzání Martha yolyéé léi' bighan góne' yah ajííyáago haa bił hóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	And when they had gone , Jesus came to a city , and he entered into the house of a woman named Martha , whose name was Mary .
GOLD:	As Jesus and the disciples continued on their way to Jerusalem , they came to a certain village where a woman named Martha welcomed him into her home .

ID:	6364
INPUT:	Áko Líívai dine'é danilį́įgo Jéshuwa , Kádmiyel , Béínai , Ha<unk> náíyah , Sheriibáíyah , Hodáíjah , Shebanáíyah índa Pethaháíyah ádadííniid , Daohsįįhgo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God baa dahohniihgo hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áa doo ; nízhi' ayóó át'éii éí ak'ihojidlíii índa aa ha'niihii biláahgo ayóó át'éego baa ha'niih doo .
PRED:	The Levites said , “ We will praise the Lord our God for ever and ever . ”
GOLD:	Then the leaders of the Levites — Jeshua , Kadmiel , Bani , Hashabneiah , Sherebiah , Hodiah , Shebaniah , and Pethahiah — called out to the people : “ Stand up and praise the Lord your God , for he lives from everlasting to everlasting ! ” Then they prayed : “ May your glorious name be praised ! May it be exalted above all blessing and praise !

ID:	6365
INPUT:	Ádadooniidgo , Haa léit'éego atídahodiilnííł lá ? T'áá bitł'ááhdę́ę́' bich'į' nahwii'nánígíí nihił béédahoozin dashíínóh'níigo
PRED:	If you say , ‘ What will we do to us ? You know that I am in trouble . '
GOLD:	“ How dare you go on persecuting me , saying , ‘ It 's his own fault ' ?

ID:	6366
INPUT:	jó , éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áá íiyisí shił halchíi'go łe'nisingo ał'ąą dine'é dajílíinii dadzidziihii hak'ijį' áádóó Íídam dine'é t'áá át'é hak'ijį' nishłį́įgo yáshti' , háálá hó shikéyah hwíí' dadooleeł áádóó t'óó bik'i nizhdookah biniyé t'áá íiyisí baa hoł dahózhǫ́ǫgo índa ak'ee dazhdiniihgo ádá shódadzoost'e' .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold , I am against Edom , and against all the nations , and against all the nations ; for they have given their inheritance to their own land , and to rejoice .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : My jealous anger burns against these nations , especially Edom , because they have shown utter contempt for me by gleefully taking my land for themselves as plunder .

ID:	6367
INPUT:	Áádóó biiskání t'óó ahayóí hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehígi neheeskaígíí Jerúsalemjį' Jesus yigáałgo dayíínii' .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that the people who came to Jerusalem , when they heard that Jesus was come to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The next day , the news that Jesus was on the way to Jerusalem swept through the city . A large crowd of Passover visitors

ID:	6368
INPUT:	Shí shinahjį' aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii dahwée'aah , áádóó ałdó' shí shinahjį' naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ákogi áhodooníiłgo hadahadziih .
PRED:	I am the princes of kings , and my princes speak righteousness .
GOLD:	Because of me , kings reign , and rulers make just decrees .

ID:	6369
INPUT:	Áádóó Éísahel éí Béthlehem kin shijaa'di bizhé'é yóó'ályaa yę́ędi yóó'ábi'diilyaa . Áádóó Jó'ab índa diné yił naakaígíí tł'éé' bíighah yikahgo ha'íí'ą́ągo Hííbran kin haal'áajį' nákai .
PRED:	And Absalom was buried in the place of his father in Bethlehem . And Joab and his men went to Hebron until evening .
GOLD:	Joab and his men took Asahel 's body to Bethlehem and buried him there in his father 's tomb . Then they traveled all night and reached Hebron at daybreak .

ID:	6370
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	6371
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , nihinaage' nílíinii , shidine'é doo deidiyoonahígíí biniyé ana'í t'áadoo naniłtseedí ! Nidi nidziilígíí bee tanoołkaadgo bik'eh dídleeh !
PRED:	O Lord , do not be afraid of my enemies , that they may not destroy my people , but scatter them with the power of the mighty hand .
GOLD:	Do n't kill them , for my people soon forget such lessons ; stagger them with your power , and bring them to their knees , O Lord our shield .

ID:	6372
INPUT:	Ízrel nílíinii , Gíbiyah kin haal'áagi ádił asínílziih yę́ędóó wóshdę́ę́' t'ahdii t'áá ákónít'į́ ; Gíbiyahgi ts'ídá doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii t'áadoo ałtso anaa' bił anoodaa' da .
PRED:	O Israel , you have sinned against Gibeah , and you have not sinned ; you have no war in the land of Gibeah .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ O Israel , ever since Gibeah , there has been only sin and more sin ! You have made no progress whatsoever.Was it not right that the wicked men of Gibeah were attacked ?

ID:	6373
INPUT:	Áko nihitahgi ashiiké tsosts'id yilt'éego t'áá ła' háájéé' lá ; alą́ąjį'ígíí azyeh , nidi t'áadoo ba'áłchíní haleehí daaztsą́ , áko hatsilí éí hwe'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí yaa náánádzá .
PRED:	There were seven brothers among you , because the first had not children , but he died , and his brother 's wife returned to him .
GOLD:	Well , suppose there were seven brothers . The oldest one married and then died without children , so his brother married the widow .

ID:	6374
INPUT:	Yishááłgóó nidahwiiłchxǫǫh ; shich'į' nidahwiiłnáa dooígíí yíká da'íłkeed ; t'áadoo yóweh bidóne'é da .
PRED:	They have come to me ; they have no one to help me .
GOLD:	They block my roadand do everything they can to destroy me.They know I have no one to help me .

ID:	6375
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii kóní , David éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó bikáá' dah asdáhí bikáá'dóó nant'áii yikáá' dah dínóodaałígíí éí doo bídin hóyée' da doo .
PRED:	For thus saith the Lord : The throne of David shall not be afraid to sit on the throne of Israel .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says : David will have a descendant sitting on the throne of Israel forever .

ID:	6376
INPUT:	áádóó Ahólibéíma áádóó Íílah áádóó Pí<unk>
PRED:	Edom , Edom , Edom , Edom ,
GOLD:	Oholibamah , Elah , Pinon ,

ID:	6377
INPUT:	T'áadoo dabiniyéhígíí baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh áádóó ádadohní , T'áá nihí ayóó adanihóodziilii bee danihidziil dasiidlį́į́' .
PRED:	Do n't rejoice , and say , “ We are strong , and we are strong . ”
GOLD:	And you brag about your conquest of Lo-debar.You boast , “ Did n't we take Karnaim by our own strength ? ”

ID:	6378
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é bílák'ee hanihíínil , áádóó nihide ádahósinii t'áá ałtso bílák'ee hanihíínil , índa nihilą́ąjį' ałtso shaa ch'íheezhjée'go bikédaayah nihílák'edíí'ą́ .
PRED:	And I delivered us into the hand of the Egyptians , and delivered us into the hand of all those who are oppressed , and I gave them into the hand of all those who were before you , and I gave them into the hand of the land .
GOLD:	I rescued you from the Egyptians and from all who oppressed you . I drove out your enemies and gave you their land .

ID:	6379
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' dók'ǫ́zhígíí hawoo' yidíníłtsi' , áádóó łid éí hanáá' yiyiiłch'ih ; t'áá ákót'éego bił hóyée'ii nidajił'a'ígíí hach'į' ákót'é .
PRED:	He poured out his teeth in water , and his daughter , and the smoke of his eyes , as the smoke of a prostitute .
GOLD:	Lazy people irritate their employers , like vinegar to the teeth or smoke in the eyes .

ID:	6380
INPUT:	Éí bąą nibik'ehgo iináanii t'áá ałtso t'áá ákogi ádaat'é nisin ; na'adlo'go áhooníłígíí t'áá ałtso jooshłxá .
PRED:	Therefore I hate all thy precepts , and I hate all thy lies .
GOLD:	Each of your commandments is right.That is why I hate every false way .

ID:	6381
INPUT:	nihidiináahgo t'áá áníiltso nihidah na'ayizii t'ááłá'í ádadiilnííł .
PRED:	Arise , and we will make each man of us .
GOLD:	Come , throw in your lot with us ; we 'll all share the loot . ”

ID:	6382
INPUT:	)
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	The Widow 's Offering

ID:	6383
INPUT:	Doo ákwii ádajit'į́į́góó shich'į' ádił nidadziisíi'ii éí t'áá ałtso hąąh dadeeshdah . Doo ákwii ádajit'į́į́góó ádił nidadziisíi'go shibee haz'áanii k'ídadzizti'ii éí t'áá ałtso há k'ééda'deeshchxǫǫł .
PRED:	I will forgive all their sins , and I will destroy them all their sins . I will destroy all their sins .
GOLD:	I will cleanse them of their sins against me and forgive all their sins of rebellion .

ID:	6384
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Bóhólníihii éí aláahgo naat'áanii Ríízin bits'ą́ą́dóó ana'í danilíinii hak'ijį' danilį́įgo áádóó hweda'ana'í hoł háádahoniłchxa'go íidoolííł ;
PRED:	Therefore the Lord is against the king , and against his enemies ; he shall make them as an enemy .
GOLD:	But the Lord will bring Rezin 's enemies against Israeland stir up all their foes .

ID:	6385
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Melkízedek át'éhígi át'éii
PRED:	CHAPTER 2 .
GOLD:	Melchizedek Is Greater Than Abraham

ID:	6386
INPUT:	Ch'ikę́ę́h Ííjip bich'é'é nílíinii , Gíliyad kéyah góde hasínáahgo tłah azee' nídii'aah ; t'áadoo biniyéhígóó azee' t'óó ahayóí choidííł'įįł , háálá doo nándi'dooldzih da .
PRED:	Arise , O daughter of Egypt , and go up to the land of Gilead , and make no rain ; for there shall be no more rain .
GOLD:	“ Go up to Gilead to get medicine , O virgin daughter of Egypt ! But your many treatmentswill bring you no healing .

ID:	6387
INPUT:	Éí bąą shiyáázh k'ad bee nich'į' haasdzí'ígíí bik'eh honíł'įįh .
PRED:	Now therefore keep my son , which I command you .
GOLD:	Now , my son , listen to me . Do exactly as I tell you .

ID:	6388
INPUT:	Éí lá bee ayóó'ó'ó'ní nihiyi' hadaałt'éego hasht'eelyaa ni , áko ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi doo nitsideiidáa da dooleeł , háálá nihokáa'gi nihí ałdó' t'áá bí át'éhígi ádaniit'é .
PRED:	For the love of love is prepared in us , that we may not sit in the day of judgment , for we also are as we are in the world .
GOLD:	And as we live in God , our love grows more perfect . So we will not be afraid on the day of judgment , but we can face him with confidence because we live like Jesus here in this world .

ID:	6389
INPUT:	t'áá níléí Éíbel bidił deezna' yę́ędóó níléí Zekaráíyah bidił deezna' yę́ęjį' , éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí índa kin bii' sohodizin bita'gi ábi'disdįįdígíí . T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Díí oochíłígíí éí yá ninádínóodah .
PRED:	As for the blood of Zechariah , the blood of Zechariah , the blood of Zechariah , and the blood of the altar between the altar and the temple , I say unto you , This generation shall fall .
GOLD:	from the murder of Abel to the murder of Zechariah , who was killed between the altar and the sanctuary . Yes , it will certainly be charged against this generation .

ID:	6390
INPUT:	Óola éí Bóhólníihii baa nídahideest'ánígíí t'áá ałtso hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' t'áá át'é bee hahodidzaii éí naadiin náhást'éí tálent wolyéii áádóó tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin shékel dah hidiidlohígíí bíighahgo ánéelą́ą́' ; éí hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' shékel choo'íinii bik'ehgo wólta' .
PRED:	All the vessels of gold which the Lord had given to the Lord was thirty shekels of gold , thirty shekels , and thirty shekels of silver , and twenty shekels of silver , in the sanctuary .
GOLD:	The people brought special offerings of gold totaling 2,193 pounds , as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel . This gold was used throughout the Tabernacle .

