BLEU:	0.10879826045890592
ID:	0
INPUT:	Áko bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii nayízhdééłkidgo ábijiní , Ha'át'íishą' baa nídaaht'į́ ?
PRED:	The teachers of religious law asked him , “ What do you want ? ”
GOLD:	“ What is all this arguing about ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	1
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí Bóhólníihii níjooskango t'áadoo há yi'iilaa da ; na'iigeeł bee nidi dooda , doodaii' Yúrim bee nidi dooda , doodaii' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii bee nidi dooda .
PRED:	But Saul did not help the Lord for help , but he refused to carry the gifts of the Lord . He did not accept the Urim or the prophets or the prophets .
GOLD:	He asked the Lord what he should do , but the Lord refused to answer him , either by dreams or by sacred lots or by the prophets .

ID:	2
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God bíí' nílínígi át'éego shí ałdó' bíí' nishłį́ ; shí ałdó' łeezh bee áshi'diilyaa .
PRED:	For God has given me his inheritance , and I am the dust of the earth .
GOLD:	Look , you and I both belong to God.I , too , was formed from clay .

ID:	3
INPUT:	Tónteel biyi'góó nik'eh honít'i' ; tó ayóó át'éii bii'góó ne'atiin , nidi nikék'eh hashchíín doo bééhózin da .
PRED:	You know the waters of the sea , but you do n't know how the city is filled with us .
GOLD:	Your road led through the sea , your pathway through the mighty waters — a pathway no one knew was there !

ID:	4
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá áłah Bóhólníihii bizaad yee hach'į' yááłti' , haghandóó danilíinii ałdó' t'áá ałtso .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to all his people :
GOLD:	And they shared the word of the Lord with him and with all who lived in his household .

ID:	5
INPUT:	Ałtso saad bee niyázhníłti'go t'áá naazínígóó biyaagi ni' ałts'áádláád ,
PRED:	When he was talking about it , he began to read it .
GOLD:	He had hardly finished speaking the words when the ground suddenly split open beneath them .

ID:	6
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í jinítínígo doo yá'áshónígi át'éego dajíkáahii bits'áhizhdookahgo nída'jookąąhgo Bóhólníihii há yididoots'į́įłgo da'át'é , háálá Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí báhóóchįįdgo t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego yee atí'éł'íinii díí dine'é yee yá haadzíi'go át'é .
PRED:	Those who do evil will come to the Lord , for they will hear the anger of the Lord 's anger , for they are angry with the anger of the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	Perhaps even yet they will turn from their evil ways and ask the Lord 's forgiveness before it is too late . For the Lord has threatened them with his terrible anger . ”

ID:	7
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádíshní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ! Hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yaa nahalne' ya' , dashiłní .
PRED:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , what is happening to me . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , they are saying of me , ‘ He only talks in riddles ! ' ”

ID:	8
INPUT:	Yiską́ągo kót'ée dooleeł , diníigo nahó'áago t'áadoo bee ádaa hó'niihí , háálá yiską́ągo ádahodooníłígíí doo nił bééhózin da .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of tomorrow , for tomorrow you will not be afraid of what you do .
GOLD:	Do n't brag about tomorrow , since you do n't know what the day will bring .

ID:	9
INPUT:	Nihí éí díí kwe'é t'áá ałtso díí jį́ baa nideiikaígíí doo baa nidaahkai da doo ; jó , t'ááłá'í jinítínígo , Díí t'áá ákóne' ásht'į́ , daznízingo baa nidajikai .
PRED:	“ All these things are here today , ” they said , “ for they are not doing what I am doing . ”
GOLD:	“ Your pattern of worship will change . Today all of you are doing as you please ,

ID:	10
INPUT:	Abímelek aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ędą́ą́'
PRED:	Abimelech Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Abimelech Rules over Shechem

ID:	11
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah bitah doo hóóts'íid da
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah 's Sickness and Recovery

ID:	12
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí ayóó át'éii nilį́ , áko t'áá íiyisí baa ha'niihgo yą́ą́h nilį́ , índa yee ayóó át'éii doo nijółkaah át'ée da .
PRED:	The Lord is great , and he is worthy of praise , and he is worthy of praise .
GOLD:	Great is the Lord ! He is most worthy of praise ! No one can measure his greatness .

ID:	13
INPUT:	Áádóó Rebékah hayáázh alą́ąjį' nilínígíí Íísa bi'éé' yá'át'éhígíí wóne'dę́ę́' nízhdiinilgo hayáázh akéédę́ę́' nilínígíí Jéíkab bee hazhdiilaa .
PRED:	So Rebekah 's son Esau took his robe from the oldest son of Esau 's robe and took Jacob 's robe from his own sons .
GOLD:	Then she took Esau 's favorite clothes , which were there in the house , and gave them to her younger son , Jacob .

ID:	14
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa dzíínílíi dooleeł biniyé díí jį́ nich'į' bééhózingo íishłaa ; éí t'áá ni nich'į' bééhózingo íishłaa .
PRED:	I am giving you today that I am giving you today . I have made you an inheritance to the Lord .
GOLD:	I am teaching you today — yes , you — so you will trust in the Lord .

ID:	15
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ,
PRED:	He brought a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , which equals twenty pounds of choice flour moistened with olive oil , which is made of choice flour moistened with olive oil .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	16
INPUT:	Jó , kéyahgi niikaigo tsésǫ'dę́ę́' hadanihíínílo' yę́ęgi díí tł'óół ts'ósí łichxí'ígíí náát'i'go ádíílííł , áko nizhé'é áádóó nimá áádóó nilahkéí índa nizhé'é bighandóó dah ooldahígíí t' áá ałtso nighan góne' áłah ádíílííł .
PRED:	For when you came from exile , you will bring your father 's warn you and your mother , your mother , your mother , and your mother will bring you home to your home .
GOLD:	When we come into the land , you must leave this scarlet rope hanging from the window through which you let us down . And all your family members — your father , mother , brothers , and all your relatives — must be here inside the house .

ID:	17
INPUT:	Jesus bídahooł'aahii yá sodilzin
PRED:	Jesus Appears to the Twelve Disciples
GOLD:	The Prayer of Jesus

ID:	18
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii yee haadzí'ígíí ádooníiłii Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' díí bee nich'į' ééhózin doo ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord has promised through this message from the Lord :
GOLD:	“ ‘ And this is the sign from the Lord to prove that he will do as he promised :

ID:	19
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo shik'eh dahóół'įįd da índa t'áadoo dashidiizts'ą́ą' da , nidi t'áá bí ádaaníinii índa bijéí biyi'dę́ę́' doo yá'át'éehii bił ádaat'íinii yik'ehgo deíkai , áko t'áadoo náás deeskai da , nidi t'ą́ą́' anáákai .
PRED:	But they did n't listen to me or obey my commands , but they refused to follow their hearts . They refused to follow their evil practices .
GOLD:	“ But my people would not listen to me . They kept doing whatever they wanted , following the stubborn desires of their evil hearts . They went backward instead of forward .

ID:	20
INPUT:	Kót'éego ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' naa hashniih doo . Dego dah nídidiishnihgo nízhi' bee naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	Therefore , I will praise you , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	I will praise you as long as I live , lifting up my hands to you in prayer .

ID:	21
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hach'į' hanáádzíi'go áhodííniid , Doo yá'áshxǫ́ǫ́góó índa adilyé yee ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii hadeintá , nidi bee ééhózinii doo ła' bá ádoolníił da , t'áá hazhó'ó Jónah , Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo bee ééhózinii silį́'ígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Get up , and I want you to know the miraculous signs I have shown you , but you do n't know the miraculous signs of Jonah . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ Only an evil , adulterous generation would demand a miraculous sign ; but the only sign I will give them is the sign of the prophet Jonah .

ID:	22
INPUT:	Éí bąągo shí , Bóhólníihii baa hashne'go biniinaa awáalyaaí nishłíinii nánihooshkąąh , Diyin God yiniyé nihíká ádííniidii bą́ą́h da'nohłį́įgo dayínóhkááh .
PRED:	So I am afraid of the Lord , for I am writing to you in prison . I am sending you into prison .
GOLD:	Therefore I , a prisoner for serving the Lord , beg you to lead a life worthy of your calling , for you have been called by God .

ID:	23
INPUT:	áko Dził Lébanandę́ę́' tsin t'áá nínízinígíí ná dadiitsiłgo ahídahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo tónteel bee Jápa kin haal'áajį' ch'ídahidiil'oł , áko éí áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áá góde ahidííyééł .
PRED:	So we went out to the mountains of Lebanon , where they were called out to the coast of the province of Lebanon . And we will be able to return to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	We will cut whatever timber you need from the Lebanon mountains and will float the logs in rafts down the coast of the Mediterranean Sea to Joppa . From there you can transport the logs up to Jerusalem . ”

ID:	24
INPUT:	Béthel índa Éí'ai kin haal'áádóó diné naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' .
PRED:	The people of Bethel and Bethel
GOLD:	The people of Bethel and Ai223

ID:	25
INPUT:	Áádóó níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ą́góó iidoojihgo áłtséédą́ą́' dóola yázhí yiidííłid yę́ęgi át'éego yiididoołił ; díí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego Ízrel dine'é bá át'ée doo .
PRED:	He must cut the bull from the camp and burn it in the camp . It will burn the bull as a sin offering for the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the priest must take what is left of the bull and carry it outside the camp and burn it there , just as is done with the sin offering for the high priest . This offering is for the sin of the entire congregation of Israel .

ID:	26
INPUT:	Áko diyingo bits'ąą hasti'go hóyoołkáłígíí Bóhólníihii bich'į' ats'á'ánídizhdoot'ááł , áádóó dibé yázhí biką'ii ła' binááhaaí jidoolóosgo doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áhát'į́į́jí nááhániihii át'éego nááhizhdoołnih , nidi átséédą́ą́' ats' á'ázhdeet'ą́ągo hwíiníłkánígíí doo íílįįd da , háálá ats'á'ázhdeet'áanii yíchxǫ' .
PRED:	The angel of the Lord must bring a lamb to the Lord and a one-year-old male lamb for a burnt offering , a one-year-old male lamb for a burnt offering , and a one-year-old male goat is holy .
GOLD:	The days of their vow that were completed before their defilement no longer count . They must rededicate themselves to the Lord as a Nazirite for the full term of their vow , and each must bring a one-year-old male lamb for a guilt offering .

ID:	27
INPUT:	Églan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í , Gíízer dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	Eglon of Eglon ,
GOLD:	The king of EglonThe king of Gezer

ID:	28
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é bisiláo anaa' ádeidoolííł biniyé Shóko kin haal'áadi Júdah kéyahgi áłah daazlį́į́' , áko Shóko áádóó Azííkah kin shijaa' bita'gi éí <unk> dámim haz'ánígi nidahaazná .
PRED:	The Philistines gathered the Ark of the Philistines , and the territory of Judah had gathered at the valley of Debir ( which means “ The people of Judah and the territory of the Rephaites . )
GOLD:	The Philistines now mustered their army for battle and camped between Socoh in Judah and Azekah at Ephes-dammim .

ID:	29
INPUT:	Áko Dził Sáínai bighą́ą'di t'áá dził bikáa'jį' Bóhólníihii hadahóóle' , áádóó Mózes hágo yidííniidgo Mózes ákóde haayá .
PRED:	Then Moses called out to the mountain of the Lord on the mountain of Sinai and Moses called out to the mountain of the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord came down on the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the top of the mountain . So Moses climbed the mountain .

ID:	30
INPUT:	Eliyéízar biye' Fíniyas éí Éran náá'iiłniihii nilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binálí Ízrel dine'é baa łe'nisinígi át'éego łe'nízingo sháhóóchįįdígíí Ízrel dine'é yits'ą́ąjį' kóyiilaa , áko baa łe'nisingo ábi'niiłdįįdígíí t'áadoo atíshłaa da .
PRED:	Eleazar son of Phinehas , the priest , was a jealous of Aaron 's son , the priest of Aaron , who had not been jealous of Israel . He did n't let them go to war .
GOLD:	“ Phinehas son of Eleazar and grandson of Aaron the priest has turned my anger away from the Israelites by being as zealous among them as I was . So I stopped destroying all Israel as I had intended to do in my zealous anger .

ID:	31
INPUT:	Áko Ruth éí Mó'ab asdzání nilíinii Neiyómii áyidííniid , Shíni'dii k'ad dá'ák'ehgóó dishááh ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í daagizhgi ajooba' bee shich'oha'néego shąąh tsídookosígíí bikéé' nahodishdáa doo . Áko ábijiní , Nílááhánee' , shich'é'é .
PRED:	One day Ruth said to Ruth , “ Let me go to the field , ” Ruth said , “ let me go to the threshing floor of wheat , and I will follow you . ” So she said , “ Yes , I will show you what you right . ”
GOLD:	One day Ruth the Moabite said to Naomi , “ Let me go out into the harvest fields to pick up the stalks of grain left behind by anyone who is kind enough to let me do it. ” Naomi replied , “ All right , my daughter , go ahead . ”

ID:	32
INPUT:	Jó , nihitahgóó t'áá aaníí oodlání danilínígíí béédahodoozįįł biniyé ałts'á'áldah hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	You will know that the truth will be known among you .
GOLD:	But , of course , there must be divisions among you so that you who have God 's approval will be recognized !

ID:	33
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí bik'i dinaago nahaz'ánígíí ałtso yída'nééł'ąądgo ha'a'aahdę́ę'go yah a'atiin góne' shił ch'íní'áázh áádóó tł'óó'dę́ę'go yínááda'nééł'ąąd .
PRED:	Then he measured the Temple and measured it to the east side of the Temple , and he measured it into the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	When the man had finished measuring the inside of the Temple area , he led me out through the east gateway to measure the entire perimeter .

ID:	34
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	35
INPUT:	kójíníigo , Shik'isóó danilíinii nízhi' bee bił dahodeeshnih ; da'oodlání áłah nádleehii bitahgi naa hashniihgo hashtaał doo .
PRED:	“ This is what my dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , I will sing praises to the church among the church .
GOLD:	For he said to God , “ I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people . ”

ID:	36
INPUT:	Áádóó ákwii hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' Jáshowa éí Éínak dine'é íísdįįd ; dziłgo nahaz'ánígi kéédahat'íinii , Hííbran kin haal'áagi áádóó Dííber kin haal'áagi áádóó Éínab kin haal'áagi índa Júdah dine'é bikéyah dziłgo nahaz'ánígi t'áá át'é áádóó Ízrel dine'é bikéyah dziłgo nahaz'ánígi t'áá át'é kéédahojit'íinii t'áá ałtso hakin hadaas'áii t'áá bił Jáshowa áhásdįįd .
PRED:	On that day Joshua destroyed the town of Ai , Joshua destroyed the town of Debir ( which means “ These are the towns of the tribe of Judah , Hebron , and the territory of the tribe of Judah . )
GOLD:	During this period Joshua destroyed all the descendants of Anak , who lived in the hill country of Hebron , Debir , Anab , and the entire hill country of Judah and Israel . He killed them all and completely destroyed their towns .

ID:	37
INPUT:	Kódzaago dízdiin jį́ áádóó dízdiin tł'éé' bíighah azlį́į'go tsé dilkǫǫhii naakigo hasht'eelyaaígíí bikáa'gi bik'e'ashchį́įgo Bóhólníihii sheinínil ; t'áá éí bee aha'deet'áanii tsé dilkǫǫhii bikáa' gi bee ak'e'ashchį́ .
PRED:	On the day of forty days and forty days , the stone tablets inscribed with the tablets of the Lord 's Covenant , and the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the Covenant .
GOLD:	“ At the end of the forty days and nights , the Lord handed me the two stone tablets inscribed with the words of the covenant .

ID:	38
INPUT:	Áko ádá k'ihodideeshłééł ; doo haa a'ááh nisin da yę́ę haa a'ááh dínéesįįł , áádóó , Doo shidine'é danohłį́į da , ho'di'níí nít'ée'ii , K'ad shidine'é danohłį́ , bidideeshniił , áko , Ni t'éí nihiDiyin God nílį́ , dashididooniił .
PRED:	I will give you a gift , and I will not abandon them . I will say , ‘ You are my people , and I will say , ‘ You are my people . ' ”
GOLD:	At that time I will plant a crop of Israelitesand raise them for myself.I will show loveto those I called ‘ Not loved . 'And to those I called ‘ Not my people , ' I will say , ‘ Now you are my people . 'And they will reply , ‘ You are our God ! ' ”

ID:	39
INPUT:	Béésh nitł'izii éí nahasdzáán biyi'dóó haagééd áádóó tsé bii'dóó bééshłitsoii hadahidilyį́į́h .
PRED:	The foundations of the earth was broken , and the foundations of the earth was broken .
GOLD:	They know where to dig iron from the earthand how to smelt copper from rock .

ID:	40
INPUT:	Kót'éego dadoohsį́į́ł : t'áá áká dasoołzaazgo , t'áá kééh nisoo'eezgo áádóó danihigish nihílák'ee naaztą́ągo dadoohsį́į́ł áádóó tsį́įłgo da'doohsį́į́ł ; éí Bóhólníihii bi'atis'adeesdzá át'é .
PRED:	“ Be careful to eat whatever you eat . Do n't eat your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and eat it with the Lord .
GOLD:	“ These are your instructions for eating this meal : Be fully dressed , wear your sandals , and carry your walking stick in your hand . Eat the meal with urgency , for this is the Lord 's Passover .

ID:	41
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bizaad éí bilááh yileełgo k'ee'ąą yilzhish .
PRED:	But God 's word is more powerful than the other nations .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the word of God continued to spread , and there were many new believers .

ID:	42
INPUT:	Áko diné nidaabaahii t'áá ałtso hoł naakai nít'é'ígíí hoł dah diikaigo kin haal'áhígíí bich'į' t'áá áyídíjį' nijíkai índa Éí'ai náhookǫsjígo nizhníná , áko Éí'ai kin haal'áii bił hata'gi bokooh lá .
PRED:	So all the men returned to the town of Ai and went to the town of Ai , where they traveled to the valley of Ai .
GOLD:	All the fighting men who were with Joshua marched in front of the town and camped on the north side of Ai , with a valley between them and the town .

ID:	43
INPUT:	Áko shí , Daniel yinishyéii , shitah doo hóóts'íídgóó t'óó sétį́įgo díkwíí shį́į́ yiską́ , ákohgo nídiish'na'go aláahgo naat'áanii hánídíshnish , nidi shił áhoodzaaígíí t'áá íiyisí bik'ee t'óó shił ahayóigo t'áadoo ła' yik'i'diitání da .
PRED:	Daniel had hidden me in a rage , but I was afraid of the king , but I did n't understand what I had done .
GOLD:	Then I , Daniel , was overcome and lay sick for several days . Afterward I got up and performed my duties for the king , but I was greatly troubled by the vision and could not understand it .

ID:	44
INPUT:	Shijéí bi'diił'áhígíí lą'í yileehgo nits'ą́ą́dóó bee hada'ahóníinii shii' sizíinii t'áá íiyisí yił náhooshǫǫł .
PRED:	My heart is full of troubles , and I am sick .
GOLD:	When doubts filled my mind , your comfort gave me renewed hope and cheer .

ID:	45
INPUT:	Jó , doo ákwii ánísht'éégóó shi'dizhchį́ , áádóó bąąhági át'éii t'áá bił shimá shí'niiltsąąd .
PRED:	See , I am the mother of my sister , and I am my mother .
GOLD:	For I was born a sinner — yes , from the moment my mother conceived me .

ID:	46
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii náhidiitahgo bi'éé' ayííłdláád índa ni'góó neeztį́ , áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso dabi'éé' adayiisdláadgo bíighahgóó naazį́ .
PRED:	When the king tore his clothes and tore his clothes , he tore his clothes and tore his clothes in despair .
GOLD:	The king got up , tore his robe , and threw himself on the ground . His advisers also tore their clothes in horror and sorrow .

ID:	47
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Spáis łikání dahalchinii nídidíínił : éí <unk> <unk> wolyéhígíí áádóó ánika wolyéhígíí índa <unk> banam wolyéhígíí áádóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii fránkinsens wolyéii bił t'áá bízhání nídidíínił ; t'áá ahidaałt'éego dah dahidiidloh doo ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Do n't be pure gold , fragrant incense , fragrant fragrant incense , fragrant incense , and fragrant incense . This is the frankincense , the frankincense , frankincense , frankincense , and frankincense . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Gather fragrant spices — resin droplets , mollusk shell , and galbanum — and mix these fragrant spices with pure frankincense , weighed out in equal amounts .

ID:	48
INPUT:	Shibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáá' t'áadoo biniyéhígóó doo kǫ' didoołtłiłgo nááda'iyołniih da doo biniyé nihitahdóó naagháii ła' shikin bii' sohodizin bich'į' ahóót'i'ígíí yidádi'doołkał laanaa nisin . Doo shił dahonohshǫ́ǫ da doo índa náádahołniihii doo ła' nihílák'eedóó nidideeshłéeł da , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ Do not be ashamed of my altar , ” says the Lord . “ I will pour out my fury on the altar of my people . I will pour out my heart on my altar . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	“ How I wish one of you would shut the Temple doors so that these worthless sacrifices could not be offered ! I am not pleased with you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ and I will not accept your offerings .

ID:	49
INPUT:	Diyin God baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał . Baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał . Aláahgo nihinanit'a'í baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał . Baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał .
PRED:	Sing to God , “ Sing praises to the King of God ! Sing praises to the King of the earth !
GOLD:	Sing praises to God , sing praises ; sing praises to our King , sing praises !

ID:	50
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo atí'deeshłííł índa shidziil ayóó át'éii ííshjání ádeeshłííł nízingo , t'óó báhádzidgo diné atíidoolíiłgo yá nihwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę t'óó nízaadgóó yich'į' ha'oosniidgoshą' hait'ée doo ?
PRED:	And when God says , “ I will make my anger , and I will make you strong and powerful ? How can he be angry with you ? ”
GOLD:	In the same way , even though God has the right to show his anger and his power , he is very patient with those on whom his anger falls , who are destined for destruction .

ID:	51
INPUT:	Nít'éé' éí bijį́ David éí Bóhólníihii béédzíldzid , áádóó ájíní , Ha'át'éegoshą' Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii shaa doot'ááł ?
PRED:	Then David realized that the Lord was afraid , and he said , “ Why are you afraid of the Ark of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	David was now afraid of the Lord , and he asked , “ How can I ever bring the Ark of the Lord back into my care ? ”

ID:	52
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bee bich'į' nahwii'nánígíí bii'dóó habi'diltééh , áádóó bee hach'į' nahwii'náanii éí diné doo yá'áshóoniida bik'i náánéildoh .
PRED:	The godly are in trouble , and the hopes of the godly will be crushed and crushed .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	53
INPUT:	áko iiná ániidíii biih dahisoohkai . Diyin God ánihijiilaii , éí nihił éédahózingo ádanihijiléehgo t'áá hwééniilt'éego ániidíii ánánihijidlééh .
PRED:	And you have made a new new new new covenant with God , which you have made you new new life . Then you will continue to do what you have done .
GOLD:	Put on your new nature , and be renewed as you learn to know your Creator and become like him .

ID:	54
INPUT:	Azhą́ doo hadziilgóó tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł o'oolkaal nidi , Diyin God bibee adziilii bee jiiná . Háálá hoł doo nihidziil da , nidi Diyin God bibee adziilii binahjį' hoł łá'í niidlį́įgo habee adziilii bee hoł hinii'náa doo .
PRED:	Even if we are crucified with him , God 's power is crucified with him . For God has made him strong in his power , but we will live in his power .
GOLD:	Although he was crucified in weakness , he now lives by the power of God . We , too , are weak , just as Christ was , but when we deal with you we will be alive with him and will have God 's power .

ID:	55
INPUT:	Łah tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii índa bąąhági ádaaníiłii éí t'áá ałtso dahółts'ą́ą' doo biniyé t'áá áháníjį' hach'į' niikai .
PRED:	One day a man named Jesus , a tax collectors and other sinners to listen to him .
GOLD:	Tax collectors and other notorious sinners often came to listen to Jesus teach .

ID:	56
INPUT:	Jó'áko , nanihidi'niitseedgo ga' nihá nihoot'ą́ą́ lá niidzį́į́' , nidi díí doo t'áá nihí áda'ííníidlíi da doo biniyé ákódzaa , Diyin God éí daneeznáanii néidiyiiłjeehii t'éí ba'ííníidlíi doo biniyé .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he told you , “ we will not be afraid of all these things , for God has given you the blessing of the dead .
GOLD:	In fact , we expected to die . But as a result , we stopped relying on ourselves and learned to rely only on God , who raises the dead .

ID:	57
INPUT:	Shoo , k'ad díí lók'aa' yisk'isgo íí'áhígíí , éí Ííjip dine'é danilį́įgo baa dzíínílí ; t'áá éí diné ła' yíniizį́įgo bíla' baa adoozhosh ; t'áá ádzíłtso éí Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro baa deijólíhígíí ákódahodoolííł .
PRED:	“ Look , you have been taken away from Egypt , and you are your brother , the king of Egypt . The king of Egypt will put his hand to Pharaoh .
GOLD:	On Egypt ? If you lean on Egypt , it will be like a reed that splinters beneath your weight and pierces your hand . Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , is completely unreliable !

ID:	58
INPUT:	Hazhé'é ábizhdííniid , Shizhé'é , yá'ąąshii bich'į' índa ni nich'į' bąąhági ásdzaa , náásgóó niye'go nááshi'dójíi dooígíí doo bą́ą́h nishłį́į da sélį́į́' .
PRED:	“ Yes , my father , ” he said , “ I 'm not the price of my father , and I 'm not worthy to be born . ”
GOLD:	His son said to him , ‘ Father , I have sinned against both heaven and you , and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . '

ID:	59
INPUT:	Neeznáadi la' t'óó shaa yáhásinígi át'éego shá hadasoohdzíí' ; doo nihił baa yádahasingóó doo shéédahonohsingóó yee' ída'doołyaa .
PRED:	But if you are coming , you will be ashamed of me , you will be ashamed of me , and you will be ashamed of me .
GOLD:	You have already insulted me ten times.You should be ashamed of treating me so badly .

ID:	60
INPUT:	bik'ee nídideeshgąshii baa nashiyí<unk> , índa shik'iidoolchíiłii shił át'į́įgo ánáshiinil'įįh .
PRED:	“ You have made me an animal that makes me an inheritance .
GOLD:	but then you shatter me with dreamsand terrify me with visions .

ID:	61
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é danilíinii Jerúsalemgi anaa' dahodoołeeł . Áko ał'ąą dine'é dajit'íinii t'áá át'é áłah ádeidoolííł : óola ádaat'éii índa béésh łigaii áádóó éé' ayóogo da'ílíinii bee hada'dít'éii t'óó ahayóigo áłah ádeidoolííł .
PRED:	Then the people of Judah will join them in Jerusalem , and many nations will be filled with gold and gold .
GOLD:	Judah , too , will be fighting at Jerusalem . The wealth of all the neighboring nations will be captured — great quantities of gold and silver and fine clothing .

ID:	62
INPUT:	Díí Jesus jílíinii lą́ą Diyin God nááhodiisáago nihí t'áá áníiltso dabíínáałgo bił béédahózinii daniidlį́ .
PRED:	And we know that we are God 's Son , and we know that we are doing what we are doing .
GOLD:	“ God raised Jesus from the dead , and we are all witnesses of this .

ID:	63
INPUT:	Hananáíyah biyooch'íidgo hoolne'
PRED:	Parable of the Rich Man
GOLD:	Jeremiah Condemns Hananiah

ID:	64
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	The Lord gave me another message . He said ,

ID:	65
INPUT:	Áádóó áshíłní , Diné nílíinii , tsé ahénátł'ingo ní'áhígíí bii' ígééd , áko bii' íígeed nít'éé' dáádílkał léi' bik'í'nígeed .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , a man who was in a cave in a cave . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall. ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	66
INPUT:	Ii' sizíinii yídin nilínígíí yee hwiih nilį́įgo ánáyoodlííł . Dichin nilį́įgo yá'ádaat'éehii yee hwiih yił'į́ .
PRED:	The seeds of a fool is a fool ; a fool gives good food to those who are hungry .
GOLD:	For he satisfies the thirstyand fills the hungry with good things .

ID:	67
INPUT:	T'áá biyi'ídi ádaaní , Haa'íyee' Bóhólníihii bidine'é ałtso ádadiildįįł . Kéyah bikáá'góó Diyin God bikin bii' áłah nída'adleehgo naaznilii t'áá át'é adeideesk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the people said , “ Let us destroy the land of the Lord our God has destroyed every town . ”
GOLD:	Then they thought , “ Let 's destroy everything ! ” So they burned down all the places where God was worshiped .

ID:	68
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , dooládó' binishínílnishii lą'í ał'ąą ádaat'ée da ! Baa honíyą́ągo t'áá ałtso ádeinilaa . Nahasdzáán bii' nit'íinii hadeezbin .
PRED:	O Lord , how many nations are ! How many nations are filled with violence !
GOLD:	O Lord , what a variety of things you have made ! In wisdom you have made them all.The earth is full of your creatures .

ID:	69
INPUT:	Áko yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo kéyah daahóó' dadooleełii dajilą'ígíí áádóó ádajíłch'į́dígíí há ałts'ádahidíízoh .
PRED:	“ If you grant the land allotted to each other , you must live in proportion to each other .
GOLD:	Each grant of land must be assigned by lot among the larger and smaller tribal groups . ”

ID:	70
INPUT:	Nít'éé' shoo , Kúshai dine'é nilíinii níyá áádóó Kúshai dine'é ání , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii hane' hólǫ́ ; jó , Bóhólníihii éí diné nik'ijį' nidaabaah nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso díí jį́ ná k'éidiidlaa .
PRED:	“ Son of man , son of man , ” the king said . “ The Lord has given you victory over all the people . The Lord has given you today . ”
GOLD:	Then the man from Ethiopia arrived and said , “ I have good news for my lord the king . Today the Lord has rescued you from all those who rebelled against you . ”

ID:	71
INPUT:	Éí bee éédahózinii áádóó ayóó át'éego ádahooníiłii t'áá át'é ázhdoolííł biniyé Bóhólníihii yich'į' hóół'aadígíí Ííjip kéyahdi Féro bich'į' áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso bich'į' índa bikéyahgi t'áá át'é nít'éé' baa nijigháá nít'éé' .
PRED:	He made a miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt , just as the Lord had commanded him . He did everything he had done to Pharaoh and his officials in Egypt .
GOLD:	The Lord sent him to perform all the miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt against Pharaoh , and all his servants , and his entire land .

ID:	72
INPUT:	Áádóó náábiiskání <unk> hoolyéedi kin haal'áágóó jiníyá , áko hódahooł'aahii índa diné t'óó ahayóí hoł yíkai .
PRED:	The next day Jesus went to the village of the village , and many people were amazed .
GOLD:	Soon afterward Jesus went with his disciples to the village of Nain , and a large crowd followed him .

ID:	73
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá shí sháháchį'go bik'e'íyé'ígi át'éego atínihish'į́įgo t'óó báhádzidgo até'ésh'į́įgo shigaan ayóó ábóodziilii bee nihich'į' k'ídííníshnii'go nihił da'ahideeshgą́ą́ł .
PRED:	And I am sending you out of my fury on my arm . I will certainly fight against you , and you will fight against me .
GOLD:	I myself will fight against you with a strong hand and a powerful arm , for I am very angry . You have made me furious !

ID:	74
INPUT:	Diné ła' asdzání bahastiin hólóonii yił shitéezhgo habi'deel'į́į'go , asdzání bił jineezhtézhígíí t'áá bił nahodi'dootsił . Kót'éego Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó doo yá'áshóonii nahjį' kódaoł'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ If a man who has sexual intercourse with her husband , she must be killed by her husband , she will be killed by her husband .
GOLD:	“ If a man is discovered committing adultery , both he and the woman must die . In this way , you will purge Israel of such evil .

ID:	75
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'éésh naalte' nilį́ ? Naalte' nilį́įgoósh yizhchį́ ? Ákoshą' ha'át'íí biniyé bąąh oogą́ą'ii silį́į́' ?
PRED:	“ Are you the slave of Israel ? Are you the slave of the male and female ?
GOLD:	“ Why has Israel become a slave ? Why has he been carried away as plunder ?

ID:	76
INPUT:	Áádóó nihitahgi diné t'áá íiyisí bił ahojooba'í nít'ée'ii índa oosą́ nít'ée'ii éí bik'is áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'áyó'nínígíí índa ba'áłchíní yidziihígíí yich'į' baa'ihígi át'į́įgo yich'į' aanichį' doo ,
PRED:	“ And if you are a faithful man among you , your brother , your brother , your wife , your wife , and your wife will be angry with you .
GOLD:	The most tenderhearted man among you will have no compassion for his own brother , his beloved wife , and his surviving children .

ID:	77
INPUT:	Áádóó éé' nineezígíí éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii naashch'ąą'go bik'i yí'nilgo deidootł'óołgo íínísin ; ch'ah dijoolí ałdó' áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii bee ádeidoolíiłgo índa sis bee áká ná'álzis dooígíí naashch'ąą'go yistł'ǫ́ǫgo ádeidoolíiłgo íínísin .
PRED:	Make a linen robe that were made of finely woven linen and embroidered with blue , purple , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Weave Aaron 's patterned tunic from fine linen cloth . Fashion the turban from this linen as well . Also make a sash , and decorate it with colorful embroidery .

ID:	78
INPUT:	Nihá aląąjį' naazíinii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ áádóó bídahwíínółnííh . Háálá éí nihii' naazíinii t'áá áłahjį' nihá yik'i hada'ídées'į́į'go yee nihindaalnishígíí Diyin God yee yił nídahalne' . Bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihindaalnishgo yá'át'ééh , doodaii' doo bik'eh dahonoł'į́į́góó éí yínííł danilį́įgo t'áadoo nihá nídoodleełí da .
PRED:	And if you obey your decrees and regulations , you will be careful to obey all your elders . For you will be careful to obey what I am saying , and you will be ashamed .
GOLD:	Obey your spiritual leaders , and do what they say . Their work is to watch over your souls , and they are accountable to God . Give them reason to do this with joy and not with sorrow . That would certainly not be for your benefit .

ID:	79
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus tó bee ho'doolzį́į'go táyi'dę́ę́' háádzísdzá , nít'éé' jó'akon yá' <unk> ąą ádzaa , áádóó Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii hasbídí nahalingo Jesus bik'ijį' hadahooleełgo áádóó bik'i dah neezdáago jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	When Jesus returned from the water , he saw the water from the boat and began to open the Spirit of God , and he saw that Jesus had seen him .
GOLD:	After his baptism , as Jesus came up out of the water , the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and settling on him .

ID:	80
INPUT:	Bee bidziilii yee nahasdzáán áyiilaa , bibee hódzáanii yee nahasdzáán niiní'ą́ , áádóó bił bééhózinígíí yee yádiłhił dah yiskaad .
PRED:	He made the strength of the earth , and he created the earth with his miraculous signs .
GOLD:	The Lord made the earth by his power , and he preserves it by his wisdom.With his own understandinghe stretched out the heavens .

ID:	81
INPUT:	Háálá yádiłhił biyi'di áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi dahólóonii t'áá ałtso , daat'íinii índa doo daat'íinii hó hwee Diyin God ádayiilaa , azhą́ naat'áanii ayóó ádaat'éii , éí doodaii' bídahólníihii , éí doodaii' naat'áanii danilíinii , éí doodaii' óhólnííh bee dahólóonii doo daat'íinii t'áá ałtso hó hwee Diyin God ádayiilaa . T'áá ałtsoní hwee ádaalyaa índa há ádabi'diilyaa .
PRED:	For God created everything in heaven and earth , who created everything in the heavens and earth , even though he created them . He did not invite everyone to do anything in the heavens and authority of the earth or in everything he created .
GOLD:	for through him God created everythingin the heavenly realms and on earth.He made the things we can seeand the things we ca n't see — such as thrones , kingdoms , rulers , and authorities in the unseen world.Everything was created through him and for him .

ID:	82
INPUT:	háálá nihí doo hadoohdzih da , nidi nihiTaa' biNíłch'i Diyinii nihiyi'dóó yáłti'ígíí hadoodzih .
PRED:	For you will not say , but you will say , ‘ The Spirit of your Father will also speak . '
GOLD:	For it is not you who will be speaking — it will be the Spirit of your Father speaking through you .

ID:	83
INPUT:	<unk> gaii yik'i dah sidáii
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	The Rider on the White Horse

ID:	84
INPUT:	Shich'ijí nílį́įgo bee bééhózinii ła' shich'į' bééhonísįįh , áko diné shik'ee dadiniihii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł , háálá shíká íínílwod áádóó ha'ííníshníigo áshiinilaa , Bóhólníihii nílíinii .
PRED:	But if you know what I am going to do , you will know that I am the Lord , and you are afraid of me .
GOLD:	Send me a sign of your favor.Then those who hate me will be put to shame , for you , O Lord , help and comfort me .

ID:	85
INPUT:	Dził até'éł'íinii nílíinii , nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso atíinilaii , nik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon ; nich'į' k'ídideeshnihgo tséghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hadandeesmasgo dził díílidgo ándeeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ Look , O mountains , I am the one who formed you in the sky and laid it on the mountain . I will pour out the mountains on the mountain of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Look , O mighty mountain , destroyer of the earth ! I am your enemy , ” says the Lord. “ I will raise my fist against you , to knock you down from the heights.When I am finished , you will be nothing but a heap of burnt rubble .

ID:	86
INPUT:	Áko ayóó'ádashó'níinii badadi'yoodi łígíí biyódí bá dahooghangóó yódí hadadeezbingo ádadeeshłííł .
PRED:	They will love those who love me , but those who love me .
GOLD:	Those who love me inherit wealth.I will fill their treasuries .

ID:	87
INPUT:	Ákohgo Mózes hwe'asdzą́ą́ bił áádóó haye'ké éí télii dabíyeehgo Ííjip kéyahgóó dashdiikai . Mózes éí Diyin God bigish jootį́į́ł .
PRED:	So Moses and his sons went out to Egypt , and they went to Egypt . So Moses put his staff on the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses took his wife and sons , put them on a donkey , and headed back to the land of Egypt . In his hand he carried the staff of God .

ID:	88
INPUT:	K'ad nídashookąąhgo ádashiłní , ShiDiyin God , Ízrel dine'é niidlíinii néédahoniilzin .
PRED:	“ Now , O God of Israel , ” they said . “ We are my helper , O God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Now Israel pleads with me , ‘ Help us , for you are our God ! '

ID:	89
INPUT:	Shidine'é bikéyah bikáá' ch'il deeníní áádóó ch'il da'dishahii hadadínóot'į́įłii , t'áá aaníí , kin bii' ił hózhǫ́ yę́ę índa ił hózhǫ́ǫgo kin haal'á yę́ę bąąh danihíni'go atínídadinohdleeh ,
PRED:	My people will be filled with joy , and joy will be filled with joy and joy .
GOLD:	For your land will be overgrown with thorns and briers.Your joyful homes and happy towns will be gone .

ID:	90
INPUT:	Háálá jó'akon , diné kódazhdidooniiłígíí t'áá áhánídę́ę́' bich'į' yoołkááł , Doo da'ałchíhígíí índa doo daaltsánígíí , índa doo dabi'doolt'ódígíí éí dabízhánee' !
PRED:	For this is what the Scriptures say , “ Look ! The day is coming from the end of the harvest , and they will be satisfied . ”
GOLD:	For the days are coming when they will say , ‘ Fortunate indeed are the women who are childless , the wombs that have not borne a child and the breasts that have never nursed . '

ID:	91
INPUT:	Háni'dii azhool bił deíyółígi át'éego Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í binoołkał le' !
PRED:	Let the chaff before the angel of the Lord , as the angel of the Lord .
GOLD:	Blow them away like chaff in the wind — a wind sent by the angel of the Lord .

ID:	92
INPUT:	Nidi ákwii yoołkáłígíí índa oolkiłígíí diné ła'da doo hoł bééhózin da , yá'ąąshdi diyingo nidaal'a'í nidi dooda , aYe' nidi dooda , nidi aTaa' t'éiyá bił bééhózin .
PRED:	But no one knows that day or hour or hour will know that the Son of heaven will not know the Son of God .
GOLD:	“ However , no one knows the day or hour when these things will happen , not even the angels in heaven or the Son himself . Only the Father knows .

ID:	93
INPUT:	Koréízingi kéédahoht'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Bethséyida kéédahoht'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! háálá aají nihitahgi ádahooníiłii ayóó ádaat'éii baa nida'asdee'ii éí Táir índa <unk> dan kin haal'áagi baa nida'asdee' nít'ée'go , ákwii kéédahat'íinii ałk'idą́ą́' aghaashzhiin yistł'óonii yee hadadiidzaago łeeshch'iihtahgi dineezbingo łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdadeezkéezgo yada'oozlíi' doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who live in exile : What sorrow awaits those who live in Judea , for they have no mercy on the heads of Tyre . They will be clothed in burlap and mourning , and they will eat their heads in burlap .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , Korazin and Bethsaida ! For if the miracles I did in you had been done in wicked Tyre and Sidon , their people would have repented of their sins long ago , clothing themselves in burlap and throwing ashes on their heads to show their remorse .

ID:	94
INPUT:	Áádóó danoonáago éí naat'agii t'áá ałtso índa nihokáá'góó naaldlooshii da'ałchinii danihits'íís deilghał doo áádóó doo ła'da nihik'iidínóołkałí da .
PRED:	All the animals of the wilderness will devour the wild animals and wild animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	Your corpses will be food for all the scavenging birds and wild animals , and no one will be there to chase them away .

ID:	95
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii shináshzhiizh , nidi nibee haz'áanii doo beisénah da .
PRED:	I have not forgotten the wicked , but I have never forgotten my instructions .
GOLD:	Evil people try to drag me into sin , but I am firmly anchored to your instructions .

ID:	96
INPUT:	doodaii' t'áadoo yoo'íní tsé yee néidííłne'ígíí daaztsą́ą́ ládą́ą́' ; éí doo yi'ana'í nilį́į́góó , doodaii' atízhdoolíiłgi doo binahodziz'ą́ą́góó ,
PRED:	“ You must not have a stone that has been ceremonially unclean for the first day of the ox or the ship 's enemies .
GOLD:	or accidentally drops a huge stone on someone , though they were not enemies , and the person dies .

ID:	97
INPUT:	áádóó ákóne' Zerábabel éí Abáíyad há yizhchį́ , náá'ákóne' Abáíyad éí Iiláíyakim há yizhchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Iiláíyakim éí Éízor há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	This was the father of Shealtiel , the father of Jedaiah ( which was the father of Eliashib ) , and he was the father of Jehoiakim .
GOLD:	Zerubbabel was the father of Abiud.Abiud was the father of Eliakim.Eliakim was the father of Azor .

ID:	98
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é atíyiilaa
PRED:	God 's Anger at Sin
GOLD:	Moses Intercedes for the People

ID:	99
INPUT:	Áshkelan kin haal'á bik'ijį' índa tónteel bibąąhgóóígíí bik'ijį' na'anish dooleełgo Bóhólníihii ákót'éego bá haadzíi'goshą' haa yit'éego hasht'edít'ée doo ?
PRED:	“ How long will this happen to this city of Ashkelon ? How long will the Lord be with you ?
GOLD:	“ But how can it be stillwhen the Lord has sent it on a mission ? For the city of Ashkelonand the people living along the seamust be destroyed . ”

ID:	100
INPUT:	Haadzíi'go nahachagiitsoh níłnii' , áádóó ch'osh ditł'ooí doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą́'góó níłnii' .
PRED:	Give birth to locusts , locusts , and sorrow awaits locusts .
GOLD:	He spoke , and hordes of locusts came — young locusts beyond number .

ID:	101
INPUT:	Áko Bath-shííba éí ni'jį' jineeshjoolgo aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' hozdísingo ájíní , Bíni'dii bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii David hináago ahóyéel'áa le' .
PRED:	So Bathsheba bowed low before the king and said , “ Let me be the king of David ! ”
GOLD:	Then Bathsheba bowed down with her face to the ground before the king and exclaimed , “ May my lord King David live forever ! ”

ID:	102
INPUT:	Ádadii'nínígíí díí ááhyiłní : aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ákót'éii , yá'ąąshdi Ayóó'ájít'éii bikáá'dóó hojoo'áałii honish'náájí dah sidáii nihá aláahgo náá'iiłniihii nilį́ .
PRED:	Then they said , “ This is what the priest says : The Most High in heaven is the Most High in heaven .
GOLD:	Here is the main point : We have a High Priest who sat down in the place of honor beside the throne of the majestic God in heaven .

ID:	103
INPUT:	Eihazáíyah dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' , áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nant'áago t'ááłá'í nááhai . Bimá éí Athaláíyah wolyéego <unk> yitsi' nilį́ .
PRED:	Ahaziah was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was Athaliah , the daughter of Athaliah .
GOLD:	Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem one year . His mother was Athaliah , a granddaughter of King Omri .

ID:	104
INPUT:	Rábshakeh áhodííniid , Heziikáíyah bich'į' hadaohdziih , Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ayóó át'é nanit'a'í nilíinii kóní , Ha'át'íí ba'ahódlíí shį́įshą' baadzíínílí ?
PRED:	The Assyrian chief of staff said to Hezekiah , “ What is your King Sennacherib of Assyria ? Why are you your brother , the king of Assyria ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Assyrian king 's chief of staff told them to give this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the great king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in that makes you so confident ?

ID:	105
INPUT:	Áádóó ashdla' náhááh góne' daneest'ánígíí éí daohsą́ą doo , áko t'óó ahayóí nihá níná'nít'į́įh doo ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the first month , during the third year of the month , the Lord your God will provide for you . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Finally , in the fifth year you may eat the fruit . If you follow this pattern , your harvest will increase . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	106
INPUT:	Éí ach'į' nahwii'ná bił yoołkáłígíí bighá yooską́ą́dóó bik'ijį' , t'áá áko jį́honaa'éí bił chahodoołhi ł , áádóó ooljéé' doo adiníłdíin da doo , índa yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' sǫ' nidahindéeh doo , áádóó yá'ąąshdi bee dahółdzilii dadoogał ,
PRED:	On that day the sun will be its sun , and the sun will be covered with the sun , and the moon will be covered with the sun .
GOLD:	“ Immediately after the anguish of those days , the sun will be darkened , the moon will give no light , the stars will fall from the sky , and the powers in the heavens will be shaken .

ID:	107
INPUT:	David áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bá náásgóó áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Géed índa Diyin God yá halne'ii Néíthan éí nidahaz'áanii bik'ehgo niinínil . Éí béésh ahídí'niłgo diits'a'ígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół neeznáá bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii índa tsin tł'óół naakits'áadah bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii Líívai dine'é dah deíjáahgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' niinínil , háálá kót'éego Bóhólníihii bá dahalne'ii yee haadzíí' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then David sent the second message to Nathan the prophet , Gad , and the prophets of the Lord 's Covenant , and the Levites who were carrying the Temple of the Lord . This is what the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	King Hezekiah then stationed the Levites at the Temple of the Lord with cymbals , lyres , and harps . He obeyed all the commands that the Lord had given to King David through Gad , the king 's seer , and the prophet Nathan .

ID:	108
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iiláísha éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii ííłní , Haash nideeshłííł ? Nílááh , nizhé'é yę́ę áádóó nimá yę́ę yá dahalne'ii bich'į' dínááh . Áko Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Dooda , háálá díí aláahgo naat'áanii tániilt'éego Mó'ab dine'é yaa nihidoonił biniyé ahínihiinilígíí éí Bóhólníihii át'į́ .
PRED:	Then Elisha asked the king of Israel , “ How can I do to you ? ” So the king of Israel replied , “ Go and go to the king of Moab ! ” So the king of Moab replied , “ Yes , the Lord has given us victory over us . ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you coming to me ? ” Elisha asked the king of Israel . “ Go to the pagan prophets of your father and mother ! ” But King Joram of Israel said , “ No ! For it was the Lord who called us three kings here — only to be defeated by the king of Moab ! ”

ID:	109
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii baazhdookáałgo bílák'ee ak'áán hadeezbingo haidoojihgo éí bee ééhániihii át'éego bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii yididoołił ; éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'é .
PRED:	On that day the priest will take the basket of flour and burn it on the altar of the Lord . He will burn it on the altar of burnt offering and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	Take the flour to the priest , who will scoop out a handful as a representative portion . He will burn it on the altar on top of the special gifts presented to the Lord . It is an offering for sin .

ID:	110
INPUT:	Híílai éí Máthat biye' , Máthat éí Líívai biye' , Líívai éí Mélkai biye' , Mélkai éí Jána biye' , Jána éí Jóseph biye' ,
PRED:	son of Levi was the son of Levi , whose son was the son of Levi was the son of Levi .
GOLD:	Heli was the son of Matthat.Matthat was the son of Levi.Levi was the son of Melki.Melki was the son of Jannai.Jannai was the son of Joseph .

ID:	111
INPUT:	Diltłish éí baa dadzíínóhłí áádóó doo daaldinii baa nidaahkai índa t'ááłá'í nootínígo bił kééhoht'íinii be'asdzą́ą́ bił da'ahidołyé ; kót'éegoósh kéyah shóideesht'eeł danohsin ?
PRED:	Do n't you trust in your sword , and do n't you trust in the land of the land ? Do you think I am taking one of your wives ?
GOLD:	Murderers ! Idolaters ! Adulterers ! Should the land belong to you ? '

ID:	112
INPUT:	Yah ííyáá nít'éé' ; nidaa'na'ii índa nidaaldlooshii doo daaldinii ts'ídá t'áá ałtso ał'ąą ádaat'éii áádóó Ízrel dine'é bi'eda'alyaii ts'ídá t'áá ałtso tsé ahénátł'ingo ní'áhígíí bikáa'jį' bééda'alyaago ahééhool'á .
PRED:	“ Look , ” they all the people of Israel and all the animals of the sky and all the places of worship .
GOLD:	So I went in and saw the walls covered with engravings of all kinds of crawling animals and detestable creatures . I also saw the various idols worshiped by the people of Israel .

ID:	113
INPUT:	Ákohgo áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Hananáíyah éí azéédéetání Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah yąąh na'iidiitą́ągo k'íiníti' .
PRED:	So Jeremiah took a yoke from the prophet Jeremiah and gave it to Jeremiah .
GOLD:	Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke off Jeremiah 's neck and broke it in pieces .

ID:	114
INPUT:	Éí bąą aláahgo naat'áanii danohłíinii , dahonohsą́ ; nahasdzáán bikáá'góó ánihwii'aahii danohłíinii , nidanihidi'nitin le' .
PRED:	“ Therefore , you kings of the earth , and teach the truth .
GOLD:	Now then , you kings , act wisely ! Be warned , you rulers of the earth !

ID:	115
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , t'áá ánółtso t'áadoo ałghadadoht'áhí , áádóó t'áadoo ał<unk> kahí , nidi t'ááłá'í góne' nitsáhákeesgo áádóó t'ááłá'í hoot'ááł bee da'ahíínóhtą' doogo nihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ bízhi' binahjį' baa nánihooshkąąh .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't be afraid of all these things . Do n't be able to understand what the name of the Lord Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I appeal to you , dear brothers and sisters , by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ , to live in harmony with each other . Let there be no divisions in the church . Rather , be of one mind , united in thought and purpose .

ID:	116
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniinaanígóó naat'áanii danilíinii atídashííł'įįd , nidi shijéí bee nizaad dinisin .
PRED:	My heart has done nothing for me , but my heart has crushed me with my heart .
GOLD:	Powerful people harass me without cause , but my heart trembles only at your word .

ID:	117
INPUT:	Bada'áłchíní k'ee'ąą dínéest'ą́ągo diltłish bee nidadootsił yiniyé ádaat'į́áádóó bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchííłgóó ch'iyáán doo yee hwiih daole' át'ée da doo .
PRED:	The people of the world will be filled with their sword , and they will be allowed to kill them .
GOLD:	They may have many children , but the children will die in war or starve to death .

ID:	118
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bida'ana'í yits'ą́ąjį' nídadíníchéehgo ha'át'íí lá dishníi doo !
PRED:	O Lord , what is your enemies , O Israel ! What is your enemies ?
GOLD:	Lord , what can I say now that Israel has fled from its enemies ?

ID:	119
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádanoht'éé nít'éé' yę́ę , áádóó ádaot'įįd nít'éé' yę́ę béédadoołnih , áko ádił nida'ayoosíí' nít'éé' yę́ę índa doo ákwii ádaot'įįd nít'éé' yę́ę biniinaa ádił nináda'oht'įįh doo .
PRED:	You have done evil in the sight of your evil deeds , and you have sinned against the evil things you had done .
GOLD:	Then you will remember your past sins and despise yourselves for all the detestable things you did .

ID:	120
INPUT:	Háálá Júdas éí hoł nihi'déélta' , díidí Jesus bá nideiil'a'ígíí łahjį' ałdó' haa deet'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	( ( This is the son of Judas ( which means “ We have been circumcised . )
GOLD:	Judas was one of us and shared in the ministry with us . ”

ID:	121
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ábsalam éí ashiiké táá' há niheezhchį́ ; bitsi' éí t'ááłá'í : Téímar wolyé ; éí asdzání ayóó ánóolninii nilį́ .
PRED:	Absalom had three sons of Tamar , and he became the daughter of Tamar . His mother was a beautiful woman .
GOLD:	He had three sons and one daughter . His daughter 's name was Tamar , and she was very beautiful .

ID:	122
INPUT:	Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Diyin God bikin ánálnéhíjį' nináhaaskaigo naaki béédaahááh góne' naaki nídízííd binih , Shiyáltiyel biye' Zerábabel áádóó Jázadak biye' Jéshuwa áádóó dabik'isóó nidahaasdzí'ígíí éí nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é danilíinii índa yisnááh danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę éí Jerúsalemjį' nidahaaskaígíí t'áá ałtso bił . Diyin God bikin bidazhdeeshnish , áádóó yik'i dadéez'į́į' dooleeł biniyé Líívai dine'é naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaígíí nídeidiinil .
PRED:	On the third day of the festival , during the third year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , Zerubbabel son of Jehozadak , and all the priests and Levites who were in Jerusalem . And they will know that I am the priests and Levites , and Levites , and they will flee to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The construction of the Temple of God began in midspring , during the second year after they arrived in Jerusalem . The work force was made up of everyone who had returned from exile , including Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , Jeshua son of Jehozadak and his fellow priests , and all the Levites . The Levites who were twenty years old or older were put in charge of rebuilding the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	123
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí Ámalek dine'é bikin haal'áagi jiníyá áádóó yíldzisdę́ę́' baa nidziyeedzá .
PRED:	When Saul arrived at the town , he returned from the town of Saul and told them what he had happened .
GOLD:	Then Saul and his army went to a town of the Amalekites and lay in wait in the valley .

ID:	124
INPUT:	Aniné áádóó iiná baa yájíłti'ii bohoolnííł , áádóó éí ájínínígíí ayóó'ádayó'níinii aneest'ą' nahalingo deildeeł doo .
PRED:	A person who gives life to eternal life , and a harvest of good crop will produce good fruit .
GOLD:	The tongue can bring death or life ; those who love to talk will reap the consequences .

ID:	125
INPUT:	Áko David éí Gath kin haal'áágóó anííchą́ą'go Saul bił nááhóóne' nidi t'áadoo háká náádínéeztą́ą' da .
PRED:	So David escaped to Gath and did n't understand what Saul had done .
GOLD:	Word soon reached Saul that David had fled to Gath , so he stopped hunting for him .

ID:	126
INPUT:	Nidashiniłchéii tsiidétáán bich'į' bił handeeł ! Shii' sizíinii ábidiní , Shí yisdánííłtíinii nishłį́ !
PRED:	Give my strength to those who are weak , for I am the one who rescued me .
GOLD:	Lift up your spear and javelinagainst those who pursue me.Let me hear you say , “ I will give you victory ! ”

ID:	127
INPUT:	Háálá ánihidishní , Bee haz'áanii yitis nidahideestáalii bił bi'déélta' , níigo bee ak'e'ashchínígíí shí shee bohodoolnííł , háálá sheinít'į́įgo bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí éí bidahodoolnííł .
PRED:	For I tell you , ‘ I am going to follow the instructions I have given you . ' ”
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	128
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é kóbidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shikin bii' sohodizin , nihibee adziil bee nihi'áshodahódli'ii daoł<unk> go baa nihił dahózhóonii áádóó nihii' sizíinii yídin nilíinii doo ílį́į́góó ádadeeshłííł , jó'akon , índa nihiye'ké áádóó nihitsi'ké daadziihígíí doo ílį́į́góó ádadeeshłíiłgo diltłish bee nidadootsił .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : ‘ This is what the Holy One of Israel says : I will punish you , and I will punish you with your daughters and daughters . I will destroy you , and I will destroy you with your sword . ' ”
GOLD:	and I was told to give this message to the people of Israel . This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will defile my Temple , the source of your security and pride , the place your heart delights in . Your sons and daughters whom you left behind in Judah will be slaughtered by the sword .

ID:	129
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Ha'át'íishą' nínízin ? Nít'éé' ábijiní , Díí shiyáázh nidilt'éego bee nóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biyi'di , ła' ninish'náájí dah sidáa doogo índa ła' éí ninishtł'ají dah sidáa doogo bee bá handziih .
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” Jesus asked . “ What is your son , ” he said . “ Your son will sit on your left and sit on your right side . ”
GOLD:	“ What is your request ? ” he asked.She replied , “ In your Kingdom , please let my two sons sit in places of honor next to you , one on your right and the other on your left . ”

ID:	130
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' . T'áá shiTaa' shiníł'a'ígi át'éego , shí ałdó' danihideesh'aał .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ May your Father be with me , and I will give you your Father . ”
GOLD:	Again he said , “ Peace be with you . As the Father has sent me , so I am sending you . ”

ID:	131
INPUT:	Tsi'díníyáagoósh ádíní ? dahałní . Nidi , T'áá aaníí , jiníigo bee nijíltee' . Éíyee' diyingo naal'a'í baa áhályánígíí át'į́ ! daaní .
PRED:	“ Is it right ? ” he asked . “ But what is your servants ? ” But the angel said , “ He is good ! ”
GOLD:	“ You 're out of your mind ! ” they said . When she insisted , they decided , “ It must be his angel . ”

ID:	132
INPUT:	Nidi aláahgo naat'áanii Jóram yę́ę bitsi' Jiihósheba wolyéii Eihazáíyah bideezhí éí Eihazáíyah biye' Jó'ash aláahgo naat'áanii yę́ę biye'ké nidadootsiłii bitahdóó yił dah dii'áazhgo bí áádóó asdzání baa áhályánígíí nida'iilkáhí góne' Athaláíyah yits'ąą náhodees'į́į́' , áko t'áadoo ho'diisyį́į da .
PRED:	But King Ahaziah of Ahaziah , the daughter of Ahaziah , was the son of Joash , the sons of Ahaziah , and the sons of Joash had fled to the royal palace . When Athaliah had fled to the palace , she hurried to the palace .
GOLD:	But Ahaziah 's sister Jehosheba , the daughter of King Jehoram , took Ahaziah 's infant son , Joash , and stole him away from among the rest of the king 's children , who were about to be killed . She put Joash and his nurse in a bedroom , and they hid him from Athaliah , so the child was not murdered .

ID:	133
INPUT:	Áko hánaaí Íísa bíla' nahalingo hála' ditł'ogo biniinaa t'áadoo hwéédi'nítą́ą da , áko t'óó hak'idzisdli' .
PRED:	So Esau did n't know that he was afraid of his brother Esau 's sister , so he could see him .
GOLD:	But he did not recognize Jacob , because Jacob 's hands felt hairy just like Esau 's . So Isaac prepared to bless Jacob .

ID:	134
INPUT:	bąąhági át'éii yaa ákodanízingo íidoolííł , háálá doo dashoodlą́ągo shaa dadzólíi da ;
PRED:	He will do what is right , for he will trust me for those who trust me .
GOLD:	The world 's sin is that it refuses to believe in me .

ID:	135
INPUT:	Ákohgo áłah ílínídóó hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii ádadííniid , Hait'éegoshą' Bénjamin dine'é t'ahdii asdzání bee ádaadinígíí be'asdzą́ą́ dahólǫ́ǫgo ádadiilnííł ? Shoo , Bénjamin dine'é bits'ąą asdzání ałtso ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	Then the elders of Benjamin asked , “ How can the men of Benjamin be married ? How can the women of Benjamin be taken away from Benjamin ? ”
GOLD:	So the elders of the assembly asked , “ How can we find wives for the few who remain , since the women of the tribe of Benjamin are dead ?

ID:	136
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo ahidiníłnáago bitsiits'iin deisiłgo booshk'iizh góne' diltłish ahidiníłnáago ałghá deisgeedgo t'áá łahjį' naa'aníídee' ; éí bąą Gíbiyan kin haal'áadi Hél<unk> hoosye' .
PRED:	Then they grabbed his head and cut the blood of the river and cut it into a sword . So they hid it in the middle of the town of Gideon 's son .
GOLD:	Each one grabbed his opponent by the hair and thrust his sword into the other 's side so that all of them died . So this place at Gibeon has been known ever since as the Field of Swords .

ID:	137
INPUT:	Áko Gíízer kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii <unk> wolyéii éí Léíkish dine'é yíká adoolwołgo yiniyé níyá , áko Jáshowa éí <unk> áádóó bidine'é t'áá bił nideistseed ; t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' áádeisįįd da .
PRED:	So the king of Lachish went to Lachish and asked them , “ The people of Lachish ” So Joshua did not let them go with them .
GOLD:	During the attack on Lachish , King Horam of Gezer arrived with his army to help defend the town . But Joshua 's men killed him and his army , leaving no survivors .

ID:	138
INPUT:	Dadine'é dziłghą́ą'jį' hágo deiłníi doo ; áadi nááhániihii t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii náádayiiłniih doo , háálá táłkáá'dóó ts'ídá łą́ągo da'ílíinii daboosání doo , índa séí bii' yódí nées'į́į'ii yik'ídadookah .
PRED:	They will say to the mountains , ‘ The mountains will rise again , for they will be filled with unfailing love and faithfulness . '
GOLD:	They summon the people to the mountainto offer proper sacrifices there.They benefit from the riches of the seaand the hidden treasures in the sand . ”

ID:	139
INPUT:	Nihoogháahjį' yoołkáałgo diné kódaat'ée doo
PRED:	In the fourteenth day of the Future Reign
GOLD:	The Dangers of the Last Days

ID:	140
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'adshą' ha'át'íí nee hólǫ́ ? Bááh ashdla'go , doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhída nee hólónígíí shaa díínił .
PRED:	“ Why do you give me five loaves of bread ? Do you give me five days ? ”
GOLD:	Now , what is there to eat ? Give me five loaves of bread or anything else you have . ”

ID:	141
INPUT:	Azhą́ shį́į́ dził ádadoodįįł índa dah daask'idii nahjį' kódadooníił nidi , bee aa a'ááh nisinii éí doo nits'ą́ąjį' kódooníił da , doo nidi bee hasht'ehodít'éii shidine'é bee bił aha'dinisht'áanii nahjį' kódooníił da , ní Bóhólníihii naa a'ááh nízinii .
PRED:	Even the mountains will be destroyed , and the hills will disappear , but I will never again be filled with unfailing love . I , the Lord , have compassion on you .
GOLD:	For the mountains may moveand the hills disappear , but even then my faithful love for you will remain.My covenant of blessing will never be broken , ” says the Lord , who has mercy on you .

ID:	142
INPUT:	T'áá áko diné éí hadaałt'é ánábi'diilyaa , áko bik'izhnitéhí nízdiiłtsoozgo dashdiiyá . Díí háá'áyį́į́h jį́ biyi' áhóót'įįd .
PRED:	So the man jumped up and took it off , and he took it to the Sabbath day and took it to the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	Instantly , the man was healed ! He rolled up his sleeping mat and began walking ! But this miracle happened on the Sabbath ,

ID:	143
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nílíinii , dooládó' hózhónígi kééhót'į́į da !
PRED:	O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , how you live !
GOLD:	How lovely is your dwelling place , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	144
INPUT:	Áko hazhé'é ábizhdííniid , Doo nídoosh'nééh át'ée daígíí t'áadoo bik'ee níni' si'ání , bóhonish'níihii , háálá ąądii sélį́į́' . Áko nináá'jízhch'id , nidi t'áadoo bik'ízhních'id da .
PRED:	“ Do n't be discouraged , ” he said . “ I ca n't be afraid of you , for I did n't eat it . ” So he slept with a long robe .
GOLD:	she said to her father , “ Please , sir , forgive me if I do n't get up for you . I 'm having my monthly period. ” So Laban continued his search , but he could not find the household idols .

ID:	145
INPUT:	Áádóó hooghan góne' yah ajííyáago , diné doo oo'íinii haa ní'áázh , áko Jesus áháłní , Díí baa nideeshaałígíísh bíneesh'ą́ągo yinohdlą́ ? Nít'éé' áháłní , Aoo' , Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	So he went to the house of the man and said , “ Are you going to die ? ” “ Yes , ” Jesus replied . “ Yes , ” the Lord replied . “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Yes , ”
GOLD:	They went right into the house where he was staying , and Jesus asked them , “ Do you believe I can make you see ? ” “ Yes , Lord , ” they told him , “ we do . ”

ID:	146
INPUT:	Diné hóyáanii doo yá'át'éehii yiyiiłtséehgo yits'ąą nídít'į́į́h , nidi diné doo hóyáanii éí doo yá'át' éehii yich'į' t'áá <unk> ghááh , áádóó yik'ee ti'hoonih .
PRED:	The wise will see the wicked , but the wise will see the joy of the wise .
GOLD:	A prudent person foresees danger and takes precautions.The simpleton goes blindly on and suffers the consequences .

ID:	147
INPUT:	Áko biiskání ch'ínáádzídzáago Hííbrew dine'é nidilt'éego ałk'iilwod lá , áko bik'is doo ákwii ííł'ínígíí ábizhdííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' t'áá bił ałk'is nídlínígíí náníłhał ?
PRED:	The next day the next day he went out to the Hebrew , and he said , “ Why are you going to be your brother ? Why are your brother ? ”
GOLD:	The next day , when Moses went out to visit his people again , he saw two Hebrew men fighting . “ Why are you beating up your friend ? ” Moses said to the one who had started the fight .

ID:	148
INPUT:	Áko Mídiyan dine'é bich'į' anaa' dahodzisłį́į́' ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo diné danilínígíí t'áá ałtso nideistseed .
PRED:	So the Philistines attacked the Lord 's command , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	They attacked Midian as the Lord had commanded Moses , and they killed all the men .

ID:	149
INPUT:	T'áadoo tsíhodeeskézí yáníłti'í , áádóó Diyin God binááł t'áadoo tsxį́į́ł ádíl'į́įgo hahídziihí , háálá Diyin God éí yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ , índa ni éí nahasdzáán bikáa'gi honílǫ́ . Éí bąągo saad t'áá díkwíí bee yáníłti' le' .
PRED:	Do n't say , “ Do n't be afraid of God ! Do n't be fooled by the eyes of God , for you are full of evil and evil .
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	150
INPUT:	Sámuel ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' Ízrel dine'é yá nihodiyii'aah nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Samuel left Israel until evening .
GOLD:	Samuel continued as Israel 's judge for the rest of his life .

ID:	151
INPUT:	Diyin God t'ááłá'í hólǫ́ , áko Jew dine'é , bąąh nídahineeshgizhii , bida'oodlą' bee t'áá ákogi ádaat'éego Diyin God bá hahadziih , áádóó doo Jew dine'é danilíinii , doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhii , t'áá bí bida'oodlą'ígíí bee t'áá ákogi ádaat'éego ałdó' Diyin God bá hahadziih .
PRED:	For God is with us , and we are God 's faith . And we are God 's faith , just as God 's faith . And we are sinning with God 's faith and by faith .
GOLD:	There is only one God , and he makes people right with himself only by faith , whether they are Jews or Gentiles .

ID:	152
INPUT:	She'asdzą́ą́ hólǫ́ǫgo oodlání nilį́įgo bił tádísh'aash dooleełgoósh doo bee shá haz'ą́ą da , t'áá ła' daal'aadii áádóó Bóhólníihii bik'isóó danilíinii índa Pe<unk> éí ákódaat'ínígi át'éego ?
PRED:	I am writing to you as a church in my own church ? Do n't you say , ‘ The Lord is with me and sisters ? '
GOLD:	Do n't we have the right to bring a believing wife with us as the other apostles and the Lord 's brothers do , and as Peter does ?

ID:	153
INPUT:	Kin hadaas'áii t'áá ałtso éí Ízrel dine'é bikéyah biyi' Líívai dine'é haa daaszįįdígíí binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił dízdiindóó ba'aan tseebíigo kin hadaas'áhígíí hóó' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	So all the towns of Israel received their pasturelands from the tribe of Levi , and they settled in their towns .
GOLD:	The total number of towns and pasturelands within Israelite territory given to the Levites came to forty-eight .

ID:	154
INPUT:	Háálá t'ą́ą́' dah nídahidoohkaigo díí ał'ąą ana'í nihitahgi daadzí'ígíí t'áá éí nihił kéédahat'ínígíí bił ahółdahgo bił ahánda'ohgehgo ídadi'doołnííł , áádóó bił ahółdahgo , índa nihił ahíldahgo ,
PRED:	For you will return to the other towns and worship other gods . Then you will be invited to the wedding feast , and you will share with you .
GOLD:	“ But if you turn away from him and cling to the customs of the survivors of these nations remaining among you , and if you intermarry with them ,

ID:	155
INPUT:	Ana'í dah deínéehii éí aláahgo bindanit'a'í t'áá bił yóó'adahinichééh ! Hooghandi asdzání nidaazdáhígíí éí ana'í binaalye'é daasnáanii nideiniih .
PRED:	All the kings of the earth are at Mizpah , but the kings of the royal palace is gone .
GOLD:	Enemy kings and their armies flee , while the women of Israel divide the plunder .

ID:	156
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' ádadidooniił , Dabizhé'é yę́ę biBóhólníihii Diyin God yił ahada'deest'áanii yóó'adeideez'ą́ągo biniinaa ákóhóót'įįd ; éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íbiní'eezh yę́ędą́ą́' yił ahada'deest'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Say to the people , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of their ancestors , the God of Egypt had led them out of Egypt . ' ”
GOLD:	“ And the answer will be , ‘ This happened because the people of the land abandoned the covenant that the Lord , the God of their ancestors , made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt .

ID:	157
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	158
INPUT:	Áko ná nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso shich'į' hadadookah , áádóó shich'į' yaa ádadooníiłgo kódadidooniił , Akóóh yówehjį' ch'ínóhnééh ; diné nikéé' tádíkáhígíí t'áá ałtso ałdó' t'áá bił , áádóó bik'ijį' índa akǫ́ǫ́ ch'ídeeshááł . Mózes éí Féro bits'ą́ą́' ch'ízhníyáago t'áá íiyisí háhóóchįįd .
PRED:	All your servants will go out to me , and they will say to them , ‘ Listen to my enemies ! ' They will say , ‘ Listen to Pharaoh and all the people of Egypt . '
GOLD:	All the officials of Egypt will run to me and fall to the ground before me . ‘ Please leave ! ' they will beg . ‘ Hurry ! And take all your followers with you . ' Only then will I go ! ” Then , burning with anger , Moses left Pharaoh .

ID:	159
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Háísh , T'áá łiníchí'í , niłní ? Da' tsin doo bąąhdóó adííyį́įł da , nidishní yę́ęésh bąąhdóó ííníyą́ą́' ?
PRED:	Then the Lord said , “ Who is your servant ? Do you eat the fig trees ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who told you that you were naked ? ” the Lord God asked . “ Have you eaten from the tree whose fruit I commanded you not to eat ? ”

ID:	160
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílam éí hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yaa áho'niilne'go ání , Bíyor biye' Béílam kódííniid ; bił ééhózingo oo'íinii ání ,
PRED:	Balaam told Balaam , “ This is what happened to Balaam son of Beor , the son of Beor , spoke to Balaam son of Beor ,
GOLD:	This is the message Balaam delivered : “ This is the message of Balaam son of Beor , the message of the man whose eyes see clearly ,

ID:	161
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel nish'náájí bee k'ízdeesnii'go Íífreiyim bitsii't'áagi dasdees'nii' ; éí akéédę́ę́' yizhchíinii jílį́ . Áádóó nishtł'ají bee Manáseh bitsii't'áagi dasdees'nii' , áko éí ahidiníłnáago bik'i dasdees'nii' , azhą́ Manáseh éí alą́ąjį' yizhchį́įgo hoł bééhózin nidi ájít'į́ .
PRED:	So the man of Israel laid his hand on the head of Ephraim and laid his head on his head . He laid his head on his head and laid it on his head . He laid the firstborn sons of Manasseh 's eyes on the ground .
GOLD:	But Jacob crossed his arms as he reached out to lay his hands on the boys ' heads . He put his right hand on the head of Ephraim , though he was the younger boy , and his left hand on the head of Manasseh , though he was the firstborn .

ID:	162
INPUT:	E'asdzą́ą́ yá'át'éehii bee baa ha'niihii
PRED:	Living by the Children
GOLD:	A Wife of Noble Character

ID:	163
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , azhą́ da'ołjił nidi , Júdah dine'é ádił da'oolziih lágo . Kin shijaa' Gílgal góyaa doo doohkah da índa Beth-éíven góde ałdó' dooda . Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii hiná ; doo t'áá ádzaagóó ádee hadidoohdzih da .
PRED:	“ Get up , O Israel , and go out to Gilgal . You will die in Gilgal , but you will never again again again again again . You will say , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Though you , Israel , are a prostitute , may Judah not be guilty of such things.Do not join the false worship at Gilgal or Beth-aven , and do not take oaths there in the Lord 's name .

ID:	164
INPUT:	Háálá díí jį́ ákóyaa ííyá , áko béégashii áádóó béégashii yáázh daneesk'ahígíí índa dibéda t'óó ahayóí neistseed , áko aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké t'áá ałtso áádóó siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í danilíinii índa náá'iiłniihii Abáíyathar ałdó' , Nidahidoohkah , yidííniid ; jó , binááł da'ayą́ índa da'adlą́ągo ádaaní , Adonáíjah aláahgo naat'áanii as'ahgóó hináa le' .
PRED:	On that day the king took the calf and sacrificed a calf . He killed many sheep and goats , cattle , cattle , sheep , goats , and fattened calves . He said to Abiathar , “ Long live the king ! ”
GOLD:	Today he has sacrificed many cattle , fattened calves , and sheep , and he has invited all the king 's sons to attend the celebration . He also invited the commanders of the army and Abiathar the priest . They are feasting and drinking with him and shouting , ‘ Long live King Adonijah ! '

ID:	165
INPUT:	háálá shizaad t'áadoo dazdiizts'ą́ą' da , ní Bóhólníihii ; shá nidaal'a'í Diyin God yá dahalne'ii hach'į' t'áá ahą́ą́h ałnáádaash'aah nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo deísóołts'ą́ą' da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	For the Lord said to me , “ The prophets have not listened to me , but they have not listened to me .
GOLD:	For they refuse to listen to me , though I have spoken to them repeatedly through the prophets I sent . And you who are in exile have not listened either , ” says the Lord .

ID:	166
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí shich'ahashkéego nashineeztą́ą́' , nidi anoonééł t'áadoo yaa shidiní'ą́ą da .
PRED:	The Lord protects me without cause , but they do n't let me die .
GOLD:	The Lord has punished me severely , but he did not let me die .

ID:	167
INPUT:	Áádóó jó'akon , nik'éí Elízabeth haastih nidi ałdó' ashkii yééltsą́ , áádóó doo ałchíi da bi'doo'niidii éí k'ad yiltsą́ągo hastą́ą́h nídeezid .
PRED:	Suddenly , Elizabeth was very old when he was born , Elizabeth 's oldest son , and the boy was not born .
GOLD:	What 's more , your relative Elizabeth has become pregnant in her old age ! People used to say she was barren , but she has conceived a son and is now in her sixth month .

ID:	168
INPUT:	índa ha'a'aahjígo nááhoodzo éí Beth-déígan kin shijaa'góó áádóó Zébyulan kin haal'áii bíighahgóó índa <unk> yel yíldzisígíí náhookǫsjígo Beth-íímek kin haal'áádóó Niyáíyel kin shijaa'góó , áádóó náhookǫsjí Kéíbul kin haal'áii bich'į'go nihoodzo ,
PRED:	From there the boundary went back to the east of the hill country of Zebulun and Bethel ( which means “ I am living in the north , ” ) , “ These are the cities of Zebulun . ” )
GOLD:	then it turned east toward Beth-dagon , and ran as far as Zebulun in the valley of Iphtah-el , going north to Beth-emek and Neiel . It then continued north to Cabul ,

ID:	169
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Judíyadę́ę́' naaltsoos naa halne'go doo ła' nihaa nína' da , áádóó nihidine'é áádę́ę́' neheeskaígíí nidi ła' doo ákwii ánít'éégóó doo naa ch'ídahaz'ą́ą da .
PRED:	The apostles replied , “ We have never been taken from Judea , and no one left in Judea , but no one has left us . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ We have had no letters from Judea or reports against you from anyone who has come here .

ID:	170
INPUT:	Áko yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Kót'éego Bóhólníihii dadíínóhsingo áádóó nihada'ahódlíigo índa danihijéí t'áá ákóne' át'éego ádaahníił dooleeł .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is what the Lord says : Make your hearts so that you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	These were his instructions to them : “ You must always act in the fear of the Lord , with faithfulness and an undivided heart .

ID:	171
INPUT:	2Chr . 7 : <unk>
PRED:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer
GOLD:	's Response to Solomon

ID:	172
INPUT:	Nidi ádííniid , Da' nihideezhí kin yąąh sizíní nahalingo ájiilaaígíísh yá'át'ééh ?
PRED:	But he asked , “ Is it right for you ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why should we let him treat our sister like a prostitute ? ” they retorted angrily .

ID:	173
INPUT:	Sádamdóó naat'áanii danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii bizaad deísínółts'ą́ą́' ; Gomárahdóó diné danohłíinii , nihíjí nihiDiyin God bibee haz'áanii dadoohts'į́į́h .
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord : “ Listen to this message from the Sovereign Lord , you citizens of Sodom .
GOLD:	Listen to the Lord , you leaders of “ Sodom. ” Listen to the law of our God , people of “ Gomorrah . ”

ID:	174
INPUT:	Trówasdi Christ baa hane' yá'át'éehii baa hodeeshnih biniyé níyáago , Bóhólníihii éí shá bohónéedzą́ągo áyiilaa ,
PRED:	So Paul went to Troas and told me what the Lord had done to me .
GOLD:	When I came to the city of Troas to preach the Good News of Christ , the Lord opened a door of opportunity for me .

ID:	175
INPUT:	Sálaman bighan haz'ą́ą́dóó éí ła'a jį́ ak'áán kor wolyéhígíí tádiin bíighahgo dabich'iyą' , índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í ak'áán kor wolyéhígíí hastą́diin bíighahgo dabich'iyą' ,
PRED:	On the first day of Solomon 's house , a grain offering of grain , a grain offering of grain and grain ,
GOLD:	The daily food requirements for Solomon 's palace were 150 bushels of choice flour and 300 bushels of meal ;

ID:	176
INPUT:	Áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii t'óó ahayóí áádóó hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii bik'ah t'áá bił índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii didlidgo nááhániihígíí t'áá bik'eh daníką́ągo , kót'éego Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizingi nidahojiłáago ádajiilaa .
PRED:	Then he made a peace offering of burnt offering and peace offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering . This is what the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	There was an abundance of burnt offerings , along with the usual liquid offerings , and a great deal of fat from the many peace offerings.So the Temple of the Lord was restored to service .

ID:	177
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa nihí daat'íinii doo baa nitsídeiikees da , nidi doo daat'íinii baa nitsídeiikees , háálá daat'íinii éí t'óó kónígháníjį' ádaat'é , nidi doo daat'íinii éí doo bá nidahwiizt'i' da .
PRED:	We do n't think we are mere things , but we do n't know what is right . We do n't want to do what is right , but those who do wrong .
GOLD:	So we do n't look at the troubles we can see now ; rather , we fix our gaze on things that can not be seen . For the things we see now will soon be gone , but the things we can not see will last forever .

ID:	178
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ii'ni' nahalingo yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' biinéé' diists'ą́ą́' , áádóó Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii haadzíí' , áko níló éí tsé nahalingo áádóó tsííd dadiltłi'ii aheesdááz .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord spoke like clouds , and the voice of the heavens were like lightning .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resoundedamid the hail and burning coals .

ID:	179
INPUT:	Háishą' shá yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ ? Ni lá t'éiyá ni . Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'áá ni t'éiyá nídin nishłį́ .
PRED:	“ Who is my own ? Who is my own ? For I am not a part of the earth .
GOLD:	Whom have I in heaven but you ? I desire you more than anything on earth .

ID:	180
INPUT:	Éí bąą da'neest'ą́ą́ góne' náádeeshdáałgo shitł'oh naadą́ą́' índa wáin ániidíii bits'ą́ą́' nahjį' kónídeeshdlííł áádóó t'áá łichí'ígo bee háázhdiit'įįh doo biniyé aghaa' índa na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo yistł'ónígíí baa deet'ą́ nít'ée'ii bits'ą́ą́' nahjį' kónídeeshdlííł .
PRED:	Therefore , I will take my wine into exile , and I will pour out my fury on the new wine , new wine , new wine , new wine , and new wine .
GOLD:	“ But now I will take back the ripened grain and new wineI generously provided each harvest season.I will take away the wool and linen clothingI gave her to cover her nakedness .

ID:	181
INPUT:	Diyin God , nihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ biTaa' nilíinii t'áá éí aTaa' aa a'ááh nízinii índa diné t'áá ałtsojį' hayi'iyoołníihii , éí baa ha'niih ,
PRED:	And may God our Father , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	All praise to God , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ . God is our merciful Father and the source of all comfort .

ID:	182
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin hasht'enályaa
PRED:	The Temple Destroyed
GOLD:	Tattenai 's Letter to King Darius

ID:	183
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah ákǫ́ǫ́ ayííł'a' , áko yił íídéelgo yiyiisxį́ .
PRED:	Then King Solomon sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada and killed him . So he killed him .
GOLD:	So King Solomon ordered Benaiah son of Jehoiada to execute him , and Adonijah was put to death .

ID:	184
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God éí t'áá bí diné yaa bił hózhóonii éí hódzą́ áádóó ił ééhózin índa ił hózhǫ́ yeidii'aah . Nidi ádił ni'iilzíihii áłah áda'ale'go áádóó ałk'i da'deesk'idgo ída'alne'go na'anishii yeidii'aah , áko bik'é nijishnishígíí Diyin God yaa bił hózhóonii yeididoo'ááł . Díí ałdó' t'áadoo nánídlíní da , áádóó níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalin .
PRED:	For God has given wisdom and peace ; he is a joyful song of peace and peace and peace offerings . But he has given them victory over the hills and honor of his enemies , and he will give them victory over the wind . ”
GOLD:	God gives wisdom , knowledge , and joy to those who please him . But if a sinner becomes wealthy , God takes the wealth away and gives it to those who please him . This , too , is meaningless — like chasing the wind .

ID:	185
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The Report of the Guard

ID:	186
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii hach'į' haadzíi'go ání , Nídiidáahgo kin bita'atiin K'éhézdon hoolyéejį' dínááh , ákwe'é Júdas bighangi ła' Saul joolyéego <unk> dę́ę́' nijighá , éí bína'ídídííłkił , háálá ákwe'é sozdilzin .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ Get up and walk in front of us . ” So he went to the house of Saul and went out to the village where he was there .
GOLD:	The Lord said , “ Go over to Straight Street , to the house of Judas . When you get there , ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul . He is praying to me right now .

ID:	187
INPUT:	áko t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nilį́į doo ; shiTaa' nílíinii , ts'ídá shii' honílǫ́ áádóó shí ałdó' nii' honishłónígi át'éego bí ałdó' t'ááłá'í nilį́įgo nihii' hólǫ́ǫ doo , áko nihokáá' dine'é éí shííníł'a'ígíí deidoodląął .
PRED:	And you will be my Father , my Father , and you will also believe me . Then you will also believe that I am the one who sent me .
GOLD:	I pray that they will all be one , just as you and I are one — as you are in me , Father , and I am in you . And may they be in us so that the world will believe you sent me .

ID:	188
INPUT:	Éí bąą , E'elyaii danihíhígíí áát'įįd índa tsin naask'ęę'ii áádóó doolyį́į'go e'elyaii éí haadzíi'go bohoolyaa , doo dadidoohniił daígíí biniyé t'áá bítséedi t'áá náshiinídą́ą'dii bee nihich'į' haasdzíí' áádóó nihich'į' yit'íní áshłaa .
PRED:	“ Therefore , I have cast an idol that was carved image and carved image that carved carved image that was carved image that had never been carved to you . I said to you , ‘ I am the one who made you an object to you . '
GOLD:	That is why I told you what would happen ; I told you beforehand what I was going to do.Then you could never say , ‘ My idols did it.My wooden image and metal god commanded it to happen ! '

ID:	189
INPUT:	Éí bąą háá'áyį́į́h Diyin God yee hooł'a'ii biih dadiikahgi t'ahdii nihá ąą át'éhídą́ą́' , haa'íshą' yéego ádeiit'į́įgo biih dahidiikah . Doo baa dahonohsą́ą́góó t'éí nihí ła' ch'ééh yahadaahkáahgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	So we will enter God 's rest , and we will enter the place of the Sabbath . Then we will be able to grow up again . ”
GOLD:	God 's promise of entering his rest still stands , so we ought to tremble with fear that some of you might fail to experience it .

ID:	190
INPUT:	Náhodi'nilghałgo áádóó nahodi'ditehgo bee hojiyąąh , nidi áłchíní doo baa hwiinít'į́į́góó t'áá bí nízinígi ááníi łgo bimá baa yánízin łeh .
PRED:	When you hear , you will be beaten , and you will know that you are children of the world .
GOLD:	To discipline a child produces wisdom , but a mother is disgraced by an undisciplined child .

ID:	191
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí ak'ah bik'i yaadziidgo bee yilzį́į́' bijį́į́dą́ą́' naat'áanii danilíinii éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bidáahgi náádeidiyoołnihígíí nidayiizhjaa' .
PRED:	On that day the king took the fat of the altar and placed it on the altar of burnt offering .
GOLD:	The leaders also presented dedication gifts for the altar at the time it was anointed . They each placed their gifts before the altar .

ID:	192
INPUT:	Pííkah łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáii t'áá át'é éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Israel 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Pekah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	193
INPUT:	Áko i'íí'ą́ągo siláo dah deínéehii bitahgóó hane' dideezdláadgo á<unk> ní , Diné t'áá ałtso danihikin hadaas'áágóó índa danihikéyahgóó nídadohkááh .
PRED:	At that evening the entire army gathered in front of the city , and all the people gathered in the towns of the city .
GOLD:	Just as the sun was setting , the cry ran through his troops : “ We 're done for ! Run for your lives ! ”

ID:	194
INPUT:	Doo honíyą́ą́góó alą́ąjį' ni'ádííníltį́įgo áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó tsídííníkéezgo nizéé' dáádidíílnih .
PRED:	Do n't put your mouth into your mouth , and do what is evil .
GOLD:	If you have been a fool by being proud or plotting evil , cover your mouth in shame .

ID:	195
INPUT:	Áko hadzoodzíi'go kójíníigo naz'neeztą́ą́' :
PRED:	Then Jesus taught this :
GOLD:	and he began to teach them .

ID:	196
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bá chohoo'į́ nílíinii , bide áhoot'įįhgo yisdáyiiníiłii nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá biniyé Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi dé'éyóní nílį́ , áádóó ha'át'íí lá biniyé ła' háádę́ę́' dayigáałii atiin ts'áníyáago t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ biiłkaahígíí nahonílin ?
PRED:	O Israel , why are your hope in trouble , O Israel ? Who is the one who lives in the land of Israel ? Who is the one who lives from war ?
GOLD:	O Hope of Israel , our Savior in times of trouble , why are you like a stranger to us ? Why are you like a traveler passing through the land , stopping only for the night ?

ID:	197
INPUT:	Nihí ła' áshididoohniił , Diyin God t'áá hó íiznízinígíí t'éiyá bik'ehgo diné ááníiłgo , ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'ahdii bik'íhoji'ááh ? Jó , háishą' íiznízinígíí yich'į' naaldzilgo yíneel'ą́ ?
PRED:	“ But if you say , ‘ God is truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly truly does it ? '
GOLD:	Well then , you might say , “ Why does God blame people for not responding ? Have n't they simply done what he makes them do ? ”

ID:	198
INPUT:	daal'aadii dayiiłtsoodgo awáalyaa góne' yah adeiznil .
PRED:	The apostles took him into prison , and he put them into prison .
GOLD:	They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail .

ID:	199
INPUT:	Nidi bik'éí ádingo t'áadoo bá kéyah ninéiyółniihígóó áádóó t'áá bí ninéidiyoołnihgo yíneel'ą́ą́ ládą́ą́'
PRED:	But if he has not bought his relatives , he will strike his own land and buy it away .
GOLD:	If there is no close relative to buy the land , but the person who sold it gets enough money to buy it back ,

ID:	200
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo náá'iiłniihii nídii'na'go áhodííniid , Da' doósh ák'ihadidíídzih da ? Díí dinéshą' ha'át'íí yee naa dahalne' ?
PRED:	The leading priests said to him , “ Do n't you say such things ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus , “ Well , are n't you going to answer these charges ? What do you have to say for yourself ? ”

ID:	201
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' t'áadoo ákódaaht'íní , háálá Bóhólníihii bich'į' ts'ídá doo haldinígi ádáát'įįdgo bąą bijoołxáhígíí bidiyin dabidi'níinii yá ádáát'įįd ; jó , biye'ké índa bitsi'ké deidiłidgo bidiyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' náádayiiłniihgo yaa naaskai .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Do not worship the idols of the Lord your God , for they have done to idols . They have committed pagan shrines and burn incense to idols .
GOLD:	You must not worship the Lord your God the way the other nations worship their gods , for they perform for their gods every detestable act that the Lord hates . They even burn their sons and daughters as sacrifices to their gods .

ID:	202
INPUT:	Dá'ák'eh ałníí'góó bi<unk> dookah biniyé diyingo áda'dilnéehgo ádąąh da'aldéehii , éí bisóodi bitsį' áádóó doo daadáanii índa na'ats'ǫǫsí deildeełgo éí t'áá łahjį' ázhdoodįįł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ We will throw the water into the middle of the valley of worship , where we will eat the meat of the sanctuary , ” says the Lord . “ The Lord , ” he said .
GOLD:	“ Those who ‘ consecrate ' and ‘ purify ' themselves in a sacred garden with its idol in the center — feasting on pork and rats and other detestable meats — will come to a terrible end , ” says the Lord .

ID:	203
INPUT:	Táir dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa hane'
PRED:	A Message for Tyre
GOLD:	A Message for Tyre

ID:	204
INPUT:	Num . 9 : <unk>
PRED:	Promises of Deliverance
GOLD:	's Glory Fills the Tabernacle

ID:	205
INPUT:	hódahooł'aahii ła' Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo yílá tánágisígíí t'áadoo yida'aléhí ida'niiyą́ą́' nít'éé' , éí dayiiłtsą́ągo [ doo bił adaaníi da] .
PRED:	But when the disciples saw the Jewish leaders , they ate no food and drinking it .
GOLD:	They noticed that some of his disciples failed to follow the Jewish ritual of hand washing before eating .

ID:	206
INPUT:	Hakaláíyah biye' Niihemáíyah díí saad yee hahaasdzíí' . Naadiin náhááh góne' <unk> lev yiziłígíí binih Shúshan kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii bighan góne' sédáago
PRED:	In the fourth year of Jeremiah 's reign , in the fourth year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , in the fortress of Susa .
GOLD:	These are the memoirs of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah.In late autumn , in the month of Kislev , in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes ' reign , I was at the fortress of Susa .

ID:	207
INPUT:	Néíhor jiináago naadiin náhást'éí honááhaigo Tíírah há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	When Terah was 30 years old , he became the father of Nahor .
GOLD:	When Nahor was 29 years old , he became the father of Terah .

ID:	208
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é dabizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii ana'al'į́ yídaneel'áanii t'áá ałtso Ízrel dine'é bitahgi yí<unk> tah .
PRED:	These were the clans of Israel who were twenty years old or older and older .
GOLD:	“ From the whole community of Israel , record the names of all the warriors by their families . List all the men twenty years old or older who are able to go to war . ”

ID:	209
INPUT:	Nihits'ą́ą́' dah diiyáádóó bik'ijį' mą'iitsoh báádahadzidii nidahalingo diné nihitah hidookahgo shił bééhózin , áko da'oodlání doo yaa daazid da dooleeł .
PRED:	We will be driven from the sky , and I will be driven away like a deer , and I will not be seen .
GOLD:	I know that false teachers , like vicious wolves , will come in among you after I leave , not sparing the flock .

ID:	210
INPUT:	Ákohgo diyingo naal'a'í shich'į' yáłti'ii áshidííniid , Hadílgháásh , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Jerúsalem índa Záíyan t'áá íiyisí haa łe'nisin .
PRED:	Then the angel said to me , “ Get up ! Shout to me , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies ! ”
GOLD:	Then the angel said to me , “ Shout this message for all to hear : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : My love for Jerusalem and Mount Zion is passionate and strong .

ID:	211
INPUT:	háálá yóó'adashideez'ą́ągo Sáídan dine'é éí asdzą́ą́ diyin deiłníinii Áshtoreth daolyéii , áádóó Mó'ab dine'é bidiyin bidi'níinii Kíímash wolyéii índa Áman dine'é bidiyin bidi'níinii Mólek wolyéii éí díí yich'į'go nidahałáago doo shik'ehgóó deíkáah da . Bizhé'é David yę́ę shich'į' t'áá ákogi át'éego ááníiłgo bee nihoyí'áanii áádóó bee nihodiish'aahii yik'eh hół'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi át'éego doo dajíkáah da .
PRED:	For they had abandoned me and said , “ These are the gods of Moab , the god of Moab , the god of Moab , the god of Moab , and Molech , just as I did . ”
GOLD:	For Solomon has abandoned me and worshiped Ashtoreth , the goddess of the Sidonians ; Chemosh , the god of Moab ; and Molech , the god of the Ammonites . He has not followed my ways and done what is pleasing in my sight . He has not obeyed my decrees and regulations as David his father did .

ID:	212
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyolígíí bee Társhishdóó tsinaa'eeł ál'ínígi át'éii nidahíníti' .
PRED:	O God , you people of Tarshish , O Tarshish , you people of Tarshish .
GOLD:	You destroyed them like the mighty ships of Tarshishshattered by a powerful east wind .

ID:	213
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é yik'i déez'į́į'go ádajít'éegi yaa ákoniizį́į́' .
PRED:	When God saw the people of Israel , he felt sorry for them .
GOLD:	He looked down on the people of Israel and knew it was time to act .

ID:	214
INPUT:	Áko Eihazáíyah éí Samériyadi adeídi haghangi tsin yistł'ǫ́ǫgo tsésǫ'gi dáádiníbaalígíí bigházhnítłizh , áko bits'ą́ą́dóó hatah doo hóóts'íid da , áádóó hane' yił nidaal'a'íii ajííł'a'go ábijiní , Nílááh , Ékran kin haal'áagi diyin Béíyalzííbab shá nidabídółkid , Díí naałniih daats'í bits'ą́ą́dóó náádideeshdááł , dooda daats'í .
PRED:	But Ahaziah was traveling in Samaria , and his family were traveling by the window of Samaria . She said , “ Do n't be afraid of what I am saying , but I will never recover ? ” “ No , ” he replied , “ I will never recover . ”
GOLD:	One day Israel 's new king , Ahaziah , fell through the latticework of an upper room at his palace in Samaria and was seriously injured . So he sent messengers to the temple of Baal-zebub , the god of Ekron , to ask whether he would recover .

ID:	215
INPUT:	Áko áyah nii'áii naakigo bii' tá'ádígisí nitsaaígíí áádóó dóola naakits'áadahgo béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaago bii' tá'ádígisí biyaa sinilígíí éí aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman yę́ę Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin yiniyé áyiilaii ayííyį́ ; éí béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaii t'áá át'é doo dah hizhdooleehígi aníłdáás .
PRED:	He also made two bronze basin called the Sea of the Sea and the Sea of the Sea . He also made a bronze basin for the Lord 's Temple , and he made a bronze bronze bronze bronze basin for the Lord .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea with the twelve bronze oxen beneath it , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of King Solomon .

ID:	216
INPUT:	T'áadoo íits'a'í ádił handzooł ; daneeznáanii t'áadoo baa yínííł nanináhí ; nitsii' biná'íłt'ih áádóó kééh ni'éés ; nizéé' doo bich'ą́ą́h ni'dííłbał da índa yínííł danilíinii bibááh doo dííyį́įł da .
PRED:	Do n't let your enemies be crushed , and put their heads in your mouths . Do n't let them eat their heads in your mouths .
GOLD:	Groan silently , but let there be no wailing at her grave . Do not uncover your head or take off your sandals . Do not perform the usual rituals of mourning or accept any food brought to you by consoling friends . ”

ID:	217
INPUT:	Áko éí Férisii hágo hodííniidii díí yiyiiłtsą́ągo , t'áá biyi'ídi ání , Díí diné Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo , díí asdzání hódílnihígíí át'íinii hoł bééhózin doo nít'éé' , háálá asdzání bąąhági ááníiłii nilį́ .
PRED:	When the Pharisees saw this , he said to them , “ This man of God , ” he said . “ He is a man who is a woman who is a woman who has committed adultery . ”
GOLD:	When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this , he said to himself , “ If this man were a prophet , he would know what kind of woman is touching him . She 's a sinner ! ”

ID:	218
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham éí Diyin God yoosdląądgo bik'ihojidlíhígi át'éego Diyin God dayoodlánígíí t'áá ałtso bik'idahojidlí .
PRED:	And God blessed all who believed in God 's faith in God 's faith .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	219
INPUT:	Áádóó naanish binanit'a'í danilíinii índa bik'ehgo nida'anishí ch'íkaigo diné ádeidííniid , Féro kóní , Tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz doo nihaa náádeeshjoł da .
PRED:	So they said to Pharaoh and his officials , “ I will send you out of Egypt , ” they replied . “ I will not be grain with straw . ”
GOLD:	So the slave drivers and foremen went out and told the people : “ This is what Pharaoh says : I will not provide any more straw for you .

ID:	220
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Férisii honíł'į́įgo t'áadoo átsé Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo tá'ázdígisí izh'niiyą́ą'go t'óó bił ahóóyóí .
PRED:	One day when the Pharisees saw that the Jews had made without yeast .
GOLD:	His host was amazed to see that he sat down to eat without first performing the hand-washing ceremony required by Jewish custom .

ID:	221
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso kódaat'éii yaa nidaakaii índa doo t'áá ákogi ádaat'íinii éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God doo bíłdin da .
PRED:	The Lord your God is righteous and righteous , and he will never deny you .
GOLD:	All who cheat with dishonest weights and measures are detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	222
INPUT:	Bisóodi éí bikéshgaan hałgizh áádóó doo bita' nideezbaal da , nidi doo ná'át'aał da ; éí nihił t'óó baa'ih .
PRED:	“ You must not eat any animal that has split hooves , but it is not defiled .
GOLD:	The pig has evenly split hooves but does not chew the cud , so it is unclean .

ID:	223
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Haash dahóót'įįd ? Áádóó ábizhdííniid , Jó , Názarethdóó Jesus ábi'dool'įįdígíí éí Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo Diyin God índa diné t'áá ałtso binááł ayóó ádaat'éii áyoolíiłgo áádóó bizaad ayóó át'éego na'iiłnáago baa nitsáhákees nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ What do you mean ? ” he asked . “ He is the Messiah ? ” And he said , “ He is a great man of God and the people of the dead . ”
GOLD:	“ What things ? ” Jesus asked. “ The things that happened to Jesus , the man from Nazareth , ” they said . “ He was a prophet who did powerful miracles , and he was a mighty teacher in the eyes of God and all the people .

ID:	224
INPUT:	Jó , nibik'ehgo iináanii bídin nishłį́ . Nit'áá ákogi é'ét'é bee náshiiłnaah !
PRED:	I am innocent , for I am innocent ; let my life life life be restored .
GOLD:	I long to obey your commandments ! Renew my life with your goodness .

ID:	225
INPUT:	Diyingo naal'a'í naakidi haa náánádzáá góne' hodeelchidgo ání , Nídiidáahgo íyą́ , háálá ayóó ánízáágóó díníyá .
PRED:	Then the angel of God came to him and said , “ Get up ! Get up and meet him ! ”
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord came again and touched him and said , “ Get up and eat some more , or the journey ahead will be too much for you . ”

ID:	226
INPUT:	Áko Gíliyad hwe'asdzą́ą́ haye' há niyiishchį́ , índa hwe'asdzą́ą́ biyáázhké daneeyą́ągo Jéfthah ch'ídei<unk> <unk> go ádeidííniid , Nihizhé'é ba'áłchíní bitahdóó nihíí' dadooleełígíí doo ła' níí' dooleeł da , háálá asdzání dé'éyóní nilíinii biyáázh nílį́ .
PRED:	Gilead was the sons of Gilead , and the sons of Gilead said , “ The sons of Jephthah 's sons will give birth to the sons of Jephthah son of Jephthah , for she is a permanent law for you . ”
GOLD:	Gilead 's wife also had several sons , and when these half brothers grew up , they chased Jephthah off the land . “ You will not get any of our father 's inheritance , ” they said , “ for you are the son of a prostitute . ”

ID:	227
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya dine'é bisiláo t'áá ałtso Éífek kin shijaa'ígi áłah silį́į́' , índa Ízrel dine'é éí Jézriyel nahós'a' tó háálínígi dah yinééł .
PRED:	So the Philistines gathered the entire army , and the entire community of Israel gathered in the land of Jezreel .
GOLD:	The entire Philistine army now mobilized at Aphek , and the Israelites camped at the spring in Jezreel .

ID:	228
INPUT:	Shidine'é Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íní'eezh bijį́į́dóó kin haal'áagi Ízrel dine'é bitahgi doo ła' kin bii' sohodizinii shá íidoolíiłgo ákwii shízhi' baa ha'niih doo biniyé bik'i diishnii' da , doodaii' doo ła' shidine'é Ízrel binazhnit'áa doo biniyé náhodiiłtį́į da .
PRED:	“ On that day I brought my people out of Egypt to bring them out of Egypt to worship the Temple of my name . I will never be able to rule over my people .
GOLD:	‘ From the day I brought my people out of the land of Egypt , I have never chosen a city among any of the tribes of Israel as the place where a Temple should be built to honor my name . Nor have I chosen a king to lead my people Israel .

ID:	229
INPUT:	Tónteel aháíyííłk'olgo ákóne' tsé'naa ho'níłnii' , áádóó tó ałts'ą́ą́hjí ní'áago áyiilaa .
PRED:	You divided the sea into the sea , and you held up the water of the sea .
GOLD:	For he divided the sea and led them through , making the water stand up like walls !

ID:	230
INPUT:	Éíbraham éí Filístiya dine'é bikéyahgi t'óó átsééd kééhojit'į́įgo lą'í yiską́ .
PRED:	Abraham lived in the land of the Philistines for many days .
GOLD:	And Abraham lived as a foreigner in Philistine country for a long time .

ID:	231
INPUT:	Áádóó éí yoołkáałdi t'áá dáda'ak'ehígi miilgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii éí miilgo béésh łigaii bą́ą́h ná'ádleehii bitsásk'ehgi ch'il ahoshí áádóó ch'il deeníní hodooleeł .
PRED:	On that day the third day of the grape harvest will be cut off from the vineyards of silver and silver .
GOLD:	In that day the lush vineyards , now worth 1,000 pieces of silver , will become patches of briers and thorns .

ID:	232
INPUT:	Áádóó łį́į́' yee nídahastį́įgo Jerúsalem éí David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaagi yóó'ádahojiilaa .
PRED:	David buried his armor in Jerusalem , and he buried his ancestors in the City of David .
GOLD:	They brought his body back to Jerusalem on a horse , and he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David .

ID:	233
INPUT:	Gííbal áádóó Áman índa Ámalek dine'é ; Táir kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii éí Filístiya dine'é yił ałch'odaos'ne' ;
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Philistines replied , “ I will destroy the Philistines and the Philistines .
GOLD:	Gebalites , Ammonites , and Amalekites ; and people from Philistia and Tyre .

ID:	234
INPUT:	Jó , t'áadoo le'é ániidíígíí baa nideeshaał ; k'ad hadínóosééł . Nił bééhodoozįįł . Jó , honoojíidi nidi , honít'i'go índa halgaidi tooh danílį́įgo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! I will see you in the wilderness of the Nile . ”
GOLD:	For I am about to do something new.See , I have already begun ! Do you not see it ? I will make a pathway through the wilderness.I will create rivers in the dry wasteland .

ID:	235
INPUT:	Ahastiin t'áá bí bits'íís ayóó'ádayó'nínígi át'éego be'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'ádayó'níi doo . Be'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'áyó'nínígíí t'áá bí ałdó' ayóó'í'dó'ní .
PRED:	For the husband loves her husband , and love love those who love her .
GOLD:	In the same way , husbands ought to love their wives as they love their own bodies . For a man who loves his wife actually shows love for himself .

ID:	236
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Nóah áyidííniid , Ats'íís k'ehgo yildahii nináneel'ą́ąjį' bá nihonít'i' dooleeł , háálá nahasdzáán bikáá'góó hó hwee t'áá át'éé nít'éé' ádílááh nihinéést'e' , áko k'ad nahasdzáán bikáa'gi áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	Then God said to Noah , “ The bodies of the world will be able to destroy the world , for the earth was filled with violence . ”
GOLD:	So God said to Noah , “ I have decided to destroy all living creatures , for they have filled the earth with violence . Yes , I will wipe them all out along with the earth !

ID:	237
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bits'ąą Ámor dine'é yóó'aheezhjée'go Beth-hóran kin shijaa' góyaa dayíjeehgo Bóhólníihii éí wódahdę́ę́' yik'ijį' nílótsoh Azííkah kin shijaa'jį' ayóó át'éego nayííłtą́ągo nidahastseed ; Ízrel dine'é danilíinii diltłish yee nidahastseedígíí biláahdi át'éego nílótsoh yee nahwésdįįd .
PRED:	The Israelites chased me from the middle of the Amorites , and the Lord chased me out of the land of the Amorites and attacked me in the middle of the land of the Amorites . But the people of Israel were killed by the sword .
GOLD:	As the Amorites retreated down the road from Beth-horon , the Lord destroyed them with a terrible hailstorm from heaven that continued until they reached Azekah . The hail killed more of the enemy than the Israelites killed with the sword .

ID:	238
INPUT:	Diyin God éí , aTaa' nílíinii , dabidohníigo , nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'ah dahinohnáago dahodíínóhsingo bá dahinohná . Diyin God doo ał'ohgo aa nitsíkeesii éí t'ááłá'í jinítínígo ádajíít'įįdii bik'ehgo haa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	“ Son of God , tell you the Father , ‘ You are the one who is greater than the world . ' ”
GOLD:	And remember that the heavenly Father to whom you pray has no favorites . He will judge or reward you according to what you do . So you must live in reverent fear of him during your time here as “ temporary residents . ”

ID:	239
INPUT:	T'áadoo ádaa dahoh'niihí
PRED:	Hope for Others
GOLD:	Warning about Self-Confidence

ID:	240
INPUT:	Áádóó bił dahóózhǫǫdgo béeso haa deidooniłgo há dahodeez'ą́ .
PRED:	And when they arrested Jesus , he gave them his money .
GOLD:	They were delighted , and they promised to give him money .

ID:	241
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Mózes éí Éran áyidííniid , Díí dinéshą' ha'át'íí daniłníigo biniinaa ayóó át'éego ádił ni'iidzííh biih yínínil ?
PRED:	Then Moses asked Aaron , “ What are you doing ? ” And Moses asked Moses , “ Why did you make a great sin ? ”
GOLD:	Finally , he turned to Aaron and demanded , “ What did these people do to you to make you bring such terrible sin upon them ? ”

ID:	242
INPUT:	Pérgamasgi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii bidiyingo naal'a'í kót'éego bich'į' ak'e'íłchí : Diltłish t'áá ałch'ishjigo deeníinii dah yootį́įłii kóní :
PRED:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in the church : Write this letter to the angel of the Lord :
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Pergamum . This is the message from the one with the sharp two-edged sword :

ID:	243
INPUT:	Shí t'éiyá nihiDiyin God nishłį́į doo biniyé Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' dah nihidii'eezh ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , who brought you out of Egypt . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	It was I who rescued you from the land of Egypt , that I might be your God . I am the Lord . ”

ID:	244
INPUT:	Áádóó Jórdan tooh nílínígíí biláahdi Átad hoolyéego ha'é'él'ésígi jinínáago ákwe'é t'áá íiyisí yínííł dajílį́įgo yínííł bił t'áá íiyisí dajíícha ; Jóseph bizaad k'ehgo tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' dajicha nít'éé' .
PRED:	As the Jordan River was in the middle of the Jordan River , he wept for seven days and wept for seven days .
GOLD:	When they arrived at the threshing floor of Atad , near the Jordan River , they held a very great and solemn memorial service , with a seven-day period of mourning for Joseph 's father .

ID:	245
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Now this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	246
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá dah oonééł nít' éé' éí níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ą́góó éí diné yił adaaskaigo tsé yee yił nidadzisne'go daaztsą́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniidígíí yida'iilaa .
PRED:	As soon as they were leaving the camp of the camp , the people of the camp was taken to the Lord .
GOLD:	So the whole community took the man outside the camp and stoned him to death , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	247
INPUT:	Nidi ni , doodaii' na'áłchíní shikéé' deínóhkáhígíí bits'ą́ąjigo dah doohkaigo shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii índa bee nihoní'áanii nihidáahgi nihá niníláhígíí doo bik'eh dahonoł'į́į́góó áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii ła' bá nidaał'a'go índa bich'į' nidahołáago ,
PRED:	But if you refuse to obey my commands and obey my commands , do not obey my commands and obey my commands and commands .
GOLD:	“ But if you or your descendants abandon me and disobey the commands and decrees I have given you , and if you serve and worship other gods ,

ID:	248
INPUT:	Doo ádaa hashne'góó shá bíighah dishnínígíí shits'íís yąąh niníyá .
PRED:	I tell you what I am telling you about your body .
GOLD:	When I refused to confess my sin , my body wasted away , and I groaned all day long .

ID:	249
INPUT:	Ákohgo Marííshah kin haal'áagi kéédahoht'íinii nihił ałts'ą́ą́' ałk'iiz dooleełii nihaa deesłóós ; éí Ízrel dine'é binaat'áanii nilíinii Adálam kin haal'áajį' adoogááł .
PRED:	“ Now tell us , ‘ Your towns will be given to you . ' ”
GOLD:	O people of Mareshah , I will bring a conqueror to capture your town.And the leaders of Israelwill go to Adullam .

ID:	250
INPUT:	Siláo neeznádiingo binanit'a'í éidíígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go , siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í yaa níyáago yił hoolne'go ání , Ha'át'íishą' baa nídinidzá ? Éí diné yee' Rome dine'é nilį́į́ lá .
PRED:	When the officer heard that the commander of the guard , the commander of the guard , he asked , “ Why are you looking for a Roman citizen ? ”
GOLD:	When the officer heard this , he went to the commander and asked , “ What are you doing ? This man is a Roman citizen ! ”

ID:	251
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákózhdííniid nidi , nida'ał'eełii táłts'á da'diil'oł daznízin , nidi ch'ééh ádajíít'įįd , háálá tónteel t'áá íiyisí hak'ijį' náádadiidáahgo yilk'ooł .
PRED:	But the people said to them , “ We have not brought the sea into the sea , but they could n't stop the sea . ”
GOLD:	Instead , the sailors rowed even harder to get the ship to the land . But the stormy sea was too violent for them , and they could n't make it .

ID:	252
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Géídai biye' Ménahem éí Térzah kin haal'áádóó Samériyajį' níyá , áádóó ákwii Jéíbesh biye' Shálam atíyiilaago yiyiisxį́ , áko éí bitsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Shallum son of Menahem began to rule over Samaria . He killed his son , and he killed the next king .
GOLD:	Then Menahem son of Gadi went to Samaria from Tirzah and assassinated him , and he became the next king .

ID:	253
INPUT:	Áádóó łą'ídi ninálí ła' nídeididooniłgo yúnak ádabi'didoolníiłgo éí Bábilan kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii bighandi yá nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	Some of your brother will be thrown into exile , but the palace will be thrown into exile .
GOLD:	‘ Some of your very own sons will be taken away into exile . They will become eunuchs who will serve in the palace of Babylon 's king . ' ”

ID:	254
INPUT:	Áko wóne'dę́ę'go bikáá' adání dį́į́' sinil ; tł'óó'dę́ę'go ałdó' dį́į́' sinil , áko bikáá' adání bikáa'gi náádahidoonihii nidaatseed dooleeł biniyé tseebíí sinil .
PRED:	On the fourth side of the altar , he put the fourth curtain on the fourth side of the altar , and he put them on the altar .
GOLD:	So there were eight tables in all — four inside and four outside — where the sacrifices were cut up and prepared .

ID:	255
INPUT:	Kódaadzaadóó bik'ijį' Gálilii be'ek'id tsé'naagóó Jesus bił dah nídii'éél , t'áá éí Taibííriyas be'ek'id wolyé .
PRED:	So they went to the Sea of Galilee to the Sea of Galilee . ( This happened to the Sea of Galilee . )
GOLD:	After this , Jesus crossed over to the far side of the Sea of Galilee , also known as the Sea of Tiberias .

ID:	256
INPUT:	Áko hoos'įįdgo Peter doo bééhoozinígíí biniinaa siláo bitahgóó ayóó át'éego hahodíídláád .
PRED:	When Peter learned that Peter was watching that Peter had gone through the crowd .
GOLD:	At dawn there was a great commotion among the soldiers about what had happened to Peter .

ID:	257
INPUT:	Jó yoołkáłígíí , áádóó nídahidizíidii , áádóó dahwéelzhíishiida índa nináháháahiida nihił dadiyingo ádeínóhsin lá !
PRED:	For he is the day of yours , and he will bless us from all times of truth .
GOLD:	You are trying to earn favor with God by observing certain days or months or seasons or years .

ID:	258
INPUT:	Nidine'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii bá yóó'adííní'ą́ ; ádił da'asziihii t'áá ałtso bá bik'i hwiiniziid . Síilah .
PRED:	You have defiled the sins of your people , and you have defiled her blood . Interlude
GOLD:	You forgave the guilt of your people — yes , you covered all their sins.Interlude

ID:	259
INPUT:	T'áá aaníinii éí há díní'į́į́' , Bóhólníihii nílíinii . Naa abídziyíníłhaal nidi , t'áadoo yaa ákodaniizį́į' da . Atídeinilaa nidi , hasht'e'dabidi'doolníłígíí doo deinízin da . Binii' tsé nitł'izígíí bilááh át'éego dayííłtł'is . Łahgo át'éego tsíńdadookos yę́ę nidi , doo deinízin da .
PRED:	You have seen the Lord , O Lord , but you have rebelled against your lips . You have rejected their cries for their sins , but they will not turn their backs on them .
GOLD:	Lord , you are searching for honesty.You struck your people , but they paid no attention.You crushed them , but they refused to be corrected.They are determined , with faces set like stone ; they have refused to repent .

ID:	260
INPUT:	Diné nininísáanii nahalingo k'ad áká nílzisnanídídéeshkiłgo shił hodíílnih .
PRED:	“ I will answer you like a man , and you will answer me .
GOLD:	“ Brace yourself like a man , because I have some questions for you , and you must answer them .

ID:	261
INPUT:	Áádóó Áshįįh Bił Honíts'aa' hoolyéé góyaa Íídam dine'é bisiláo neeznáadi míilgo nidzistseed , índa Síílah kin haal'áii anaa' bee dzisná , áádóó díí jį́įjį' <unk> hiyel bee hojíízhi' .
PRED:	They captured the Ark of Edom and killed 10,000 soldiers in the city of Edom . They captured the city of Edom and killed him .
GOLD:	Amaziah also killed 10,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt . He also conquered Sela and changed its name to Joktheel , as it is called to this day .

ID:	262
INPUT:	Óola t'áá bízhání bik'ídííłtihgo ła' bibąąhgóó ahééhiníkaadgo ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Make a piece of pure gold , and overlay it with gold .
GOLD:	Overlay it with pure gold and run a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	263
INPUT:	Ła' nidzistseed nidi , daadzíi'ii háká daat'į́įgo t'ą́ą́' ninákaigo Diyin God t'áá íiyisí há daat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	But some of them were trying to kill them . But God was very angry with them .
GOLD:	When God began killing them , they finally sought him.They repented and took God seriously .

ID:	264
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	265
INPUT:	áádóó náhodiiniichii'go doo naagháhígóó haz'ánígi kéyah bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo , índa ákwii ch'il hadínóot'į́į́ł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ nídahodiłtį́į́h .
PRED:	The home of the field will be filled with violence , and it will be filled with water .
GOLD:	Who sends rain to satisfy the parched groundand make the tender grass spring up ?

ID:	266
INPUT:	Ákwii Íímim dine'é kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' ; éí diné ayóó ádaat'éii áádóó t' óó adahayóí nít'éé' índa Ánakim dine'égi ádaníłnééz nít'éé' .
PRED:	The people of Edom had defeated the land of Egypt , and the glorious presence of the Ammonites .
GOLD:	( A race of giants called the Emites had once lived in the area of Ar . They were as strong and numerous and tall as the Anakites , another race of giants .

ID:	267
INPUT:	Nidi oodlání nohłį́įgo éí doo oodlání ánihwii'aahii nilíinii náánáła' oodlání nilíinii nihá yaa nídóot'įįłgo biniyé bich'į' nidahoh'éésh .
PRED:	But if you are not guilty of Christ , take some of the church in the church 's church .
GOLD:	But instead , one believer sues another — right in front of unbelievers !

ID:	268
INPUT:	áádóó éí diné bił neezhtéezhgo áádóó ájíít'įįdígíí hahastiin bits'ąą nanil'ingo ázhdoolchxǫ'ígíí t'áadoo bééhoozingóó índa oo'íinii ádingo t'áadoo hahodeel'į́'ígóó
PRED:	“ If you have sexual relations with a man who has sexual relations with her husband , you must not have sexual relations with her .
GOLD:	and has sex with another man , but neither her husband nor anyone else knows about it . She has defiled herself , even though there was no witness and she was not caught in the act .

ID:	269
INPUT:	Naat'áanii danilíinii t'óó daho'di<unk> go honoojíidi doo nida'aztiindi t'áá ádzaagóó t'óó ahii' naaníjookah nít'éé' .
PRED:	The princes were unable to grow in the wilderness , but they followed the evil spirits of the wilderness .
GOLD:	the Lord pours contempt on their princes , causing them to wander in trackless wastelands .

ID:	270
INPUT:	tsííd yááhiiltaałígi át'éego ach'į' nahwii'ná biniyé diné bi'dichííh .
PRED:	There was a captain of a man named him , a man who had been born to death .
GOLD:	People are born for troubleas readily as sparks fly up from a fire .

ID:	271
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é bitahdę́ę́' diné shaa hínínilígíí bich'į' nízhi' bee ánít'éii bééhózingo íishłaa ; éí t'áá ałtso níí' nít'ée'go shaa hínínil , índa nizaad yik'eh dahół'į́ .
PRED:	I have made you a nation from among the world , and you have shown me everything I did . I did to obey all the things I gave you .
GOLD:	“ I have revealed you to the ones you gave me from this world . They were always yours . You gave them to me , and they have kept your word .

ID:	272
INPUT:	T'áá hó Diyin God yee ayóó át'éii bee bits'ádi'nílíidii bee hats'ádi'nídíín , índa Diyin God át'éhígíí ts'ídá t'áá éí jílį́įgo , t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' hazaad ayóó ábóodziilii bee hoogááł . Nihibąąhági át'éii nihąąh táádzízgizdóó bik'ijį' aghánáhóó'áadi Diyin God Ayóó'át'éii binish'náájígo dasneezdá .
PRED:	He was raised from God 's glory , and he was raised from the light of God , and he was filled with the power of God . He went up to the place of honor and the Son of God , and he fell on his right hand .
GOLD:	The Son radiates God 's own glory and expresses the very character of God , and he sustains everything by the mighty power of his command . When he had cleansed us from our sins , he sat down in the place of honor at the right hand of the majestic God in heaven .

ID:	273
INPUT:	Kintah góne' ada'iiztiingi nidilghaash łeh ; dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó chánahgo yáłti'
PRED:	The gates of the city cry out to the gates of the city ,
GOLD:	By the gates at the entrance to the town , on the road leading in , she cries aloud ,

ID:	274
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , shoo , Bóhólníihii hinishnáago áshósin , t'áá ádííniidígi át'éego , dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' nááhaijį' Bóhólníihii díí saad yee Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'ii bee Ízrel dine'é honoojíidi naaldeeh yę́ędą́ą́' hinishnáago áshósingo hoolzhiizh , áko k'ad , shoo , díí jį́ tseebídiindóó ba'aan ashdla' shinááhai .
PRED:	And now I know that the Lord has done for us , just as the Lord had commanded Moses . And now I am about to do what the Lord had commanded through Moses . And now I am about the wilderness of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Now , as you can see , the Lord has kept me alive and well as he promised for all these forty-five years since Moses made this promise — even while Israel wandered in the wilderness . Today I am eighty-five years old .

ID:	275
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph índa hazhé'é ba'áłchíní bił Ííjip kéyahgi kéédahojit'į́į́ nít'éé' , ákohgo Jóseph t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan neeznáá honááhai .
PRED:	Joseph and his father , Joseph , who lived in Egypt . So Joseph lived in Egypt for ten years .
GOLD:	So Joseph and his brothers and their families continued to live in Egypt . Joseph lived to the age of 110 .

ID:	276
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii éí Daniel ayóó át'éego ił nilį́įgo áyiilaa índa ayóó ádaat'éii t'óó ahayóí t'áá jíík'eh haa yiiznil ; Bábilangi t'áá át'é binazh'nt'áago áhoolaa índa Bábilandóó diné dahóyáanii binanit'a'í jílį́įgo áhoolaa .
PRED:	Then King Daniel made a great wisdom and great riches and great wealth . He also appointed him to be exiled to Babylon , and he appointed him to be exiled to Babylon .
GOLD:	Then the king appointed Daniel to a high position and gave him many valuable gifts . He made Daniel ruler over the whole province of Babylon , as well as chief over all his wise men .

ID:	277
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ła' kééhojit'į́įgo éí kéyah doo hohóóghah da ; t'áá íiyisí bidziilgo dah ajooléełgo biniinaa doo t'áá ła' kééhojit'į́į le' át'ée da .
PRED:	The land will be destroyed , and no one will be able to rebuild it .
GOLD:	But the land could not support both Abram and Lot with all their flocks and herds living so close together .

ID:	278
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah éí nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é dayíłkiin dooígíí yeidiní'ą́
PRED:	Hezekiah assigned the priests to the priests and Levites
GOLD:	Hezekiah 's Religious Reforms

ID:	279
INPUT:	Éí bitahdi nihí ałdó' Jesus Christ bíí' dadoohłeełgo nihíká ádahodoo'niid .
PRED:	But when you are in the presence of Jesus , he said , “ You will be healed . ”
GOLD:	And you are included among those Gentiles who have been called to belong to Jesus Christ .

ID:	280
INPUT:	Bąąhági át'éii lá bich'į' nidaałdzil ni , nidi t'ah doo biniinaa nihidił dadinéeh da .
PRED:	You have sinned against us , but you have not sinned .
GOLD:	After all , you have not yet given your lives in your struggle against sin .

ID:	281
INPUT:	Didlidgo náádahidoonihii éí alį́į́' t'áá át'é éí dóola yázhí naakits'áadahgo , deenásts'aa' naakits'áadahgo , dibé yázhí biką' ii ła' béédááhaii naakits'áadahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii bił náádahaaz'nii' áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh naakits'áadahgo ádił oodzíí'jí náádahaaz'nii' .
PRED:	These were the grain offerings of bulls , twelve rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs with no defects . These were the offering of choice flour moistened with no defects .
GOLD:	Twelve young bulls , twelve rams , and twelve one-year-old male lambs were donated for the burnt offerings , along with their prescribed grain offerings . Twelve male goats were brought for the sin offerings .

ID:	282
INPUT:	áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii doo bikéé' dashdidoogááłgóó Bóhólníihii díí yee hach'į' haadzí'ígíí t' áadoo bik'eh hojííł'įįd da .
PRED:	But if you do not follow the Lord 's ways , they would not obey the ways of the Lord .
GOLD:	He had warned Solomon specifically about worshiping other gods , but Solomon did not listen to the Lord 's command .

ID:	283
INPUT:	Áko Jiisháíman honoojíijigo Hakíílah yanáalk'idgi atiin bąąhgóó Saul bisiláo yił dah yinééł . Nidi David éí honoojíidi nijigháago honoojíígóó Saul hakéé' heedzáago baa ákozniizį́į́' .
PRED:	So David went into the wilderness of Ziph and went to the cave in the wilderness of Saul . But Saul realized that Saul had fled to Saul in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Saul camped along the road beside the hill of Hakilah , near Jeshimon , where David was hiding . When David learned that Saul had come after him into the wilderness ,

ID:	284
INPUT:	Léímek jiináago Nóah há yizhchį́į́dóó bik'ijį' ashdladi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiindóó ba'aan ashdla' honínáánááhaígíí biyi' haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	After the birth of Lamech , Noah lived another 82 years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Noah , Lamech lived another 595 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	285
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Záíyandóó ne'ayóó át'éii naat'á gish yił dah doolnihgo ádidooniił , Ni'ana'í bitahgi nanít'á !
PRED:	May the Lord be your servant , the king of Zion , says the king , “ May your enemies be your enemy ! ”
GOLD:	The Lord will extend your powerful kingdom from Jerusalem ; you will rule over your enemies .

ID:	286
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Dá'ák'ehgi niinéé' diséts'ą́ą'go nísísdzííd , háálá t'áá łinishchí'í ; éí bąą nídísht'į́į́' .
PRED:	Then he said , “ I am afraid of you , for I am afraid of you .
GOLD:	He replied , “ I heard you walking in the garden , so I hid . I was afraid because I was naked . ”

ID:	287
INPUT:	Diyin God bidiyį́į́' nihokáá' dine'é yaa nídadóot'įįłígíísh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Áko nihokáá' dine'é baa nídadóoht'įįłgo kóníshéhégo haz'ánígíí baa nídadóoht'įįłgi nidiísh bi'oh danooł'ą́ ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that God 's holy people are trying to kill you ? Are you trying to kill the world ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that someday we believers will judge the world ? And since you are going to judge the world , ca n't you decide even these little things among yourselves ?

ID:	288
INPUT:	Bóhólníihiigi át'éego doo ła' náádíyin da , háálá nigi át'éii doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da ; nihiDiyin God éí tsé bine' na'adzi'ígi át'éego doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For the Lord our God is not like a few of us , for there is no other God . There is no other God .
GOLD:	No one is holy like the Lord ! There is no one besides you ; there is no Rock like our God .

ID:	289
INPUT:	nidi aninéédę́ę́' náádi'yiijée'go atah dadooleełgo yą́ą́h da'nilíinii éí doo nááda'doogeh da , doo nidi ahaa dabi'dii'níił da doo ,
PRED:	But if we are coming , we will never be able to open the door of the world . We will never be able to drink .
GOLD:	But in the age to come , those worthy of being raised from the dead will neither marry nor be given in marriage .

ID:	290
INPUT:	nidi , Łah atínihił'į́įgo Jesus baa hane' doo t'áá aaníi da , níí nít'éé' yę́ę k'ad índa yoodlą́ągo yaa nahalne' , ha'níigo shaa dahodiits'a' .
PRED:	One day Jesus was speaking to you , and he told you the truth , “ You have heard me ! ”
GOLD:	All they knew was that people were saying , “ The one who used to persecute us is now preaching the very faith he tried to destroy ! ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	Náánáła' bee yisdá'doodáałii doo nááhódlǫ́ǫ da , háálá yádiłhił biyaagi yízhí náánáła' bee yisdáhiikáah dooleełii ts'ídá doo ła' nihokáá' dine'é baa náádeet'ą́ą da .
PRED:	“ No one will be able to save us , for there will be no resurrection of the earth .
GOLD:	There is salvation in no one else ! God has given no other name under heaven by which we must be saved . ”

ID:	292
INPUT:	Áádóó be'awéé' biyaałáii bijáágiizhdę́ę́' haalts'idígíí índa niyiiłchíhígíí yíká dichin yéé'oo'níihgo nitsinádáahgo doo boo'ínígóó t'áá bizááká néídą́ągo t'áá ałtsoní yéé'oo'níihgo ana'í t'éí binídahaashzhiizh góne' índa bich'į' dahodiisnáá' góne' nihi'ana'í ti'nidanihiyoołníihgo nihikin hadaas'áagi ákódahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	I took the baby from the winepress of the city and put it on his shoulder . You put the clothes of slavery in the middle of the siege , and our enemies are knocked down to the ground .
GOLD:	She will hide from them the afterbirth and the new baby she has borne , so that she herself can secretly eat them . She will have nothing else to eat during the siege and terrible distress that your enemy will inflict on all your towns .

ID:	293
INPUT:	Ákohgo Rábshakeh áhodííniid , Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ayóó át'éii ání , K'ad Heziikáíyah ádabidohní , Ha'át'íí ba'ahódlíí shį́įshą' baa dzíínílí ?
PRED:	Then the chief of staff said to the Assyrian chief of Assyria , “ What did you say ? What did you do ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Assyrian king 's chief of staff told them to give this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the great king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in that makes you so confident ?

ID:	294
INPUT:	T'ááłáhígi át'éego danołdzilgo na'nitin woodláanii bee nisoozį́įgo , áádóó hane' yá'át'éehii biyi'dóó dasidoots'ą́ą'ii bee ił chohoo'íinii doo bits'ánáhóhkááhgóó t'éiyá ákódanoht'ée doo . Yá biyaagi nihokáá' dine'é t'áadoo ła' doo<unk> díí hane' yá'át'éehii bee bił dahóóne' . Shí Paul díí baa hashne' doogo shi'dool'aad .
PRED:	“ Be careful to teach the things you have done , and you will be ashamed of the good things you have done . For this is what I have told you . I have told you , ‘ This is what I am saying . ' ”
GOLD:	But you must continue to believe this truth and stand firmly in it . Do n't drift away from the assurance you received when you heard the Good News . The Good News has been preached all over the world , and I , Paul , have been appointed as God 's servant to proclaim it .

ID:	295
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdígíí yee Jerúsalem dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é hólónídóó áts'ą́ąjį' nahjį' kóhoolaajį' ákóhóót'įįd ; nít'éé' Zedekáíyah éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yich'į' naastee' .
PRED:	The anger of the Lord was very angry with the people of Judah and Judah , and he rebelled against King Zedekiah of Babylon .
GOLD:	These things happened because of the Lord 's anger against the people of Jerusalem and Judah , until he finally banished them from his presence and sent them into exile.Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon .

ID:	296
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' hamá Méíyakah asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nilį́įgo éí nidi nahjį' hayííłt'e' , háálá asdzání be'elyaii doo daaldinii áyiilaa , áko éí asdzání be'elyaii áyiilaaígíí hats'ą́ą́' Éísa niyiishchǫ'go Kídran tó nílínígi yidííłid .
PRED:	Then the queen of sexual relations with her mother 's mother , because she had defiled the Asherah poles from the Asherah poles . He destroyed the Asherah poles from the Kidron Valley and burned the Kidron Valley with the Kidron Valley .
GOLD:	He even deposed his grandmother Maacah from her position as queen mother because she had made an obscene Asherah pole . He cut down her obscene pole and burned it in the Kidron Valley .

ID:	297
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é yik'ee Ízrel dine'é dadínéezhchą́ą́' , áko Diyin God éí Júdah dine'é yaa hodiní'ą́ .
PRED:	Judah began to run away , and God of Judah began to run away .
GOLD:	The Israelite army fled from Judah , and God handed them over to Judah in defeat .

ID:	298
INPUT:	Áádóó ída'oołdįįłii yee anadaat'íinii nihiniyé hasht'edadeeshłíiłgo danihigad agháago yá'ádaat'éehii deidootsxiłgo tsídza deidiyoołkał .
PRED:	I will pour down your arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant arrogant people .
GOLD:	I will call for wreckers , who will bring out their tools to dismantle you.They will tear out all your fine cedar beamsand throw them on the fire .

ID:	299
INPUT:	Heródiyan shikwá'ásiní shá k'é bijiniih . <unk> sas bighan haz'ą́ą́dóó Bóhólníihii dayoodlánígíí shá k'é dabijiniih .
PRED:	Give my greetings to Joseph , for he has given me my greetings to the Lord .
GOLD:	Greet Herodion , my fellow Jew . Greet the Lord 's people from the household of Narcissus .

ID:	300
INPUT:	áko nida'niłkaadii éí yaa dahalne'go dazdiizts'ą́'ígíí t'áá ádzíłtso bik'ee t'óó hoł adahóóyóí .
PRED:	Everyone listened to him and heard what they had said .
GOLD:	All who heard the shepherds ' story were astonished ,

ID:	301
INPUT:	Dah dadinóohchééh ; yisdá'ádóh'níiłgo honoojíidi k'ai' łichíí' íí'áhígíí nidahonohłin le' .
PRED:	Do n't worry about your salvation , but you are like chaff in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Flee for your lives ! Hide in the wilderness !

ID:	302
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii nááda'iiłniihii Júdahgi kin hadaas'áhídóó áádóó Jerúsalem binaagóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii náádayiiłniih yiniyé nidayiiznilígíí éí Josáíyah nahjį' hayíínil ; éí nááda'iiłniihii ałdó' Béíyal bich'į' áádóó jį́honaa'éí bich'į' áádóó tł'ééhonaa'éí bich'į' áádóó sǫ' bich'į' índa yót'ááh hiníláii t'áá át'é yich'į' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii náádayiiłniih .
PRED:	He offered sacrifices to the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , and the incense altar . He also offered sacrifices to the Lord and the heavens and the heavens and the stars .
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	303
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa hashchíinii ádííniid , Jó , nizninísą́ , t'áá hó nidahódółkid .
PRED:	“ Look , ” he said . “ I 'll tell you what you are . ”
GOLD:	That 's why they said , “ He is old enough . Ask him . ”

ID:	304
INPUT:	Áádóó náábíkéé' góne' éí siláo binanit'a'í Jiihohéínan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tseebídiindi mííl siláo yił dah yinééł .
PRED:	So the captain of the guard of the guard ,
GOLD:	Next in command was Jehohanan , who commanded 280,000 troops .

ID:	305
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii bi'diisyį́
PRED:	The Birth of John the Baptist
GOLD:	The Death of John the Baptist

ID:	306
INPUT:	Nidi doo Jew dine'é danilíinii da'oosdląądígíí kódabidii'níigo bich'į' naaltsoos ádeiilyaa , [ Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo bee nahaz'ánígíí doo t'áá ałtso bik'eh dahonoł'į́į da , ni<unk> eda'alyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii áádóó dił áádóó bizák'ídadii'nii'ii t'áadoo daohsání , índa na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá bits'ą́ąjį' ádanoht'éego yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	But if we are trying to obey the Jewish leaders , we are trying to obey the law of the Jews , and do n't obey the law of Moses and the law of the Jews . And if you do what is right , you must do to do . ”
GOLD:	“ As for the Gentile believers , they should do what we already told them in a letter : They should abstain from eating food offered to idols , from consuming blood or the meat of strangled animals , and from sexual immorality . ”

ID:	307
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ deisiidląądgo baa da'iisiidlį́į́' yę́ędą́ą́' Níłch'i Diyinii nihaidiní'ánígi át'éego bí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego beidiní'ą́ , da' Diyin God bich'į' naasdzil dooleełgoósh bą́ą́h nishłį́ ? Dooda lą́ą !
PRED:	And we did this by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ , just as he had said , “ Why are God 's Spirit ? ”
GOLD:	And since God gave these Gentiles the same gift he gave us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ , who was I to stand in God 's way ? ”

ID:	308
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí yii'dę́ę́' t'eesh háádayiikáahgo índa na'at'ą́hí tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bikáá' náá'iiniihí yik'ínídeiłtih doo ,
PRED:	Then he must break the bones of the altar and put it on the altar of burnt offering .
GOLD:	“ They must remove the ashes from the altar for sacrifices and cover the altar with a purple cloth .

ID:	309
INPUT:	Áko aneest'ą' índa yá'ádaat'éehii daohsą́ą dooleeł biniyé kéyah bikáá' áda'azįįdii biih nihíí'eezh , nidi yah oonáago shikéyah daołchxǫ' , áádóó shíí' nilíinii doo yildinii ádaohłaa .
PRED:	“ You brought the land you gave to your crops , and you defiled the land I gave you . You have defiled my land with no allotment of land .
GOLD:	“ And when I brought you into a fruitful landto enjoy its bounty and goodness , you defiled my land andcorrupted the possession I had promised you .

ID:	310
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehgóó tséhígíí doo nide át'ée da doo ; nihokáá'góó naaldlooshii da'ałchinii doo naa nídaat'į́į da doo .
PRED:	You ca n't stay away , and your wild animals will never see the wild animals .
GOLD:	You will be at peace with the stones of the field , and its wild animals will be at peace with you .

ID:	311
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán jilįhígi át'éego ajaa' bee saad dzółts'ą́'ígíí bééhodzoosįįh .
PRED:	“ If you listen to what you have heard , you will not listen to what you have said .
GOLD:	The ear tests the words it hearsjust as the mouth distinguishes between foods .

ID:	312
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus áháłní , T'áá aaníígóó ándishní , T'áá díí tł'éé' naa'ahóóhai biką'í t'áadoo naakidi ániihí , táadi , Doo hwééhasin da , náshididíí'niił .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you do n't know the rooster rooster crows three times , but you do n't know me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , Peter — this very night , before the rooster crows twice , you will deny three times that you even know me . ”

ID:	313
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , hazhó'ó nihíísísts'ą́ą́' nít'éé' , áko jó , nihí ła' t'áadoo Job bíni' bá áhoołaa da , índa saad yee hahaasdzí'ígíí t'áadoo ła' bich'į' saad bee bighadinoht'ą́ą da .
PRED:	I would not listen to you , for Job refused to listen to Job .
GOLD:	I have listened , but not one of you has refuted Jobor answered his arguments .

ID:	314
INPUT:	( hastą́ą́h nídeezidjį' Íídam dinéhígíí t'áá ashiikéjį' ałtso nidajistseedjį' Jó'ab áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é bił t'áá ákwe'é nijikai nít'éé' )
PRED:	After the sixth year of Edom , all the men of Edom and all the Israelites left the land of Edom .
GOLD:	Joab and the army of Israel had stayed there for six months , killing them .

ID:	315
INPUT:	Díí yinaha'áhígíí nahasdzáán t'áá át'éé nít'éé' yee yinahaz'áanii át'é ; díí ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso yik'ijį' dah doolnihii át'é .
PRED:	This is what happened to the whole earth , including all the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	I have a plan for the whole earth , a hand of judgment upon all the nations .

ID:	316
INPUT:	T'áá ánéelt'e'go hasht'enídaał'įįhígíí bik'ehgo t'áá ałtso ádanéelt'e'ígíí bik'ehgo ákónídaał'įįh doo .
PRED:	Each of these men must be set aside for each other .
GOLD:	Follow these instructions with each offering you present .

ID:	317
INPUT:	Diné dahóyáanii t'ááłá'í nítínígo bił bééhózinígíí yaa nidaakai , nidi diné doo áhályáanii bidoo áháyą' bééhózínígo ádeile' .
PRED:	The wise are wise , but fools know the difference between fools .
GOLD:	Wise people think before they act ; fools do n't — and even brag about their foolishness .

ID:	318
INPUT:	Shidine'é éí yá'ádaat'éehii bíí' danilíinii baa nídiní'ą́ągo , Júdah nílíinii , ni ałdó' niba' aneest'ą́ągo ná haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ O my people , O my people of Judah , are good to you .
GOLD:	“ O Judah , a harvest of punishment is also waiting for you , though I wanted to restore the fortunes of my people .

ID:	319
INPUT:	Íífreiyim ádidooniił , Eda'alyaiishą' haa náádeeshdlííł ? Shí hach'į' ééhosésįįd áádóó haa áháshyą́ . Shí ch'ó t'áá dootł'izhgo sikaadii nahonishłin . Shits'ą́ą́dóó nineest'ą' nąąh náhoodleeł .
PRED:	“ What can I do to you ? ” the people of Ephraim asked . “ I 'm like a shepherd , and I am like a shepherd .
GOLD:	“ O Israel , stay away from idols ! I am the one who answers your prayers and cares for you.I am like a tree that is always green ; all your fruit comes from me . ”

ID:	320
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii dajijoołxáii t'óó ádahozhdil'į́įgo Bóhólníihii biyaa ni'ízhdeejaa' doo nít'éé' áádóó atídaal'į́įgo ahool'áa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	The Lord does not punish those who fear the Lord , and he crushed the curses .
GOLD:	Those who hate the Lord would cringe before him ; they would be doomed forever .

ID:	321
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é da'iidoołtséełgo dabidziilii yaa yádadínóozįįł , áko bizéé' dádadidoolnih , índa bijééhkał dadooleeł .
PRED:	The nations will see their eyes , and their mouths will be open to their mouths .
GOLD:	All the nations of the world will stand amazedat what the Lord will do for you.They will be embarrassedat their feeble power.They will cover their mouths in silent awe , deaf to everything around them .

ID:	322
INPUT:	T'áá bí t'éiyá tsé shá nilį́ áádóó bee yisdáhásháahii índa bine' ahinishchéehii nilį́ . Doo nahjį' kóshidi'doolníił da .
PRED:	He is my rock , and he is my fortress ; he is my refuge .
GOLD:	He alone is my rock and my salvation , my fortress where I will not be shaken .

ID:	323
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán áyiilaa bijį́į́dą́ą́' nahasdzáán índa yádiłhił bił niilyáii dahodideezlį́į́' .
PRED:	For the Lord God made the heavens and earth as the heavens and earth .
GOLD:	This is the account of the creation of the heavens and the earth.When the Lord God made the earth and the heavens ,

ID:	324
INPUT:	Diné dahóyáanii ił ééhózin hasht'e'nideidiyii'nííł , nidi diné doo áhályą́ą́góó yáłti'ii éí hodoołchxǫǫłii koshídę́ę́' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The wise are foolish , but fools are foolish , but fools are foolish .
GOLD:	Wise people treasure knowledge , but the babbling of a fool invites disaster .

ID:	325
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa diné bizhé'é índa bimá yits'ą́ą́' dah didoogáałgo be'asdzą́ą́ yił ahididoo'ash ,
PRED:	He will listen to his father and mother 's sister , and he will go to his wife .
GOLD:	‘ This explains why a man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife ,

ID:	326
INPUT:	Áádóó Géed dine'é éí Dáíban , Átarath áádóó Aró'er dahoolyéegi kin hadaas'áago ádayiilaa ,
PRED:	These were the tribes of Gad , Gad , and Aroer on the towns of Gad .
GOLD:	The descendants of Gad built the towns of Dibon , Ataroth , Aroer ,

ID:	327
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Shí bááh bee iináanii nishłį́ ; shaazhníyáhígíí éí doo dichin náázhdoodleeł da , áádóó shijoodlą́ągo sheidzólíii éí doo dibáá' náázhdoodleeł da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I am the bread of bread , and I am hungry . I am hungry and thirsty .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I am the bread of life . Whoever comes to me will never be hungry again . Whoever believes in me will never be thirsty .

ID:	328
INPUT:	Nidi yá'ąąshdę́ę́' iinéé' náádiséts'ą́ą'go ánááshidi'ní , Diyin God ha'át'íhída hasht'eyiilaii t'áadoo t'áá bóhólníhígíí át'é bidiníní .
PRED:	But when I heard the voice from heaven , I said , “ O God , who created anything from heaven .
GOLD:	“ But the voice from heaven spoke again : ‘ Do not call something unclean if God has made it clean . '

ID:	329
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bił haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'íhodooleełgo nahasdzáán bikáá' wódahgo nahaz'ą́ąjį' hadahodooleełgo yik'i nidoogaał , jó'akon .
PRED:	And the Lord will protect them from the earth , and he will trample them down on earth .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord is coming ! He leaves his throne in heavenand tramples the heights of the earth .

ID:	330
INPUT:	Daal'aadii áłah daazlį́į'ii binaaltsoos
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	The Letter for Gentile Believers

ID:	331
INPUT:	Jó , hane' yá'át'éehii baa hashne'ii bik'ehgo ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi hajéí biyi'di nidazhnił'inii Jesus Christ binahjį' Diyin God há nihodiyoo'ááł .
PRED:	For the Good News is given to those who follow God 's word in Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And this is the message I proclaim — that the day is coming when God , through Christ Jesus , will judge everyone 's secret life .

ID:	332
INPUT:	Síriya dine'é , Mo'ab dine'é , Áman dine'é , Filístiya dine'é , Ámalek dine'é índa Rííhob biye' Hadadíízer éí Zóbah kéyahgi aláahgo naat'áanii yik'eh deesdlį́į́' yę́ę bindaalye'é diyingo niidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	The Philistines attacked the Philistines , and the Philistines defeated the Philistines . He also defeated the kings of Gibeon , who lived in the land of Gibeon .
GOLD:	from Edom , Moab , Ammon , Philistia , and Amalek — and from Hadadezer son of Rehob , king of Zobah .

ID:	333
INPUT:	David bidiné ayóó ádaat'éii
PRED:	David 's Vision of Praise
GOLD:	David 's Mightiest Warriors

ID:	334
INPUT:	Áko Aghánáhóó'áadi Hólóonii áádóó Ayóó'át'éii , éí hool'áágóó hólóonii áádóó bízhi' diyinii kóní , Wódahgo áádóó diyingo haz'ą́ągi honishłǫ́ ; ąąh bíni'ígíí áádóó a'ohgo á'dólzinígíí ałdó' bił honishłǫ́ , áko a'ohgo át'éhígíí índa ąąh bíni'ígíí bijéí náhiidoo'<unk> .
PRED:	And when he was there , he said , “ I am the one who sits on the heights of the Most High , the law of the Most High , the law , the law , the law , and the one who is pure . ”
GOLD:	The high and lofty one who lives in eternity , the Holy One , says this : “ I live in the high and holy placewith those whose spirits are contrite and humble.I restore the crushed spirit of the humbleand revive the courage of those with repentant hearts .

ID:	335
INPUT:	Áko jíl'áhígíí bits'ą́ądi t'áá sáhí hoł nizhní'áázh , áko áadi bijeeyi' góne' azhdoolchid áádóó azhdíízhée'go bitsoo' bizhdeelchid ,
PRED:	So they took her away from the distance , and she touched her mouth . Then she touched her tongue and touched her tongue .
GOLD:	Jesus led him away from the crowd so they could be alone . He put his fingers into the man 's ears . Then , spitting on his own fingers , he touched the man 's tongue .

ID:	336
INPUT:	Jiifáneh biye' Kéíleb éí Júdah dine'é bitahgi Jáshowa wolyéii kéyah ła' haidiní'ą́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa yich'į' t'áá ákót'éego yee haadzíí' ; éí Éínak dine'é Árba wolyéii bizhé'é bikin haal'áii Hííbran hoolyéii yeidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	These are the tribes of Caleb son of Nun , Joshua son of Nun , the tribe of Caleb son of Nun , just as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	The Lord commanded Joshua to assign some of Judah 's territory to Caleb son of Jephunneh . So Caleb was given the town of Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , which had been named after Anak 's ancestor .

ID:	337
INPUT:	Haza'aleeh hadeigéedgo índa ch'il naazkaadígíí behétł'óól hadeigéedgo dabich'iyą' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Their roots were thrown into the palm trees , and they could n't eat it .
GOLD:	They pluck wild greens from among the bushesand eat from the roots of broom trees .

ID:	338
INPUT:	Áko ła'da yínahódídóołkiłgo áhodidooniił , Ha'át'íishą' ninághahdę́ę́' bee tídááná ? Áko ádidooniił , Shik'isóó bighangi níyáago atídashiilaa .
PRED:	“ No one can ask him to ask , ‘ What do you want to kill me ? ' And if you have sex with me , they will reply , ‘ My relatives have sex with me . '
GOLD:	And if someone asks , ‘ Then what about those wounds on your chest ? ' he will say , ‘ I was wounded at my friends ' house ! '

ID:	339
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii shijaayi'jį' haadzíi'go diséts'ą́ą́' , T'áá aaníí , nida'soołdįįd bijį́įjį' díí nihibąąhági át'éii doo nihąąh dadooldah da , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has told me , “ I have never been wiped out to this day , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has revealed this to me : “ Till the day you die , you will never be forgiven for this sin. ” That is the judgment of the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	340
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Éran biye'ké éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi kǫ' iididoołt'áałgo ákwii hazhó'ó chizh deididoonił .
PRED:	Then Aaron and his sons will burn the wood on the altar .
GOLD:	The sons of Aaron the priest will build a wood fire on the altar .

ID:	341
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii nahalne'
PRED:	John the Baptist Foretold
GOLD:	John the Baptist Prepares the Way

ID:	342
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é
PRED:	The Levites and Levites
GOLD:	The Tribe of Simeon

ID:	343
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílam éí Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í ííłní , Ádił asésiih ; jó , shidáádíínízínígíí doo shił bééhózin da lá , nidi k'ad yisháłígíí doo nił yá'át'ééhgóogo t'óó t'ą́ą́' nihéédeeshdááł .
PRED:	Then Balaam said to the angel of the Lord , “ I have sinned , for I have not sinned . But now I will not return to you . ”
GOLD:	Then Balaam confessed to the angel of the Lord , “ I have sinned . I did n't realize you were standing in the road to block my way . I will return home if you are against my going . ”

ID:	344
INPUT:	T'áadoo nánídlíníii t'áadoo nídandlíní da , ní halne'í , T'áadoo nánídlíníii t'áadoo nídandlíní da ; t'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nídandlíní da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of worthless worthless worthless worthless worthless ! Do n't be like worthless worthless worthless as worthless as worthless as worthless as worthless as worthless as others .
GOLD:	“ Everything is meaningless , ” says the Teacher , “ completely meaningless ! ”

ID:	345
INPUT:	Da' Diyin God bich'ijísh dadoohłeełgo bá yádaałti' ? Diyin Godshą' , da' éísh bá ałghada'doht'áah doo ?
PRED:	Do you be afraid of God ? Do you be afraid ? Do you trust in God ?
GOLD:	Will you slant your testimony in his favor ? Will you argue God 's case for him ?

ID:	346
INPUT:	Áko da'jiyą́ągo nidzíiztą́ , nít'éé' Jesus ání , T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Nihí nihił da'ashánígíí ła' nináshididooh'ááł .
PRED:	When they arrived , Jesus told them , “ I tell you the truth , one of you will betray me . ”
GOLD:	As they were at the table eating , Jesus said , “ I tell you the truth , one of you eating with me here will betray me . ”

ID:	347
INPUT:	Béthlehemdóó hananit'a'í hodooleełgo bee nihoot'ą́
PRED:	The King of Bethlehem
GOLD:	A Ruler from Bethlehem

ID:	348
INPUT:	Ákohgo t'ah abíínígo jį́honaa'éí t'óó hááyáhígo nídidoohjahgo kin haal'áhígíí bik'i dah doohjahgo diné yił naakaígíí nihá hashjada'doolíiłgo t'áá nínízinígi át'éego atídadíílííł .
PRED:	You will attack the sun , for you will attack the sun and attack them .
GOLD:	In the morning , as soon as it is daylight , attack the city . When Gaal and those who are with him come out against you , you can do with them as you wish . ”

ID:	349
INPUT:	doo diné t'áá ałtso dahoołtsą́ą da , nihí Diyin God nánihiizláa'ii t'éiyá dabíínáałii daniidlį́įgo , dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náázdiidzáádóó bik'ijį' doodį́įłii índa doodlį́įłii hoł deiidą́ą́' .
PRED:	And we do n't believe that God has been raised from the dead , and he has been raised from the dead . And we will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	not to the general public , but to us whom God had chosen in advance to be his witnesses . We were those who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead .

ID:	350
INPUT:	Bee nani'diiniihii doo nídidííléeł da , háálá éí dahóyáanii bíni' ádeiłdįįh , áádóó t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bizaad łahgo ádeile' .
PRED:	Do n't let them be proud , for the wise are full of integrity .
GOLD:	“ Take no bribes , for a bribe makes you ignore something that you clearly see . A bribe makes even a righteous person twist the truth .

ID:	351
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii t'áágééd , naat'áanii t'áágééd , nááhániihii t'áágééd , tsé bich'į' nahadláii t'áágééd , íífad wolyéii t'áágééd , eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadláii t'áágééd Ízrel dine'é kééhat'į́įgo t'óó ahayóí yidoołkááł .
PRED:	The king of Israel must be without any kind of wood , without a sacred ephod . The people of Israel must be made without a sacred ephod .
GOLD:	This shows that Israel will go a long time without a king or prince , and without sacrifices , sacred pillars , priests , or even idols !

ID:	352
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é diyingo bits'ąą dahasti'
PRED:	The Levites from the Levites
GOLD:	The Levites Dedicated

ID:	353
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí nahasdzáán bee niłdzilgo dah si'ą́ ? Éí doodaii' háí tsé bee naaná'ástł'inii niiní'ą́ ?
PRED:	Who created the earth ? Who is the foundation of the earth ?
GOLD:	What supports its foundations , and who laid its cornerstone

ID:	354
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'óó báhádzidgo bich'į' sháhóóchįįdgo t'áá íiyisí dooyoł ; hach'į' sháhóóchįįdgo tó yajiiłį́ nahalingo nahodoołtį́į́ł ; t'óó báhádzidgo sháháchį'go nílótsoh nááłtánígíí bee ádooldįįł .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am angry with them , and I will pour out my fury on them like a fierce anger .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will sweep away your whitewashed wall with a storm of indignation , with a great flood of anger , and with hailstones of fury .

ID:	355
INPUT:	Ch'ilátah hózhóón áádóó bee dahool'iní índa tsííd bee náhádláhí éí óola t'áá bízhání yee ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He made the lamps of pure gold , lamp snuffers , and pure gold .
GOLD:	the flower decorations , lamps , and tongs — all of the purest gold ;

ID:	356
INPUT:	Áko niha'áłchíní nidahołchíhígíí , éí nihiye'ké índa nihitsi'ké danilíinii Bóhólníihii t'áá bí yee nihik'ijisdli'ii nídaohdą́ą doo ; éí nihi'ana'í nihinídahaashzhiizhgo áádóó nihich'į' dahodiyiisnáa'go éí binih ákódadoohnííł .
PRED:	“ Then take your sons and daughters from your own sons , your sons and daughters and daughters , and we will eat whatever the Lord has commanded us .
GOLD:	“ The siege and terrible distress of the enemy 's attack will be so severe that you will eat the flesh of your own sons and daughters , whom the Lord your God has given you .

ID:	357
INPUT:	Ákohgo Diyin God hahoyííłhalgo tó hahaasnilgo dziiłtsą́ ; ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago tó abid bii' tó hazhdééłbįįdgo ashkii baazhníłtsoozgo yoodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	When God saw him , he threw the water into the boat and threw it into the mouth of the water . Then he took it into the water .
GOLD:	Then God opened Hagar 's eyes , and she saw a well full of water . She quickly filled her water container and gave the boy a drink .

ID:	358
INPUT:	Aląąjį' naazíinii ádajit'į́ dahodi'nínígíí , ( doo haash yit'éegoda haa nitséskees da , Diyin God doo ła' a'ohgo yaa nitsékees da , ) aląąjį' naazíinii dahodi'nínígíí t'áadoo ha'át'éhígoda shighą́ą́h dazh'deeshjée' da .
PRED:	I am not ashamed of the elders , but I am not ashamed of God . I do n't know what I am going to do .
GOLD:	And the leaders of the church had nothing to add to what I was preaching . ( By the way , their reputation as great leaders made no difference to me , for God has no favorites . )

ID:	359
INPUT:	Éí bijį́įdi díí baa hodoolzhish : Jerúsalemdóó tó hináanii háálį́įgo ha'a'aahjį' tónteel biih yílį́į doo áádóó ła' e'e'aahjį' ałdó' tónteel biih yílį́į doo ; éí t'áá áłahjį' háálį́įgo nináháhááh áádóó nináháshį́įh doo .
PRED:	On that day , on the third day of your enemies will be raised into the Mediterranean Sea , and there will be a place for the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	On that day life-giving waters will flow out from Jerusalem , half toward the Dead Sea and half toward the Mediterranean , flowing continuously in both summer and winter .

ID:	360
INPUT:	Héírim biye' Malkáíjah áádóó Péíhath-mó'ab biye' Háshab éí łahjiígíí áádóó bii' déédadiljahgo bá ch'íláyi' yaa'áhígíí hasht'éyiidlaa .
PRED:	From the family of Pahath-moab ( son of Hilkiah ) , and his son .
GOLD:	Then came Malkijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-moab , who repaired another section of the wall and the Tower of the Ovens .

ID:	361
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' t'áá háiida kin dá'deelkaal yę́ędą́ą́' ákóne' yah ajííyáhígíí éí i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didoodah da .
PRED:	Those who later , however , the person must not enter the house until evening .
GOLD:	Those who enter the house during the period of quarantine will be ceremonially unclean until evening ,

ID:	362
INPUT:	bee ni'dootsiłígíí biniyé hááhaashk'aazh ; bik'i nizdidlaad dooleeł biniyé ákót'éego ályaa . Ákoósh nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo ? Shiye' binaat'á gish éí gish tsin bee ádaalyaii t'áá ałtso yiz'įįd .
PRED:	How long will it be for us , for it is for the weight of the cart ? How long will it be for you ? How long will you be saved ?
GOLD:	It is sharpened for terrible slaughterand polished to flash like lightning ! Now will you laugh ? Those far stronger than you have fallen beneath its power !

ID:	363
INPUT:	Job bi'dizhchínígíí yąąh bíni'
PRED:	Job 's Second Speech : A Response to Eliphaz
GOLD:	Job 's First Speech

ID:	364
INPUT:	Nidi hánaaí yę́ę bá áłchíní doo hodooleeł da biniyé hánaaí yę́ę be'asdzą́ą́ bił yah ajííyáago t'óó ni'jį' hwíígąsh hadziistł'ííd .
PRED:	But because of your brother 's brother 's brother 's brother , he took his brother 's brother 's brother 's brother , and he was put to death .
GOLD:	But Onan was not willing to have a child who would not be his own heir . So whenever he had intercourse with his brother 's wife , he spilled the semen on the ground . This prevented her from having a child who would belong to his brother .

ID:	365
INPUT:	T'áá áko Philip áadi yílwod , nít'éé' Diyin God yá halne'ii Aizéíyah binaaltsoos yółta' lágo jidiizts'ą́ą'go ábijiní , Yíníłta'ígíísh t'áá bik'idi'yiitįįh ?
PRED:	Philip went to the prophet and told him what he had said , “ Are you going to understand ? ”
GOLD:	Philip ran over and heard the man reading from the prophet Isaiah . Philip asked , “ Do you understand what you are reading ? ”

ID:	366
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í ádadííniid , Díí Hííbrew dine'éshą' kwe'é ha'át'íí yaa naakai ? Áko Éíkish éí Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í áyidííniid , Díísh doo David át'į́į da ? Éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Saul yá naal'a'í , t'áá shił tádí'aashgo díí jį́į́góó yoołkááł áádóó nináháháahgo hoolzhish , áko t'áá shich'į' dah diiyáádóó díísh jį́įjį' doo aaníinii doo ła' bá shił bééhoozin da .
PRED:	The Philistines replied , “ Why are you looking for the Hebrew women ? ” So David replied , “ Why are you looking for me to die ? ” So David replied , “ I will never be here today . ”
GOLD:	But the Philistine commanders demanded , “ What are these Hebrews doing here ? ” And Achish told them , “ This is David , the servant of King Saul of Israel . He 's been with me for years , and I 've never found a single fault in him from the day he arrived until today . ”

ID:	367
INPUT:	Jeremáíyah áádóó Gedaláíyah yił diné daadzíi'ii
PRED:	A Plot against Gedaliah
GOLD:	Gedaliah Governs in Judah

ID:	368
INPUT:	Ákohgo Job bik'isóó tált'éego éí doo yá'áshóonii t'áá át'é Job bik'i hoole'ígíí dayíínii'go t'ááłá'í nítínígo kéédahat'į́į́dę́ę́' haa yíkai : Élifaz wolyéii Tííman kin haal'áádę́ę́' áádóó Shúwah dine'é Bíldad wolyéii índa Zófar wolyéii Néíyama hoolyéédę́ę́' éí díí ahada'deest'ą́ągo , Hak'édí daniidlį́į doo áádóó hadah ho'ayiilniih doo , daaníigo biniyé haa yíkai .
PRED:	Then Job gave Job a vision from speaking to Job : A Response to Eliphaz , Eliphaz , Eliphaz , Eliphaz , Eliphaz , Eliphaz , Eliphaz , Bildad the Shuhite , and Bildad the Shuhite .
GOLD:	When three of Job 's friends heard of the tragedy he had suffered , they got together and traveled from their homes to comfort and console him . Their names were Eliphaz the Temanite , Bildad the Shuhite , and Zophar the Naamathite .

ID:	369
INPUT:	Bee ída'diiljeehí tsosts'idígíí
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	The Lamb Breaks the Seventh Seal

ID:	370
INPUT:	Áádóó Ííjip dine'é honeetehee éí kéyahdóó t'óó hatsxį́įłgo diné yida'as'nii' , háálá ádaaní , Nihí ałdó' t'áá áníiltso dadíníi'nééł , sha'shin .
PRED:	The people of Egypt were sick at Mizpah , and they sold him sick . They said , “ We 've been sick , ” they said . “ We 'll die ! ”
GOLD:	All the Egyptians urged the people of Israel to get out of the land as quickly as possible , for they thought , “ We will all die ! ”

ID:	371
INPUT:	Nidi Christ ti'hwiidoonihgo , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii t'áá ałtso t'áá átséedi yaa dahoolne'ígíí , t'áá ákót'éego yi'iilaa .
PRED:	But when Christ has finished speaking , he has revealed his message to all the prophets .
GOLD:	But God was fulfilling what all the prophets had foretold about the Messiah — that he must suffer these things .

ID:	372
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é ábizhdííniid , Nihílááh , díí kin haal'áhígíí bináhkááh , áko diné nidaabaahii éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii yilą́ąjį' yikah doo .
PRED:	Then the Israelites said to them , “ Go to the Ark of the Lord , and the people of Israel will enter the Ark of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then he gave orders to the people : “ March around the town , and the armed men will lead the way in front of the Ark of the Lord . ”

ID:	373
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	374
INPUT:	Yiską́ągo Hérad bizaad k'ehgo ch'íhodi'doodlóosgo , t'áá éí bitł'éé' Peter , siláo naaki bita'gi béésh da'ahólzha'í naaki bee daho'diistł'ǫ́ǫgo ajiłhosh , índa siláo ła' awáalyaa bidáádílkał yaa ádahalyą́ .
PRED:	On the day of Herod 's reign , when Herod 's soldiers arrived , Peter 's soldiers were thrown into the province of Asia and bound in prison .
GOLD:	The night before Peter was to be placed on trial , he was asleep , fastened with two chains between two soldiers . Others stood guard at the prison gate .

ID:	375
INPUT:	Nihitsilí nihitah díníł'a'go t'éiyá ákóyaa diikahgo ch'iyáán ła' nináádahidiilnih .
PRED:	We sent our brother to our brother , and we 'll tell us what we want to buy food . ”
GOLD:	If you send Benjamin with us , we will go down and buy more food .

ID:	376
INPUT:	Nidi shí éí Diyin God néideeshkąął , áádóó Bóhólníihii yisdáshidoołtééł .
PRED:	But I will call to God , and he will save me from the Lord .
GOLD:	But I will call on God , and the Lord will rescue me .

ID:	377
INPUT:	áko tsin t'ááłá'í dooleeł biniyé ahidiiníiłgo ahííníłtą'go dahíjih .
PRED:	So take one piece of wood , and take them up with them .
GOLD:	Now hold them together in your hand as if they were one piece of wood .

ID:	378
INPUT:	áádóó tsídiitsoh ástrich wolyéii áádóó ná'áshjaa' áádóó tábąąsdísí índa giní ał'ąą ádaat'éii
PRED:	the desert owl , the desert owl , the desert owl , the desert owl ,
GOLD:	the eagle owl , the short-eared owl , the seagull , hawks of all kinds ,

ID:	379
INPUT:	Da'ayą́ą doo nidi , doo hwiih dadooleeł da . Adilyé yaa naakai doo nidi , ba'áłchíní ádaadin doo , háálá Diyin God dadzółts'ą́ą́' yę́ę doo dazniizį́į' da .
PRED:	They have no food to eat , but they have refused to eat their children . They have rejected God because they have rejected their children .
GOLD:	They will eat and still be hungry.They will play the prostitute and gain nothing from it , for they have deserted the Lord

ID:	380
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii yaa níyáago ííłní , Nílááh , nidziilgo í'dílnééh , áádóó hazhó'ó baa nidíínaałígíí hazhó'ó baa nanítá , háálá nááhaigo Síriya dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii nich'į' nídidoobah .
PRED:	So the prophet went to the king of Israel and told him , “ Go and look to the king of Israel ! ” So the king of Aram went to fight the king of Aram .
GOLD:	Afterward the prophet said to King Ahab , “ Get ready for another attack . Begin making plans now , for the king of Aram will come back next spring . ”

ID:	381
INPUT:	Áko Mary Mágdaliin índa Mary , Jóses bimá éí niho'deeltínígi bił bééhoozin .
PRED:	Mary Magdalene , Mary Magdalene , the mother of Joseph , was known as Joseph 's mother .
GOLD:	Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joseph saw where Jesus ' body was laid .

ID:	382
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee aa a'ááh hasinii , áádóó bibee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'ii , índa bibee ayóó'ó'ó'níinii k'ee'ąą yilzhishgo yee nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	May God 's unfailing love and faithfulness be filled with love and peace .
GOLD:	May God give you more and more mercy , peace , and love .

ID:	383
INPUT:	Ákohgo Tówii haye' Jóram dashdiił'a' , áko aláahgo naat'áanii David k'é yididooniił áádóó nizhónígi íinidzaa yididooniił jinízin , háálá David éí Hadadíízer yił ana'ahishchį́įgo yik'eh deesdlį́į́' . Jó , Hadadíízer éí Tówii yił anaa' ahil'į́į́ nít'éé' . Jóram éí béésh łigaii áádóó óola índa béésh łitsoii bee łeets'aa' ádaalyaii yiníjaa' .
PRED:	When he returned to Jezreel , he sent his son David to recover . Then he said to David , “ He had defeated King David , who had been killed by war and gold , silver , silver , and bronze . ”
GOLD:	he sent his son Joram to congratulate King David for his successful campaign . Hadadezer and Toi had been enemies and were often at war . Joram presented David with many gifts of silver , gold , and bronze .

ID:	384
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí ana'í dabitsi'ké bida'asdzą́ą doo biniyé t'áá bí ádá nídayiisdláá' , áádóó dahatsi'ké éí dabiye'ké bił ahaa dayii'nííł nít'éé' , índa bidiyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' nidahojiłáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	So the men of Israel had sexual relations with their wives and daughters . They put up their wives and daughters to worship other gods .
GOLD:	and they intermarried with them . Israelite sons married their daughters , and Israelite daughters were given in marriage to their sons . And the Israelites served their gods .

ID:	385
INPUT:	Tsé ahénátł'in jílį́įgo bikáá'dóó béésh łigaii bee ya'niiltł'ǫ́ǫgo ádadiilníí ł , índa dáádílkał jílį́įgo dilk'is tsin neheesh<unk> go hak'i nidadiilzhosh .
PRED:	She is a fortified wall , a city of silver , and a city filled with silver and gold . She is able to give birth to the city of Samaria .
GOLD:	If she is a virgin , like a wall , we will protect her with a silver tower.But if she is promiscuous , like a swinging door , we will block her door with a cedar bar .

ID:	386
INPUT:	Áádóó David ázhdííniid , Ízrel biBóhólníihii Diyin God , ná naal'a'í nishłíinii éí Saul shíká dínéeztą́ą'go Kii'áílah kin haal'áajį' doogáałgo baa hodiséts'ą́ą́' . Éí shiniinaa kin haal'áhígíí ábizhniiłdįįd lá .
PRED:	David replied , “ I am the Lord , the God of Israel , the servant of the Lord , the God of Israel , for I have heard what he had done . ”
GOLD:	Then David prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , I have heard that Saul is planning to come and destroy Keilah because I am here .

ID:	387
INPUT:	<unk> dzihgo doo shich'į' hanádziihí da nít'éé' ; shizaad dahak'ijį' naałtin nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Do n't you think of me , and I could teach me what I say .
GOLD:	And after I spoke , they had nothing to add , for my counsel satisfied them .

ID:	388
INPUT:	Paul áádóó Jerúsalemdi da'oodlání yá naazíinii
PRED:	Paul and the Church in Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Apostles Accept Paul

ID:	389
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá ákwii hoolzhishgo Kaldíya dine'é ła' daaskaigo Jew dine'é yik'ídahaz'ah .
PRED:	So the time of the Babylonians began to kill some Jews .
GOLD:	But some of the astrologers went to the king and informed on the Jews .

ID:	390
INPUT:	Áko Húshai éí David bik'is nilíinii kin haal'áajį' yah ííyá , áádóó Ábsalam éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áajį' yah ííyá .
PRED:	Hushai went to Jerusalem and went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So David 's friend Hushai returned to Jerusalem , getting there just as Absalom arrived .

ID:	391
INPUT:	Háálá bááh Diyin God bíhígíí éí yá'ąąshdę́ę́' hadahóóle'go nihokáá' dine'é iiná yeidii'aah .
PRED:	For God came down from heaven and gave it to the world .
GOLD:	The true bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world . ”

ID:	392
INPUT:	hoł wót'ááh néí'ááh áádóó níléí góyaa hoł taah náyii'aah , áko hach'į' nidahwii'nánígíí hoł áńdahadįįh .
PRED:	He threw him into the sky into the desert , and he struck them into trouble .
GOLD:	Their ships were tossed to the heavensand plunged again to the depths ; the sailors cringed in terror .

ID:	393
INPUT:	Tósiil éí k'os diłhił yii' háidiłbį́į́h , índa k'os diłhił biyi' da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó atsiniltł'ish anídahata'go ííł'į́ .
PRED:	He made the clouds of lightning , and the lightning flashes of lightning with lightning .
GOLD:	He loads the clouds with moisture , and they flash with his lightning .

ID:	394
INPUT:	Aghádahideezíinii t'óó yeidloh ; ayóó ádaat'éii dabidziilii doo dabidziilgóó ádeile' .
PRED:	Let their enemies be filled with fear ; let them be filled with power .
GOLD:	He pours disgrace upon princesand disarms the strong .

ID:	395
INPUT:	Doo ákwii ádaat'íiniísh ił ééhózin doo bee dahólǫ́ǫ da ? Éí bááh deiyą́ nahalingo shidine'é deildeeł índa Diyin God doo nídayookąąh da .
PRED:	Do you think of miraculous signs and knowledge ? Do you think of God ?
GOLD:	Will those who do evil never learn ? They eat up my people like breadand would n't think of praying to God .

ID:	396
INPUT:	Ákwii Ííjip dine'é bee bóhólníihii doo bee bóhólnííhgóó áshłaago Tahápaniizdi chahałheełgo oo'áał doo ; ayóó ájít'éego bee ádaa hoji'niihii éí ninít'i' doo ; k'os éí hak'i dah yilzhoł doo áádóó hach'é'é danilíinii éí yisnáágóó ałtso adahidoonééł .
PRED:	“ I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who will live in Egypt , but I will break down the clouds of Egypt , like a storm of clouds .
GOLD:	When I come to break the proud strength of Egypt , it will be a dark day for Tahpanhes , too.A dark cloud will cover Tahpanhes , and its daughters will be led away as captives .

ID:	397
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jázadak biye' Jéshuwa yiizį' áádóó bik'isóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Zerábabel éí Shiyáltiyel biye' jílį́įgo hak'isóó bił jíkaigo Diyin God yá naal'a'í Mózes bibee haz'áanii t'áá yee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God bibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi didlidgo náádahaniihii náádahidoonih biniyé ádajiilaa .
PRED:	Then Zadok son of Jeshua and Jeshua son of Jehozadak , stood in front of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and the priests who were standing in the Temple of God in the Law of Moses .
GOLD:	Then Jeshua son of Jehozadak joined his fellow priests and Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel with his family in rebuilding the altar of the God of Israel . They wanted to sacrifice burnt offerings on it , as instructed in the Law of Moses , the man of God .

ID:	398
INPUT:	Adziil áádóó ił ídlį́ yee hadít'é , áádóó náás hoolzhishgóó yaa bił nihoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	Your strength and majesty will rejoice , and his glory will rejoice .
GOLD:	She is clothed with strength and dignity , and she laughs without fear of the future .

ID:	399
INPUT:	Áko ashdla'ígi daats'í oolkiłgo naanish baa dadeest'ánígíí yíkaigo , t'ááłá'í nítínígo denériyas t'ááłá'í bich'į' nidahaasya' .
PRED:	About that time , they went to the crowd and asked each other , “ Do n't have enough money to pay them . ”
GOLD:	When those hired at five o'clock were paid , each received a full day 's wage .

ID:	400
INPUT:	Áko hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , Ła' John Tó Yee Asį́įhii yę́ę át'į́ ; náánáła' éí Iiláíjah yę́ę át'į́ , nidi náánáła' éí Diyin God yá halne'ii yę́ę ła' át'į́ , daaní .
PRED:	Then they told John the Baptist , “ John the Baptist is the Baptist ! ” But some of the Baptist said , “ Elijah is a prophet . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , ” they replied , “ some say John the Baptist , some say Elijah , and others say you are one of the other prophets . ”

ID:	401
INPUT:	Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é dah diikaigo Júdahgi nidahaazná índa Lííhai haz'ání bóhoneel'ą́ągo nidahaazná .
PRED:	So the Philistines left Judah and camped at Bethel .
GOLD:	The Philistines retaliated by setting up camp in Judah and spreading out near the town of Lehi .

ID:	402
INPUT:	Nidi Lat , diné t'áá ákogi át'éii jílíinii , Diyin God díí yits'ą́ąjį' ho'níłnii' . Lat éí diné doo yá'ádaashóonii t'áá íiyisí baa'ihgo naaldeehii doo bee a<unk> doos'įįd da .
PRED:	But Lot , the righteous man of Lot , was taken away from the wicked because of what had happened .
GOLD:	But God also rescued Lot out of Sodom because he was a righteous man who was sick of the shameful immorality of the wicked people around him .

ID:	403
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Asíriya dine'é choyoos'įįd
PRED:	A Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Judgment against Assyria

ID:	404
INPUT:	Niha'áłchíní yázhí áádóó nihida'asdzą́ą́ índa nihiníbaal haal'áagi dé'éyóní nidaakaii éí nihá chizh nídeidiyiiłniihdóó nihá tó ninádayiiłjiidjį' nihool'áago bił nidasoozį́ .
PRED:	I brought you to your children , your wives , your wives , and the foreigners living in the camp with water .
GOLD:	Your little ones and your wives are with you , as well as the foreigners living among you who chop your wood and carry your water .

ID:	405
INPUT:	Áádóó Abímelek bidine'é kót'éego yi'níłnii'go ání , Díí diné índa be'asdzą́ąda t'áá bizhdeelchidígíí éí t'áá aaníí hodi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	So Abimelech took his hand and said to the people , “ This man who is a man who has been put to death . ”
GOLD:	Then Abimelech issued a public proclamation : “ Anyone who touches this man or his wife will be put to death ! ”

ID:	406
INPUT:	áko diné , Hasht'ehodít'ée yee' áádóó yá'ádahoot'ééh , daaníi nidi t'áadoo hooyání bee í'dooldįįłii bik'i hwiidooleeł , asdzání i'niiłchíihgo bił náhodíníigahígi át'éego , áko ts'ídá t'áadoo bee yisdáhóót'i'í da doo .
PRED:	It is better to say , “ It 's better to be patient , ” they said . “ We ca n't be able to be able to be able to be saved . ”
GOLD:	When people are saying , “ Everything is peaceful and secure , ” then disaster will fall on them as suddenly as a pregnant woman 's labor pains begin . And there will be no escape .

ID:	407
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbel ałdó' hadibé áłtsé deishchíinii aláahgo łik'aii ła' jiníłtį́ . Áko Éíbel áádóó náájiisnii'ígíí éí Bóhólníihii bił yílįįd ,
PRED:	The first day of the first month , the first of the sheep and goats , and the Lord had given him a gift of wine to the Lord .
GOLD:	Abel also brought a gift — the best portions of the firstborn lambs from his flock . The Lord accepted Abel and his gift ,

ID:	408
INPUT:	Doo <unk> da'ídééłkidii , doo hadashineeztą́ą'ii shik'ídaaskai , dadine'é doo shízhi' bee dabi'dééji'ii ábidishní , Dashinół'į́ , dashinół'į́ .
PRED:	Do n't let me tell me what I am saying , ‘ Listen to my name ! '
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ I was ready to respond , but no one asked for help.I was ready to be found , but no one was looking for me.I said , ‘ Here I am , here I am ! 'to a nation that did not call on my name .

ID:	409
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' báhóóchįįdgo , Mesopotéímiya kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Kúshan-rishathéíyim wolyéii hasnáago Ízrel dine'é éí Kúshan-rishathéíyim yinaalte' danilį́įgo tseebíí nááhai .
PRED:	So the Lord became angry with Israel , and he reigned in Israel eight years . He reigned in Israel eight years .
GOLD:	Then the Lord burned with anger against Israel , and he turned them over to King Cushan-rishathaim of Aram-naharaim . And the Israelites served Cushan-rishathaim for eight years .

ID:	410
INPUT:	Diné t'óó ahayóí éí bił hadlee'ii shich'odooniił danízingo łídeidilchí , áádóó diné t'áadoo le'é t'áá jíík'eh nijiniihígíí binahjį' diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo hak'is danilį́ .
PRED:	“ If you are my friends , you will say to me , ‘ We are writing to anyone who is a friend . '
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	411
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus t'áadoo ák'ihazdoodzíi' da . Nít'éé' aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ánááhodoo'niid , Diyin God hináanii binahjį' ándishní , Christ , Diyin God biYe' daats'í nílínígíí bee nihił hólne' .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ No , I tell you the Son of God . I tell you the Son of God , the Son of God , the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus remained silent . Then the high priest said to him , “ I demand in the name of the living God — tell us if you are the Messiah , the Son of God . ”

ID:	412
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį'ígíí ábizhdííniid , Shínaaí Íísa nidááh níyáago áádóó nanídééłkidgo , Háishą' bíí' nílį́ ? Háágóoshą' díníyá ? índa , Díí nííłkałígíishą' háí bí ? nidííniidgo
PRED:	The oldest brother said to Esau , “ Who is your brother , Esau ? Who is the one who sent me ? ”
GOLD:	He gave these instructions to the men leading the first group : “ When my brother , Esau , meets you , he will ask , ‘ Whose servants are you ? Where are you going ? Who owns these animals ? '

ID:	413
INPUT:	bizhé'é áádóó bimá éí kin haal'áagi kééhat'į́įgi hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii yah a'atiiníjį' yich'į' niidoolóós .
PRED:	He will bring his father 's mother to the elders of the town gate to the elders of the town gate .
GOLD:	In such a case , the father and mother must take the son to the elders as they hold court at the town gate .

ID:	414
INPUT:	Kéyah éí Bóhólníihii bá ats'ádeet'ánígíí índa kéyah kin haal'áago ádoolníiłgo bá ats'ádeet'ánígíí éí kéyah bił ahóóltą'go tseebíídóó náá'áłníí' t'įįhí bi'ohgo tsin sitą́ ákónízah áádóó naaniigo ałdó' tseebíídóó náá'áłníí' t'įįhí bi'ohgo tsin sitą́ ; éí ałts'ą́ą́hjígo bíighahgi kéyah hoodzooígíí áádóó e'e'aahjigo tónteeljį' kéyah niní'áhígíí áádóó ha'a'aahjigo kéyah niní'áhígíí t' áá át'é éí t'áá áłah naat'áanii bikéyah doo . Kin bii' sohodizin índa kéyah t'áá bóóltą'go Bóhólníihii bá ats'ádeet'ánígíí éí t'áá ałtso kéyah ahééhoodzooígíí ałníi'gi sinil doo ;
PRED:	“ The land will be given to the Lord 's special possession , and it will be 81/3 miles long and 31/3 miles long and 31/3 miles wide , and all the towns of the Lord 's land will be yours .
GOLD:	“ The areas that remain , to the east and to the west of the sacred lands and the city , will belong to the prince . Each of these areas will be 81/3 miles wide , extending in opposite directions to the eastern and western borders of Israel , with the sacred lands and the sanctuary of the Temple in the center .

ID:	415
INPUT:	Nidi Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí diné tseebílt'éego yił Johéínan yits'ąą dadínéezhchą́ą'go Áman dine'é yich'į' ííjéé' .
PRED:	But Gedaliah son of Kareah and began to run away from the Midianites .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Ishmael and eight of his men escaped from Johanan into the land of Ammon .

ID:	416
INPUT:	Nidi dine'é dadéesxéelgo saad t'ááłá'í nidi , t'áadoo yee yich'į' hadaasdzíi' da , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go ání , Doo bich'į' háádadoohdzih da .
PRED:	But the people of Israel did not speak , for they refused to answer the king , for they said , “ Do n't answer the king ! ”
GOLD:	But the people were silent and did not utter a word because Hezekiah had commanded them , “ Do not answer him . ”

ID:	417
INPUT:	Bijáád éí béésh nitł'izii bee ályaa índa bikee'jį' béésh nitł'izii áádóó hashtł'ish bił ałta' nínilgo ályaa .
PRED:	Their legs were as iron as iron as iron as iron as iron as iron as iron .
GOLD:	its legs were iron , and its feet were a combination of iron and baked clay .

ID:	418
INPUT:	Háálá diné doo yá'ádaashóonii náásgóó bada'iideełgo yiiłtsą́ągo éí yee ádaa daha'niihgo wooshch'į́į́d nít'éé' .
PRED:	For I saw the wicked of the wicked , having no one ever died .
GOLD:	For I envied the proudwhen I saw them prosper despite their wickedness .

ID:	419
INPUT:	Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin índa eda'alyaiishą' ha'át'íí yee t'ááłá'í nilį́įgo aha'didoot'ááł ? Jó , nihí Diyin God hináanii bikin bii' sohodizin daniidlį́ , háálá Diyin God t'áá bí ádííniid , Hatah kééhasht'į́į doo , áádóó hataasháa doo , áádóó haDiyin God nishłį́į doo , índa hó shidine'é dajílį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	And why do you think of God 's Temple ? I will be God 's Temple , and I will live in the Temple of God . I will be their God , and I will be their God . ”
GOLD:	And what union can there be between God 's temple and idols ? For we are the temple of the living God . As God said : “ I will live in themand walk among them.I will be their God , and they will be my people .

ID:	420
INPUT:	Yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' doo naaznilgi náhookǫs yiníłbaal ; nahasdzáán t'áadoo bótą'ígóó dah yiz'ą́ .
PRED:	He made the heavens above the earth , and the earth covered the earth .
GOLD:	God stretches the northern sky over empty spaceand hangs the earth on nothing .

ID:	421
INPUT:	Éí baa dahideest'ánígíí Shííkem hoolyéii dahootsooígíí t'áá bił Íífreiyim dine'é bidziłgo nahaz'ánígi kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichéehii iisxíinii bá át'é , áádóó Gíízer kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił yaa deideez'ą́ ,
PRED:	From the tribe of Shechem , the tribe of Shechem , the tribe of Ephraim , Benjamin , and the tribe of Ephraim .
GOLD:	Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim ( a city of refuge for those who accidentally killed someone ) , Gezer ,

ID:	422
INPUT:	Áko tsé dį́į́' hasht'e'nibída'astséelgo didlidgo náádahidoonihii bá sinil ; nááseego naakidi ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódaníłtso ; naaniigo ałdó' t'áá ákódaníłtéél , dego éí t'ááłá'í ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' t'įįhdí biláhígo ákódanízah ; éí bikáa'gi didlidgo náádahaniih dooleełii bee naatseedígíí ákwii ninádaa'nił doo .
PRED:	On the fourth side of the second side of the altar , which was 71/2 feet long and 27 inches wide ,
GOLD:	There were also four tables of finished stone for preparation of the burnt offerings , each 311/2 inches square and 21 inches high . On these tables were placed the butchering knives and other implements for slaughtering the sacrificial animals .

ID:	423
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Nan biye' Jáshowa bił nídiit'aash ; éí yá'át'éehgo diné bii' honít'i'ii bik'i dah didíílnihgo
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Joshua , “ Get up and take some of the men of the community . ”
GOLD:	The Lord replied , “ Take Joshua son of Nun , who has the Spirit in him , and lay your hands on him .

ID:	424
INPUT:	Ats'á'ázhdeeltį́įgo hóyoołkááł biyi' ch'il na'atł'o'ii sikaadii bits'ą́ą́dóó doo<unk> go ályaii éí bílástsii' índa bikágí nidi doo jiyą́ą da doo .
PRED:	“ These are the boundaries of the beast , and the seed will eat the seed that grow .
GOLD:	As long as they are bound by their Nazirite vow , they are not allowed to eat or drink anything that comes from a grapevine — not even the grape seeds or skins .

ID:	425
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii éí dadine'é ił danilį́įgo áyoolííł , nidi bąąhági át'éii éí dadine'é yáhásin yénéínił .
PRED:	The godly give justice to the godly , but those who repent of their sins .
GOLD:	Godliness makes a nation great , but sin is a disgrace to any people .

ID:	426
INPUT:	Éí bąą hó hwee Diyin God yaa hakáhígíí t'áá nihonít'i'jį' yisdájiiníiłgo bízhneel'ą́ , háálá bá na'ak'íyájíłti' doo biniyé t'áá áłahjį' jiiná .
PRED:	Therefore , God has given him his life , for he has given life to those who do evil .
GOLD:	Therefore he is able , once and forever , to save those who come to God through him . He lives forever to intercede with God on their behalf .

ID:	427
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí diné nididooltałgóó yiyoołááł , áádóó joogááłgóó Bóhólníihii haa bił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	The Lord is with a human heart , and he has filled with joy .
GOLD:	The Lord directs the steps of the godly.He delights in every detail of their lives .

ID:	428
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bik'ijį' asdzání bił nihéézhdoot'ash biniyé náájoodááł nít'éé' ; náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bits'íís jidínóoł'įįł biniyé naanii hajííyá . Nít'éé' jó , tsés'ná éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bits'íís yiih yínáá lá áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh bii' hazlį́į́' lá ,
PRED:	Then he would return to his own body and return to his own head . Then he took the lion to see the lion 's head and honey , and the lion covered the heads of honey .
GOLD:	Later , when he returned to Timnah for the wedding , he turned off the path to look at the carcass of the lion . And he found that a swarm of bees had made some honey in the carcass .

ID:	429
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	430
INPUT:	Áádóó Ábsalam éí David yá nidaal'a'í yił ałk'ą́ą́h yikai , áko Ábsalam éí dzaanééz bił yilwołgo chéch'iltsoh bits'áoz'a' ałtaanáneez'áá léi' hoł bik'ą́ą́h yilwodgo biishdinoolne'go yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán bita'gi t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ dah nijil<unk> ; dzaanééz éí hayaa haalwodgo eelwod .
PRED:	So Absalom sent messengers to Absalom , and he sent Absalom to a cave with a huge tree in a valley . As soon as he was walking along the middle of the forest , he ran out to the ground and ran to the ground .
GOLD:	During the battle , Absalom happened to come upon some of David 's men . He tried to escape on his mule , but as he rode beneath the thick branches of a great tree , his hair got caught in the tree . His mule kept going and left him dangling in the air .

ID:	431
INPUT:	T'áá azhé'é ba'áłchíní yaa a'ááh nízinígi át'éego Bóhólníihii dabidísinii yaa a'ááh nízin .
PRED:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as he did .
GOLD:	The Lord is like a father to his children , tender and compassionate to those who fear him .

ID:	432
INPUT:	Shiníłch'i doo bidziil da yileehgo yishááłgóó nił bééhózin ! Yishááłgóó łoh shiniyé nídeidees'į́į́' nít'éé' .
PRED:	You have kept my strength in a trap ; you have kept my feet into a trap .
GOLD:	When I am overwhelmed , you alone know the way I should turn.Wherever I go , my enemies have set traps for me .

ID:	433
INPUT:	Yínííł doo t'áá íiyisí bide ádooníił da biniyé yee ádił asziih yę́ę bá yóó'adadidooh'ááł , áádóó hadabidi'yoołnih .
PRED:	Do n't let them go into trouble , for they have sinned against their sin .
GOLD:	Now , however , it is time to forgive and comfort him . Otherwise he may be overcome by discouragement .

ID:	434
INPUT:	yá'át'ééh ó'oo'níiłii bídahooł'aah ; doo haada yit'éii hádaaht'į́ ; bide ádahoot'éii bíká anídaahjah áádóó áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii bich'ą́ą́h yádaałti' índa asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii bá nída'oohkąąh .
PRED:	Give justice to the commands of your servant ; do n't let the rights of the oppressed , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	Learn to do good.Seek justice.Help the oppressed.Defend the cause of orphans.Fight for the rights of widows .

ID:	435
INPUT:	Łóó' t'óó ahayóí haadlo'
PRED:	A Discussion about Resurrection
GOLD:	The First Disciples

ID:	436
INPUT:	K'é ha'níinii
PRED:	Greetings from Paul
GOLD:	Greetings from Paul

ID:	437
INPUT:	Áízak be'asdzą́ą́ dooleełígíí bá nídiiltį́
PRED:	Isaac 's wives for Isaac
GOLD:	A Wife for Isaac

ID:	438
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' saadígíí t'áá ałtso deidiizts'ą́ą'go nídaasdzíidgo da'ahinéél'į́į́' , áádóó Bérak ádeidííniid , Díí saadígíí t'áá át'é aláahgo naat'áanii nilíinii bee bił dahodiilnih .
PRED:	When they heard this , they all listened to the king and told them , “ This is what the king tells us . ”
GOLD:	When they heard all the messages , they looked at one another in alarm . “ We must tell the king what we have heard , ” they said to Baruch .

ID:	439
INPUT:	T'áá bí yii' sitínígíí ałdó' ádá ííł'į́ ; bi'éé' áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bił bee ályaa .
PRED:	He dressed himself in linen cloth , and he wore a linen garment .
GOLD:	She makes her own bedspreads.She dresses in fine linen and purple gowns .

ID:	440
INPUT:	Áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' daats'í nááhozhdidoołááł danízingo bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii hak'i dahodidoo'ááł biniyé hadahasííd .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day Jesus tried to heal the Sabbath day of religious law and Pharisees .
GOLD:	The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely . If he healed the man 's hand , they planned to accuse him of working on the Sabbath .

ID:	441
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é t'ááłá'í jinítínígo doo aaníígóó ájít'íinii hach'į' nahwii'náa doo , áádóó ti'hojooníih doo , Jew dine'é nilíinii áłtsé , áádóó doo Jew dine'é nilíinii ałdó' .
PRED:	But everyone will say to you , “ We will live in trouble and preach the truth , and the Gentiles will also be judged . ”
GOLD:	There will be trouble and calamity for everyone who keeps on doing what is evil — for the Jew first and also for the Gentile .

ID:	442
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ííjip kéyahgi tó yich'į' Éran bigish yił dah didiilnii' , áko áádę́ę́' ch'ał haaldee'go Ííjip kéyah ałtso yik'i diilkǫ' .
PRED:	Then Aaron threw the staff into the land of Egypt and threw it into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Aaron raised his hand over the waters of Egypt , and frogs came up and covered the whole land !

ID:	443
INPUT:	Áko Líyah ázhdííniidígíí Diyin God yidiizts'ą́ą'go izh'niiltsąąd , áádóó Jéíkab bá ashkii náájíshchį́ ; éí bił ashdladi ajishchį́ .
PRED:	When Rachel heard that God had heard him , he became pregnant and gave birth to a son of Jacob .
GOLD:	And God answered Leah 's prayers . She became pregnant again and gave birth to a fifth son for Jacob .

ID:	444
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haa áhályą́ągo jiináago áhósin . Éí nihokáa'gi hak'ihojidlíi dooleeł . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , hwe'ana'í laanaa danízinígíí baa hodóó'ááł lágo .
PRED:	The Lord will bless him , and he will bless them from his enemies . Do n't let them be afraid of your enemies .
GOLD:	The Lord protects themand keeps them alive.He gives them prosperity in the landand rescues them from their enemies .

ID:	445
INPUT:	áádóó kin hadaas'á t'áá ałtsogóó índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi baa nidahodołdlaadgo ádadohní , T'áá bik'e'ashchínígi át'éego chaha'oh ádadoohłííł biniyé dziłgóó dadohkáahgo áliv bits'áoz'a' , nídíshchíí' bits'áoz'a' , mértal sikaadii áádóó páam sikaadii bits'áoz'a' índa tsin naazkaadii t'áá íiyisí bi'iil díłch'ilii ch'ídahidoohxééł .
PRED:	“ Go out to the towns of Jerusalem and rebuild the hill country of Jerusalem . Go out to the mountains. ” I told the people , “ Go out to the hills and fig trees , fig trees , olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , and fig trees .
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	446
INPUT:	Áko ba'áłchíní daniidlį́įgo , ba'áłchíní yá dah yooléełii nihíí' dadooleeł , éí Christ bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz doo . Christ bił ti'dahwii'nííh ládą́ą́' yee ayóó át'éii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz doo .
PRED:	And if we are children of our children , we will share the joy of Christ 's children and share in the joy of Christ .
GOLD:	And since we are his children , we are his heirs . In fact , together with Christ we are heirs of God 's glory . But if we are to share his glory , we must also share his suffering .

ID:	447
INPUT:	Áko dashdii'áázh , nít'éé' t'áá aaníí t'áá áhodííniidígi át'éego bik'ízhní'áázh , áko atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihgo dadoodį́łígíí t'áá áłdįįłt'éego ájiilaa .
PRED:	So they found him and prepared the Passover meal for the Passover meal . So they prepared the Passover meal for the Passover meal .
GOLD:	They went off to the city and found everything just as Jesus had said , and they prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	448
INPUT:	Diyin God t'ááłá'í hólǫ́ǫgo yinídlánígíí éí yá'át'ééh . Jó , níłch'i bida'iiníziinii ákót'éego da'oodlą́ą nidi yik'ee bił daayée'go bitah dahoditłid .
PRED:	It is good to God , and it is good to those who believe in the power of demons .
GOLD:	You say you have faith , for you believe that there is one God . Good for you ! Even the demons believe this , and they tremble in terror .

ID:	449
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii áshíłní , Ízrel dine'é t'ą́ą́' anáhátłíishii éí Júdah dine'é doo bazh'dí'nóodlíí át'éii yiláahgo t'áá ákogi át'éego í'diilyaa .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Judah is my sister , Judah , Judah , and Judah has become as righteous as Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Even faithless Israel is less guilty than treacherous Judah !

ID:	450
INPUT:	Áko doo da'ahiji<unk> góó Éísa nant'áago tádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' nááhai .
PRED:	So Asa began to rule over the years of Asa 's reign .
GOLD:	So there was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa 's reign .

ID:	451
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahaniihii náádayiisnii' .
PRED:	Then the king and all Israel sacrificed sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	452
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é yéego hak'ijį' nidaalteehii hach'į' ninádookah .
PRED:	“ Listen to the people of Israel , and let them go ahead of them .
GOLD:	Though you are such wicked rebels , my people , come and return to the Lord .

ID:	453
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Éran biye'ké nízhdii'eezhgo ayaadi éé' nineezígíí biih jiiłteehgo sis bee áká dabidzisas , áádóó ch'ah bitsiinídadzist'i' ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí yi'iilaa .
PRED:	So Moses took Aaron 's sons and placed it in the middle of his waist . He put his clothes on his head and placed it on his head on his head , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Next Moses presented Aaron 's sons . He clothed them in their tunics , tied their sashes around them , and put their special head coverings on them , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	454
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iyísíi'ii nich'į' bee ádaa ákoniiszį́į́' , áádóó doo ákwii áát'įįdii t'áadoo nídíł'į́į' da ; Bee haz'áanii híti'ii éí Bóhólníihii bee bił hodeeshnih , dííniid ; ákohgo doo ákwii át'éii bee ádił ni'iyísíi'ii shá yóó'ańdííní'ą́ . Síilah .
PRED:	When I saw what was evil , I said to them , “ I will search for your sins , and I will forgive my guilt . ” And the Lord said , “ I will forgive my guilt . ”
GOLD:	Finally , I confessed all my sins to youand stopped trying to hide my guilt.I said to myself , “ I will confess my rebellion to the Lord. ” And you forgave me ! All my guilt is gone.Interlude

ID:	455
INPUT:	Jóseph bínaaíké Bénjamin Ííjipgi yił nákai
PRED:	Joseph 's brothers in Benjamin
GOLD:	The Brothers Return to Egypt

ID:	456
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Jerúsalemdi ats'ááhoníłt'e' , áko kéyah éí béésh łigaii tálent wolyéii neeznádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo índa óola t'ááłá'í tálent bíighahgo ák'é ninádazhdoodléełgo áhoolaa .
PRED:	The king of Egypt was placed in the land of Egypt . The king of Egypt took care of silver and gold , which was given to the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then he was deposed by the king of Egypt , who demanded that Judah pay 7,500 pounds of silver and 75 pounds of gold as tribute .

ID:	457
INPUT:	Áko baa nidziizyeelígíí áádóó ááhyiłnínígíí dzidiizts'ą́ą'go Gídiyan sodoolzin , áádóó Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígóó nídzídzáago ájíní , Hasht'e'ádadołnééh , háálá Mídiyan dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó dah deínéehii Bóhólníihii nihílák'eidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	When he heard what he had happened , he said to Gideon , “ Come and pray , ” Gideon replied , “ for the Lord has given us victory over Midian . ”
GOLD:	When Gideon heard the dream and its interpretation , he bowed in worship before the Lord . Then he returned to the Israelite camp and shouted , “ Get up ! For the Lord has given you victory over the Midianite hordes ! ”

ID:	458
INPUT:	Dooda lą́ą ! Jó , Christ ayóó'ánihó'níinii bee ak'eh hididleehii biláahdi ádaniit'éego át'é !
PRED:	Oh , that Christ is better than Christ , but he is better than those who love Christ .
GOLD:	No , despite all these things , overwhelming victory is ours through Christ , who loved us .

ID:	459
INPUT:	Áádóó łahjį' ałníí'dóó Ízrel dine'é baa dahaas'nilígíí t'áá ha'át'íhída ashdladiin ánéelą́ą'go bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ááłá'ígo ats'ádahidoołtééł : éí bíla' ashdla'ii nilíinii áádóó béégashii áádóó télii áádóó dibé índa da'alį́'ígíí t'áá ał'ąą ádaat'éii éí Líívai dine'é Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzinii yaa ádahalyáanii baa dadidooh'ááł .
PRED:	“ On the first day of all the tribes of Israel will bring fifty pieces of silver , goats , and cattle , donkeys , and goats , and goats , and goats , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	From the half that belongs to the people of Israel , take one of every fifty of the prisoners and of the cattle , donkeys , sheep , goats , and other animals . Give this share to the Levites , who are in charge of maintaining the Lord 's Tabernacle . ”

ID:	460
INPUT:	Nizhé'é bilah doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da ; éí nizhé'é áhánígo bik'éí nilį́ .
PRED:	Do not have sexual relations with your sister 's sister , and you are your sister .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father 's sister , for she is your father 's close relative .

ID:	461
INPUT:	Áádóó Rúben áhodííniid , T'áadoósh kódíshníigo nihich'į' haasdzíi' da ? Ashkii t'ááká haada daohłe' yíila' ; bąąhági ádaohłe' lágo , nihidííniid , nidi t'áadoo dashisidoots'ą́ą' da . Éí bąą bidiłígíí biniinaa bá naniideeh .
PRED:	“ Do n't you say , ‘ Do n't I tell you the boy ? Do n't let the boy be able to let me go into sin . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Did n't I tell you not to sin against the boy ? ” Reuben asked . “ But you would n't listen . And now we have to answer for his blood ! ”

ID:	462
INPUT:	áko kin góne' yah ajookai nít'éé' ashkii áłts'íísígíí bimá Mary t'áá bił dajiiłtsą́ , áko Jesus bich'į' nitsidazdeezgo'go bich'į' nidahodzisá , índa hanaalye'é da'ílíinii ąą ádajiilaago , óola áádóó tsin bijeeh łikání halchinii fránkinsens índa mir wolyéii baa dajiiznil .
PRED:	So they went to the boy with Mary and the mother of Mary , who had been with her mother and mother . They brought him to Jesus , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , and frankincense .
GOLD:	They entered the house and saw the child with his mother , Mary , and they bowed down and worshiped him . Then they opened their treasure chests and gave him gifts of gold , frankincense , and myrrh .

ID:	463
INPUT:	Áko táá' nááhaijį' nihoolzhiizhgo deisná ; Heziikáíyah aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo hastą́ą́h náhááh góne' índa Hoshíya éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo náhást'éí náhááh góne' Samériya kéyah yisná .
PRED:	In the third year of King Hezekiah 's reign , King Hezekiah of Israel captured the sixth year of King Hezekiah 's reign in Israel . He reigned in Samaria nine years .
GOLD:	Three years later , during the sixth year of King Hezekiah 's reign and the ninth year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , Samaria fell .

ID:	464
INPUT:	Nidi Peter índa John ázhdííniid , T'áá nihí baa nitsídaahkees , Diyin God yiníł'į́įgo nihíjí nihik'eh dahoniil'į́įgo daats'í yá'át'ééh , doodaii' Diyin God bik'eh honiil'į́įgo daats'í yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	But Peter and John said to John , “ Be careful to obey God 's ways . If we do what is right , we are doing what we are doing .
GOLD:	But Peter and John replied , “ Do you think God wants us to obey you rather than him ?

ID:	465
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Diné bił ałch'į' ádant'į́ yę́ę bił ahidadílyéego bee baa yánínízin yę́ę t'áadoo bahat'aadí íinilaago t'áá łiníchí'í sínílį́'ígíí biniinaa áádóó eda'alyaii t'áá ałtso bił doo ni'dóldin yę́ę biniinaa índa eda'alyaii bich'į' na'áłchíní náádahíłniihgo bidił dadeezna' yę́ę biniinaa ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Do n't be afraid of what you have done to you . Do n't be ashamed of all your detestable sins , for you have been defiled by worshiping idols and your idols .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have poured out your lust and exposed yourself in prostitution to all your lovers , and because you have worshiped detestable idols , and because you have slaughtered your children as sacrifices to your gods ,

ID:	466
INPUT:	Áko Sáíras aláahgo naat'áanii náádoodleełii átsé baa yíhááh biná Daniel nijil'a' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then Cyrus sent this message to King Cyrus of Persia .
GOLD:	Daniel remained in the royal service until the first year of the reign of King Cyrus .

ID:	467
INPUT:	Sálaman bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Héídad ach'į' nahwiiłná yę́ęgi át'éego ákót'éego ałdó' Ríízan éí Ízrel dine'é yi'ana'í nilį́įgo hoolzhiizh , áko Ízrel dine'é ayóo yijoołáá nít'éé' índa Síriya kéyahgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Solomon became very angry with King Baasha of Israel , just as he had defeated the army of Israel . He reigned in the land of Aram and the army of Israel .
GOLD:	Rezon was Israel 's bitter adversary for the rest of Solomon 's reign , and he made trouble , just as Hadad did . Rezon hated Israel intensely and continued to reign in Aram .

ID:	468
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran áyidííniid , Ízrel dine'é índa Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro bich'į' hadoohdzih , Ííjip kéyahdóó Ízrel dine'é ch'ídiit'ish , bididoohniił .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ Go out to Egypt and speak to Pharaoh , the king of Israel , the king of Egypt , and bring them out of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them orders for the Israelites and for Pharaoh , the king of Egypt . The Lord commanded Moses and Aaron to lead the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	469
INPUT:	áádóó , Ha'át'íísh yíní'į́ ? shidííniid . Áko ádíshní , Déé'į́į́' nít'éé' , jó'akon , áko bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áhígíí áádóó bílátahgi dah azkánígíí áádóó éí bikáá'dóó bee dahool'iní tsosts'idgo dah naaznil índa t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo óola níyizgo biih dahasdzą́ągo bidadii'áago yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	“ What do you see ? ” I asked . “ Look , ” I said . “ I saw a gold lampstand and a lampstand , four lamps , and the lampstand and the lampstand . ”
GOLD:	“ What do you see now ? ” he asked.I answered , “ I see a solid gold lampstand with a bowl of oil on top of it . Around the bowl are seven lamps , each having seven spouts with wicks .

ID:	470
INPUT:	Nidi Yuráíyah binanit'a'í bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso bił aláahgo naat'áanii bich'éédą́ą'gi da'iiłhaazhgo t'áadoo bighangóó anáádzáa da .
PRED:	But Uriah the king 's officials refused to go home at the palace gate .
GOLD:	But Uriah did n't go home . He slept that night at the palace entrance with the king 's palace guard .

ID:	471
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bisiláo yił Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Jííbas dine'é éí kéyah yii' kéédahat'ínígíí baa jíkai ; éí David yich'į' yádaałti'go ádeidííniid , Doo da' oo'íinii áádóó nida'niłhodii doo nahjį' bi'ííníłnii'góó doo kojį' yah adíínéeł da . Éí David yah azhdoonéłígíí doo bízhneel'ą́ą da , dahó'ní .
PRED:	So the king told the commanders , “ Do n't go to Jerusalem to the town of the Amorites who live in the land of the Amorites . Do n't let them go to the town of David . ”
GOLD:	David then led his men to Jerusalem to fight against the Jebusites , the original inhabitants of the land who were living there . The Jebusites taunted David , saying , “ You 'll never get in here ! Even the blind and lame could keep you out ! ” For the Jebusites thought they were safe .

ID:	472
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa Jew dine'é bitahdóó alááh dahideezíinii Paul yee yaa nídaat'íinii yee hoł dahoolne' áádóó nídahooskango ,
PRED:	So the leading priests and the elders of the Jews begged Paul to tell him what they had done .
GOLD:	where the leading priests and other Jewish leaders met with him and made their accusations against Paul .

ID:	473
INPUT:	Áko ánáádadi'ní , Bóhólníihii baa áłah ná'ádleeh t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh néit'aahígíí éí Sháíloh haz'ánígi éí Béthel kin shijaa' náhookǫsjígo , Bétheldóó Shííkem kin haal'áajį' atiinígíí ha'a'aahjígo índa Lebónah kin shijaa' shádi'ááhjígo t'éí bá náhoot'aah .
PRED:	On the third day the Lord said to him , “ The Lord gave me this message from Shiloh to Bethel . He went to Bethel and went to Bethel , along the road to Bethel .
GOLD:	Then they thought of the annual festival of the Lord held in Shiloh , south of Lebonah and north of Bethel , along the east side of the road that goes from Bethel to Shechem .

ID:	474
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus joogááł , nít'éé' diné naaki doo oo'į́į́góó hakéé' yi'ashgo , dilwoshgo kóní , David biYe' nílíinii , nihaa jiiníbaah .
PRED:	As Jesus was walking along the crowd , he said to him , “ Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”
GOLD:	After Jesus left the girl 's home , two blind men followed along behind him , shouting , “ Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	475
INPUT:	Ízrel bidine'é bik'ehgo nida'anishígíí bis t'áá ákwíí jį́ ádaahłe' nít'éé' yę́ę t'áadoo bi'oh ánéelt'e'go á<unk> e'í , hodoo'niidgo t'áá íiyisí hach'į' nidahwii'náago baa ákodazniizį́į́' .
PRED:	“ Do n't let the people of Israel build this Passover meal for the day of Israel , so that no one would be able to help them .
GOLD:	The Israelite foremen could see that they were in serious trouble when they were told , “ You must not reduce the number of bricks you make each day . ”

ID:	476
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	477
INPUT:	áko t'ah abínídą́ą́' náádiish'nahgo Diyin God yá dahalne'ii shá nidaal'a'í danilíinii bá deínółts'ą́ą' dooleeł biniyé nihich'į' ahéł'a' , nidi t'áadoo bá dasidoots'ą́ą' da ,
PRED:	I did not listen to you before the prophets . I told you the prophets about the prophets , but I did n't listen to you .
GOLD:	and if you will not listen to my servants , the prophets — for I sent them again and again to warn you , but you would not listen to them —

ID:	478
INPUT:	Áádóó hamá índa hatsilíké ákwe'é yíkai , áko tł'óo'di naazį́įgo hágo dahałníigo hach'į' yah ada'as'a' .
PRED:	Then his mother and his brothers returned to the gateway and sent him to his mother .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him . They stood outside and sent word for him to come out and talk with them .

ID:	479
INPUT:	Diné yá'át'éehii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ach'oha'né shóyoołt'eeh , nidi diné doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó binahagizii Bóhólníihii baa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	The Lord helps the wicked , but the guilty person stops the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord approves of those who are good , but he condemns those who plan wickedness .

ID:	480
INPUT:	T'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí yee nant'áa doo
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Lord said , “ the Messiah will rule over Israel .
GOLD:	The

ID:	481
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó eda'alyaii yich'į' nidahałáii jooshłá , nidi Bóhólníihii baa jííníshłí .
PRED:	“ Do not worship idols , but I will not worship the Lord .
GOLD:	I hate those who worship worthless idols.I trust in the Lord .

ID:	482
INPUT:	Nidi Hánnah éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ deeyáa da , háálá hahastiin ábizhdííniid , Shí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ deesháał da , awéé' i'díít'óodgo índa ákǫ́ǫ́ bił deesh'ash , áko bíni'dii Bóhólníihii yich'į' nidoogáałgo be'iina' ninít'i'jį' ákwii hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	But Hannah said to her husband , “ I will go with you , for I will go to where I am going to meet you . ”
GOLD:	But Hannah did not go . She told her husband , “ Wait until the boy is weaned . Then I will take him to the Tabernacle and leave him there with the Lord permanently . ”

ID:	483
INPUT:	T'áá háiida jiinánígíí t'áá hó ádá shójoost'e'go éí yóó'azhdoołdił , áádóó t'áá háiida shí shiniinaa jiinánígíí yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo éí jiinánígíí <unk> doołt'eeł .
PRED:	Anyone who believes in me will lose it , and you will lose it . Anyone who believes in me will lose it . ”
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it ; but if you give up your life for me , you will find it .

ID:	484
INPUT:	hasht'edadíníit'éego índa k'é daniidzingo Diyin God k'ehgo índa t'áá ałtsojį' nihił da'ílį́įgo dahinii'náa doo biniyé aláahgo naat'áanii índa bídahólníihii t'áá ałtso bá sodadołzin .
PRED:	Pray for us , and we will live in God 's sight , just as we live in every way .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	485
INPUT:	Háálá doo ákwii ájooníiłii nabik'ítsídzízkéezgo ałtso yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo doo dazhdootsaał da ; ts'ídá t'áá aaníí jiináa doo .
PRED:	For they will perish , and they will die ; they will never die .
GOLD:	They will live because they thought it over and decided to turn from their sins . Such people will not die .

ID:	486
INPUT:	Bánai , Ázgad , Bííbeiyai ,
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Jezreel ,
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	487
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago atiingóó ats'íís sitį́įgo áádóó télii índa náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bíighahgóó sizį́įgo baazhníyá , áko náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ats'íís t'ah doo yiyą́ą da lá , télii nidi doo niyiizhnizh da lá .
PRED:	As he went to the house and saw a lion standing beside the road , a lion standing beside the road beside the mouth of a lion 's head , and a lion could n't eat it .
GOLD:	and he went out and found the body lying in the road . The donkey and lion were still standing there beside it , for the lion had not eaten the body nor attacked the donkey .

ID:	488
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí índa ooljéé' , sǫ' nihídazdilidii t'áá ánółtso , baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Praise the stars , the stars , and all the stars .
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	489
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Gídiyan ánéídoo'niid , Táadi neeznádiingo diné da'ííłch'alígíí éí áádeesįįłgo Mídiyan dine'é nílák'ee dideesh'ááł , áádóó ła'ígíí t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bí dabinághangóó bíni'dii nídeíkááh .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Gideon , “ I will punish the men of Gibeon , but I will punish them with all the other men of Midian .
GOLD:	The Lord told Gideon , “ With these 300 men I will rescue you and give you victory over the Midianites . Send all the others home . ”

ID:	490
INPUT:	Nidayiizh'eezhígíí nídiiníiłgo éí níbaal bii' dahozdísingi chodao'į́į doo ; Líívai dine'é t'ááłá'í nízínígo bindaanishígíí bik'ehgo baa hidíínił .
PRED:	“ Take the sacred objects from the Tabernacle , and bring the Levites to the Levites at the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Receive their gifts , and use these oxen and wagons for transporting the Tabernacle . Distribute them among the Levites according to the work they have to do . ”

ID:	491
INPUT:	Háishą' bílák'eegi tónteel yí'nééł'ąądgo ánéelt'e'gi bił bééhózin , doodaii' háishą' yíládeests'ǫ́ǫ́d bee yádiłhił yí'nééł'ąądgo áníłtsogi bił bééhózin , doodaii' háishą' nihokáá' łeezh yiyííłta'go ánéelt'e'gi bił bééhózin , doodaii' háishą' dził áádóó deílk'idígíí dah deidiyiilo'go ádaníłdáasgi bił bééhózin ?
PRED:	“ Who knows how much it is going to happen ? Who is the one who stretched out the soil and the earth ? Who knows the soil and the soil and the earth ? ”
GOLD:	Who else has held the oceans in his hand ? Who has measured off the heavens with his fingers ? Who else knows the weight of the earthor has weighed the mountains and hills on a scale ?

ID:	492
INPUT:	T'áá áko hágo bizhdííniid , áko bizhé'é Zébedii índa bá nidaalnishígíí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ tsinaa'eeł yii' naháaztą́ągo bits'ą́ą́' dashdii'áazhgo Jesus bikéé' jiní'áázh .
PRED:	Then he said to his father , James , James , James , and John went to the shore of the boat and joined them .
GOLD:	He called them at once , and they also followed him , leaving their father , Zebedee , in the boat with the hired men .

ID:	493
INPUT:	Nihik'isóó , nihá sodadołzin .
PRED:	Pray for us , dear brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , pray for us .

ID:	494
INPUT:	Da' tsés'ná bitł'izh bik'ííníyá ? Doo bénínánílkoh da dooleełígíí biniyé t'áadoo áde nánídį́hí ; t'áá bee hwiih nánídleehíjį' niyą́ .
PRED:	“ Do n't you plant your honey ? Do n't you have enough to plant it ? Do n't you eat what you have enough to eat .
GOLD:	Do you like honey ? Do n't eat too much , or it will make you sick !

ID:	495
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalemgi Júdah áádóó Bénjamin ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ła' kéédahat'į́ . Júdah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii éí díí : Píírez ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ła' , Mahéílalíyel biye' Shefatáíyah , éí biye' Amaráíyah , éí biye' Zekaráíyah , éí biye' Azáíyah , éí biye' Atháíyah wolyéii ákwii kééhat'į́ ,
PRED:	These were the clans of Judah and Benjamin . Their registered troops were the clans of the tribe of Judah : Zechariah son of Athaliah , son of Athaliah , son of Athaliah , son of Athaliah , son of Athaliah , son of Zechariah .
GOLD:	but some of the people from Judah and Benjamin resettled in Jerusalem . ) From the tribe of Judah : Athaiah son of Uzziah , son of Zechariah , son of Amariah , son of Shephatiah , son of Mahalalel , of the family of Perez .

ID:	496
INPUT:	Ádamah , Réímah , Héízor ,
PRED:	Ramah , Hazor , Ramah ,
GOLD:	Adamah , Ramah , Hazor ,

ID:	497
INPUT:	Néédahósinígíí baa a'ááh nínízingo áánííł , áádóó diné bijéí yee t'áá ákogi át'éii bich'į' t'áá ákogi áánííł .
PRED:	He does what is right , and he shows justice to the godly .
GOLD:	Pour out your unfailing love on those who love you ; give justice to those with honest hearts .

ID:	498
INPUT:	Ákohgo naakits'áadahígíí éí ídahooł'aahii t'áá át'é áłah ádayiilaago ádeidííniid , Ch'iyáán nidei'niih doo biniyé Diyin God bizaad nahjį' nidadidiit'áłígíí doo bohónéedzą́ą da .
PRED:	So the disciples called together the twelve disciples and told them , “ We ca n't let us tell us what we do . ”
GOLD:	So the Twelve called a meeting of all the believers . They said , “ We apostles should spend our time teaching the word of God , not running a food program .

ID:	499
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' háhgóóshį́į́ anídeidloh nít'éé' , áádóó nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dahwiitaał nít'éé' . Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó ádahodoo'niid , Bóhólníihii éí ayóó ádaat'éii há yaa naayá .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the people of Egypt was filled with joy and joy . They said , “ The glory of the Lord has given us great joy . ”
GOLD:	We were filled with laughter , and we sang for joy.And the other nations said , “ What amazing things the Lord has done for them . ”

ID:	500
INPUT:	Éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' nahasdzáán bikáa'gi yé'iitsoh dahólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' , áádóó bik'ijį' Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' aye'ké danilíinii nihokáá' dine'é bitsi'ké yił ahaa dahaaskaigo ba'áłchíní dahazlį́į́' ; éí ałk'idą́ą́' diné ayóó ádaat'éii índa ch'ídabi'dit'áahii danilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	In the days of all the world began to see the meaning of the world , and the sons of God came out from the world . They were all children of God and children .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	501
INPUT:	Níyol nahalingo łahjigo ádooníiłgo ch'ídookah ; bihodiit'i'ii dine'é danilį́ ; t'áá bí bibee adziilii t'éí bidiyin ádayósin .
PRED:	The wind blows , and the wind will come to the wind , and those who follow him .
GOLD:	They sweep past like the windand are gone.But they are deeply guilty , for their own strength is their god . ”

ID:	502
INPUT:	Tsosts'id yiską́ą́ góne' éí dahodíínóhsingo áłah náhdleeh doo ; éí bijį́ doo nidoołnish da .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the festival , you must not observe the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	The seventh day of the festival will be another official day for holy assembly , and no ordinary work may be done on that day .

ID:	503
INPUT:	Éí dine'é t'óó báádahadzid danoolnin ; éí hadaastihii doo yaa daazid da doo , doodaii' ániid nidaakaii doo yich'odaaníi da doo .
PRED:	They are too proud for their sins , and they are too proud for their sins .
GOLD:	a fierce and heartless nation that shows no respect for the old and no pity for the young .

ID:	504
INPUT:	Héírad dine'é Shámmah ałdó' , Héírad dine'é Iiláíka ałdó' ,
PRED:	Ahiah , son of Shar ,
GOLD:	Shammah from Harod ; Elika from Harod ;

ID:	505
INPUT:	Áko t'áá áłah nídiiłts'į́įhgo níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'gi t'áá ałtso naa áłah nádleeh doo .
PRED:	When you hear the Tabernacle , you will hear the glorious presence of the Lord 's Tabernacle .
GOLD:	When both trumpets are blown , everyone must gather before you at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	506
INPUT:	nihokáá' nijigháá nít'éé' , áádóó hwee nahasdzáán hazlį́į́' , nidi nihokáá' dine'é t'áadoo hwéédahoosįįd da ;
PRED:	He did n't let the earth tremble , but he refused to fear the world .
GOLD:	He came into the very world he created , but the world did n't recognize him .

ID:	507
INPUT:	Áko Jiihó'ash łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáhígíí t'áá át'é Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	508
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí łį́į́' baa neelkaadígíí éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' áádóó Kwéi hoolyéédę́ę́' shóozt'e' ; aláahgo naat'áanii bá nida'iiłniihígíí Kwéi hoolyéédę́ę́' łį́į́' nideiniiłkaadígíí t'áá bą́ą́h da'ílínígíí bíighahgo nída<unk> nii' .
PRED:	Solomon 's horses were from the land of Egypt , and they were traveling from Egypt to the king of Egypt . They were driven from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Solomon 's horses were imported from Egypt and from Cilicia ; the king 's traders acquired them from Cilicia at the standard price .

ID:	509
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad ádaaníinii bik'eh honíł'įįh , nidi ni éí ts'ídá t'áadoo naaki nilíní bi'dííłnih , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii át'ée dooígíí bił ííshjání ádíílííł .
PRED:	You must not obey the king 's commands , but you will be shown to the king .
GOLD:	Do as they ask , but solemnly warn them about the way a king will reign over them . ”

ID:	510
INPUT:	Áko doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdígíí t'áá át'é tł'ízí bik'éé diit'áahgo doo na'adáhígóó yił anádáah doo , áko diné éí tł'ízí dah néidiidlóosgo honoojíidi yéidichi' doo .
PRED:	As for your sins , you will be lifted up into the wilderness , and you will enter the wilderness of goats , but you will enter the wilderness .
GOLD:	As the goat goes into the wilderness , it will carry all the people 's sins upon itself into a desolate land .

ID:	511
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí hodine'é anaa' da'ał'íinii t'áá ałtso bił t'áadoo kót'é'ílíní bik'ijį' hajizhjée'go be'ek'id Mííram hoolyéhí bíighahgi bik'i jiijéé' .
PRED:	So Joshua and the Israelite army fled to the camp at the camp .
GOLD:	So Joshua and all his fighting men traveled to the water near Merom and attacked suddenly .

ID:	512
INPUT:	Áádóó yaa ádzaago ání , Ná naal'a'í nishłíinii , ha'át'íísh nishłį́ ? Jó , łééchąą'í daaztsáaniigi yee' ánísht'éego ayóogo shíninidlį́įgo shiníníł'į́ .
PRED:	“ Why are you your servant ? ” he asked . “ I am like this dogs ? ”
GOLD:	Mephibosheth bowed respectfully and exclaimed , “ Who is your servant , that you should show such kindness to a dead dog like me ? ”

ID:	513
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro éí Jóseph áyidííniid , Neiseełgo , shoo , tooh nílínígíí bibąąhgóó sézį́ , nisin .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Listen to my dream ! I am standing beside the bank of the Nile River .
GOLD:	So Pharaoh told Joseph his dream . “ In my dream , ” he said , “ I was standing on the bank of the Nile River ,

ID:	514
INPUT:	éí ałk'idą́ą́' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii dadiyinii yaa dahoolne'ígi át'éego , t'áá ałtsoní hasht'éédoo'nííł baa hoolzhiizhjį' yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	In the end of the prophets , the prophets of the prophets will rise in heaven , and everything in heaven will happen .
GOLD:	For he must remain in heaven until the time for the final restoration of all things , as God promised long ago through his holy prophets .

ID:	515
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yaa yínííł danilį́įgo yóó'ádeidoolííł , áko Jerobówam bits'ą́ą́dóó hazlį́į'ii t'áá bí t'éiyá yóó'ádoolnííł , háálá Jerobówam ba'áłchíní bitahdóó t'áá bí t'éiyá Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God bich'į' yá'át'éehii bii' hólǫ́ǫgo bééhoozin .
PRED:	He will show all the people of Israel , for he will love Jeroboam son of Nebat because Jeroboam had done what was evil in Israel . He will know that Jeroboam son of Nebat , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	All Israel will mourn for him and bury him . He is the only member of your family who will have a proper burial , for this child is the only good thing that the Lord , the God of Israel , sees in the entire family of Jeroboam .

ID:	516
INPUT:	Ayóó'áníínísh'níinii , dooládó' ayóó áníínílnin da , shoo , ayóó áníínílnin , jó , hasbídí yinílnáá' .
PRED:	Do n't you remember me , O God.See how beautiful you are !
GOLD:	How beautiful you are , my darling , how beautiful ! Your eyes are like doves .

ID:	517
INPUT:	Náhookǫs nidahonees'ą́ądi kééhót'į́į́dę́ę́' díínááł ; ni áádóó diné ayóó ánéelą́ą'go , éí t'áá ałtso łį́į́' bił deíjeehgo , ayóó ánéelą́ą́' siláo yinéełgo siláo ayóó ánéelą́ą́' bił díínééł .
PRED:	“ You will fight against the north of the north and the army of the north , and you will fight against the great army .
GOLD:	You will come from your homeland in the distant north with your vast cavalry and your mighty army ,

ID:	518
INPUT:	Áko índa t'áá ákogi át'éego náádahaniihii áádóó didlidgo náádahaniihii índa t'áá át'é didlidgo nááhániihii baa nił nihoozhǫǫh doo . Áko índa nibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi dóola náádahidoonih .
PRED:	Then bring peace offerings to the Lord , the burnt offering , the burnt offering , and all the utensils on the altar .
GOLD:	Then you will be pleased with sacrifices offered in the right spirit — with burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings.Then bulls will again be sacrificed on your altar .

ID:	519
INPUT:	Jó , tsénít'i' bighą́ą́'dóó yish'į́ , índa yílk'id bighą́ą́'dóó yish'į́ ; jó , t'áá sahdii kééhat'į́ , áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó doo bił ólta' da .
PRED:	Look , I am in the rock , and I will see the mountains of the earth , for I am giving you a special possession of your own people .
GOLD:	I see them from the cliff tops ; I watch them from the hills.I see a people who live by themselves , set apart from other nations .

ID:	520
INPUT:	T'áá háiida saad bee hódzą́ yiyíí'įįdígíí éí atíhodi'doolnííł , nidi bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yidísinígíí bich'į' ni'doolyééł .
PRED:	Those who are wise will be punished , but those who obey your commands will be put to death .
GOLD:	People who despise advice are asking for trouble ; those who respect a command will succeed .

ID:	521
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Éísa ádííniidígíí Ben-héídad yi'iilaago siláo dah deínéehii bindanit'a'í éí Ízrel bikin hadaas'áágóó Áíjan áádóó Dan áádóó Éíbel-beth-méíyakah índa Kí<unk> dahoolyéégóó t'áá át'é áádóó Náftalai dine'é bikéyah t'áá át'é yich'į' ayiis'a'go yik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	Then King Asa sent his army to attack the towns of Israel and conquered them , along with all the towns of Naphtali . He also captured the towns of Naphtali , and all the towns of Naphtali .
GOLD:	Ben-hadad agreed to King Asa 's request and sent the commanders of his army to attack the towns of Israel . They conquered the towns of Ijon , Dan , Abel-beth-maacah , and all Kinnereth , and all the land of Naphtali .

ID:	522
INPUT:	Áko Abáíyathar éí David bił hojoolne'go ájíní , Saul éí Bóhólníihii binááda'iiłniihii neistseed .
PRED:	Then Abiathar told David , “ Lord has killed Saul ! ”
GOLD:	When he told David that Saul had killed the priests of the Lord ,

ID:	523
INPUT:	Ákohgo t'ahdii ahił hojilne'go áádóó baa níjít'į́įgo , nít'éé' Jesus t'áá bí hwíighahgi yiizį' , áádóó bił nihijíkai .
PRED:	As soon as they were speaking , they stood up and stood beside Jesus . As they stood beside him , they stood beside him .
GOLD:	As they talked and discussed these things , Jesus himself suddenly came and began walking with them .

ID:	524
INPUT:	Ábner áádóó diné yił naakaígíí t'áá bił tł'éé' bíighah Árabah dzígaigóó bił jookahgo Jórdan tooh ha'naa nijíkaigo <unk> nahós'a'góó ch'íjíkaigo Méíhanéíyim kin shijaa'jį' nijíkai .
PRED:	When Abner and his men arrived at the Jordan River , they went out to the Jordan River to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	All that night Abner and his men retreated through the Jordan Valley . They crossed the Jordan River , traveling all through the morning , and did n't stop until they arrived at Mahanaim .

ID:	525
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasinii bił haz'áanii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii bidań'dítį́įhgo ádadoohłíiłgo ts'ídá aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ání góne' nidadooh'ááł .
PRED:	Place the Ark of the Covenant with the terms of the Covenant , which you have written in the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	“ Then put the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on top of the Ark of the Covenant inside the Most Holy Place .

ID:	526
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus díidíígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go áhodííniid , T'áadoo nił yé'í ; t'óó iinídlą́ągo shaa dzíínílí , áko náábidi'doodlááł .
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid of him ! ” And he said , “ Do n't believe me . ”
GOLD:	But when Jesus heard what had happened , he said to Jairus , “ Do n't be afraid . Just have faith , and she will be healed . ”

ID:	527
INPUT:	Éí bąągo nihiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii ts'ídá t'áá ákóne' át'éhígi át'éego , nihí ałdó' ts'ídá t'áá ákóne' ádanoht'ée le' .
PRED:	And may the Father of heaven be done in heaven , just as you say .
GOLD:	But you are to be perfect , even as your Father in heaven is perfect .

ID:	528
INPUT:	áádóó dé'éyóní nilíinii niyódí ádił haididoolbį́į́ł , áádóó bik'é nishínílnishii dé'éyóní bighan góne' yanáa'áa doo ;
PRED:	“ You will fill your blood with your finger , and you will fill your homes with all foreigners living in your homes .
GOLD:	Strangers will consume your wealth , and someone else will enjoy the fruit of your labor .

ID:	529
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é ałníí'dóó bíí' silį́'ígíí éí daho'disnáanii ashdladiin jiníjaa'go hatahdóó t'áá dajíłá'ígo áádóó da'alį́'ígíí ashdladiin níjaa'go bitahdóó t'áá daałá'ígo éí Mózes ats'áyiiznilgo Líívai dine'é danilíinii Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzinii yaa ádahalyánígíí yeinínil . Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniidígíí yik'ehgo ádzaa .
PRED:	So the rest of the tribe of Israel was taken from one piece of twelve tribes . So Moses put them in charge of the Tabernacle , just as the Lord had commanded Moses . So Moses gave them all the Levites to the Levites .
GOLD:	From the half-share given to the people , Moses took one of every fifty prisoners and animals and gave them to the Levites , who maintained the Lord 's Tabernacle . All this was done as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	530
INPUT:	Bikáá' nááda'jiiłniihígóó índa eda'alyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáhígóó , dah daask'id t' áá ałtso bighą́ą́'góó índa dziłghą́ą'di t'áá ałtsogóó , tsin dootł'izh naazkaadii t'áá át'é dabiyaagóó índa chéch'il díłch'ilgo naazkaadii t'áá ałtso biyaagóó áádóó eda'alyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáhígíí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii t'áá háádę́ę́' shį́į́ bich' į' nááda'jiiłniihgo nahaz'ánígóó hodine'é nidaaztseedii naazhjée'go daołtsą́ągo Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	When they see their idols , they will worship idols and worship idols on the mountains and hills , they will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , a tree , a tree of wood , a tree , a tree of wood , and a tree .
GOLD:	They will know that I am the Lord when their dead lie scattered among their idols and altars on every hill and mountain and under every green tree and every great shade tree — the places where they offered sacrifices to their idols .

ID:	531
INPUT:	Doo yá'áshóonii nahjį' nidizhní'ą́ągo éí t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii be'atiin azdoolkǫ'góó joogáał dooleeł ; diné ádaa áhályą́ągo yigáałii éí bii' sizíinii as'ah naagháago áyósin .
PRED:	The wicked will cut off the path of the wicked , and a fool goes out to death .
GOLD:	The path of the virtuous leads away from evil ; whoever follows that path is safe .

ID:	532
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago dízdiin yiską́ągo Nóah éí tsinaa'eeł bitsésǫ' ájiilaii ąą ájiilaago
PRED:	When Noah opened the boat , he opened the boat and opened the surface of the stars .
GOLD:	After another forty days , Noah opened the window he had made in the boat

ID:	533
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Jórdan tooh ha'naa Kéínan kéyah góne' oonáago
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel :
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : When you cross the Jordan River into the land of Canaan ,

ID:	534
INPUT:	Díí éí baa naahkai doo : t'ááłá'í nootínígo bił kéédahoht'íinii saad t'áá aaníinii bee bił ałch'į' yádaałti' ; nihił yah ada'iiztiingi t'áá aaníinii índa k'é hwiindzin bee nidahodiyoh'aah ;
PRED:	Give all these instructions to each other : Love each other with the truth and peace . Pray to the truth and peace .
GOLD:	But this is what you must do : Tell the truth to each other . Render verdicts in your courts that are just and that lead to peace .

ID:	535
INPUT:	Na'iis<unk> dóó ch'éédzídzidígi át'éego , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díldzíiłgo ana'í ádanóolninii dadíí'įį ł .
PRED:	Do n't let them go out into the presence of the Lord , and let them stand in front of your enemies .
GOLD:	When you arise , O Lord , you will laugh at their silly ideasas a person laughs at dreams in the morning .

ID:	536
INPUT:	Nikin bii' sohodizin yidahodeeznilgo adeideesk'ą́ą́' ; nízhi' bee wójíigo si'ą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę ahiih nídayiiskaadgo doo hodiyingóó ádahoolaa .
PRED:	He burned the Temple of the Temple , where he burned the pagan shrines and burned them in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	They burned your sanctuary to the ground.They defiled the place that bears your name .

ID:	537
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Mózes kóyidííniid , éí Dził Sáínai honoojíidi naaki náhááh góne' átsé nídízídígíí binih íídą́ą́' Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ééjí'náago kóní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ On the third year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the month .
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai . In the first month of that year he said ,

ID:	538
INPUT:	Ákohgo David éí Jánathan ábijiní , Nizhé'é t'áá na'níle'dii nich'į' haadzíi'goshą' , éí háí shił hodoolnih ?
PRED:	Then Jonathan said to Jonathan , “ What is your father ? Who will tell me what I do ? ”
GOLD:	Then David asked , “ How will I know whether or not your father is angry ? ”

ID:	539
INPUT:	Áko nihitahgi doo ła'da bahojoobá'í da doo , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii kéyah nihíí' dadooleełgo nihaidiní'ánígíí biyi' Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone be poor among you , for the Lord your God is giving you the land he has given you .
GOLD:	“ There should be no poor among you , for the Lord your God will greatly bless you in the land he is giving you as a special possession .

ID:	540
INPUT:	T'áá shizááká nisébaa' , ałtso yiishtee' , na'nitin woodláanii ts'ídá t'áá ákót'éego íínísingo ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	“ My enemies have rebelled against me , but now my life is still useless .
GOLD:	I have fought the good fight , I have finished the race , and I have remained faithful .

ID:	541
INPUT:	Béégashii yáázh be'elyaii ałdó' aláahgo naat'áanii ayóó át'éii baa dooltééł biniyé Asíriya kéyahgóó eeltį́į doo , áko Íífreiyim t'óó ádaa yánídzin doo , índa Ízrel t'áá bí kót'éego daaníinii bił baa yáhodoosįįł ?
PRED:	“ Oh , the king of Assyria will return to the land of Assyria , so why should I go to Assyria ? ”
GOLD:	This idol will be carted away to Assyria , a gift to the great king there.Ephraim will be ridiculed and Israel will be shamed , because its people have trusted in this idol .

ID:	542
INPUT:	Éí bąą bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , díí aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké ałtso naaztseed , ha'níigo nijeehwiit'aahígíí t'áadoo yinídlą́ągo ni'diił'áhí ; jó , Ámnan t'éiyá bi'diisyį́ .
PRED:	“ But now , my lord the king , ” the king told him . “ That is why Amnon has been killed . ”
GOLD:	No , my lord the king , your sons are n't all dead ! It was only Amnon . ”

ID:	543
INPUT:	T'áá háiida daz'diits'a'ii Níłch'i Diyinii éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii kwííłníigo yee yił halne'ígíí háni'dii dajíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Holy Spirit . Anyone with ears to the churches .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches .

ID:	544
INPUT:	Tsé nástł'inígíí diyingo nideideez'ą́
PRED:	The foundations of the Temple
GOLD:	Dedication of Jerusalem 's Wall

ID:	545
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Ha'át'íísh biniyé náshiinikąąh ? Ízrel dine'é , Bíni'dii náásgóó wohnééł , bidiní .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you looking for me ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you crying out to me ? Tell the people to get moving !

ID:	546
INPUT:	Nidi bee nitsíníkeesii ná dadidiits'į́į́ł daniidzin , háálá díí nahadlá bee ałts'á'áldah ha'nínígíí t'áá ałtsogóó dooda daha'níigo bee yádaati'go nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	But when you pray , you will hear what you have said , for you have seen everything you have seen .
GOLD:	But we want to hear what you believe , for the only thing we know about this movement is that it is denounced everywhere . ”

ID:	547
INPUT:	Nááshidi'yoolnihígíí koshídę́ę́' hoolzhish ; dadeestsaałii baa hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	The time is coming for me , and my life is near .
GOLD:	As for me , my life has already been poured out as an offering to God . The time of my death is near .

ID:	548
INPUT:	Áko Neiyómii hahastiin yę́ę Elímelek wolyéii ła' diné ayóó át'é at'íinii yik'éí nilį́ ; éí Bó'az wolyé .
PRED:	One of the daughter of Abimelech , the daughter of Abimelech , was the daughter of Boaz .
GOLD:	Now there was a wealthy and influential man in Bethlehem named Boaz , who was a relative of Naomi 's husband , Elimelech .

ID:	549
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee bi'dójíigo yigáłígíí bik'ihojidlíi doo ! Bóhólníihii bikin si'ą́ą́dóó naa dahwii'niih .
PRED:	May the name of the Lord be blessed in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Bless the one who comes in the name of the Lord.We bless you from the house of the Lord .

ID:	550
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , haa nízahdishą' índa nihich'į' nínádííyis ? Ná nidaal'a'í daniidlíinii nihaa a'áhí nídíníídzįįł .
PRED:	O Lord , why are you waiting for us ? You are your servants and your servants .
GOLD:	O Lord , come back to us ! How long will you delay ? Take pity on your servants !

ID:	551
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bá dahwéelzhíísh
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	A Time for Everything

ID:	552
INPUT:	Díí Bóhólníihii bikéyahgi doo náádahojídlǫ́ǫ da dooleeł , nidi Íífreiyim dine'é éí Ííjip kéyahgóó nihéédookah índa Asíriya kéyahgi ch'iyáán dááchǫ'ii deiyą́ą doo .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel will die in Egypt , but the land of Egypt will be filled with food .
GOLD:	You may no longer stay here in the Lord 's land.Instead , you will return to Egypt , and in Assyria you will eat foodthat is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	553
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii bii' áhodoo'niidígíí bik'ehgo hasbídí naakigo , doodago hasbídíłgaii biyázhí naakigo nááhizhdoołnih ałdó' biniyé Jerúsalemgóó hozhníłtį́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave two turtledoves sand two young pigeons to bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So they offered the sacrifice required in the law of the Lord — “ either a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons . ”

ID:	554
INPUT:	<unk> jiiłniihígíí biláahgo t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó doo haada yit'éégóó ájooníiłgo bee Bóhólníihii bił hojíshǫ́ .
PRED:	The Lord gives justice to the godly , and he gives justice to the godly people .
GOLD:	The Lord is more pleased when we do what is right and justthan when we offer him sacrifices .

ID:	555
INPUT:	Ch'il yíl'áagi da'ałchozh doo ; dził<unk> di ch'il yíl'áago éí daabígo ákwii da'ałchozh doo ; ákwii ch'il yíl'áagi náhinoojah doo ; Ízrel dine'é bidził daní'áii bighą́ą́'góó ch'il deíl'áágóó da'ałchozh doo .
PRED:	The mountains will eat the grass in the hill country , where the mountains will lie down in the wilderness . They will lie down in the mountains of Israel .
GOLD:	Yes , I will give them good pastureland on the high hills of Israel . There they will lie down in pleasant places and feed in the lush pastures of the hills .

ID:	556
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí shijéé' góyaa Daniel ahoolghan
PRED:	Daniel 's Vision of a lion
GOLD:	Daniel in the Lions ' Den

ID:	557
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso yá'át'éehgo nihaa yádaałti'go doo hojooba' ájíníi da , háálá ákódanihił'íinii dabizhé'é yę́ę t'áá ákót'éego t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii yaa yádaałti' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And all who are good , for those who do good things are wrong . For they are talking about what their ancestors had done .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you who are praised by the crowds , for their ancestors also praised false prophets .

ID:	558
INPUT:	Júdah dine'éésh t'áá óolyéego yóó'adííní'ą́ ? Nii' sizíiniísh Záíyan yiyíí'įįd ? Ha'át'íísh biniyé nihitaa síníłhaalgo <unk> dasiildááz , áko bee nídeidziih dooígíí ádin ? Bee ach'į' hózhóonii há dadéet'į́į'go naháatą́ , nidi yá'át'éehii doo nihee haleeh da . Yá'át'ééh nídadiidleełígíí biba' naháatą́ą nidi , t'óó nihich'į' nídahodii'nááh !
PRED:	“ Have you abandoned the people of Judah ? Are you going to worship you ? Why are you able to throw you up ? Why are you looking for us ? Do n't you look to us ? ” they cry . “ What sorrow awaits you ! ”
GOLD:	Lord , have you completely rejected Judah ? Do you really hate Jerusalem ? Why have you wounded us past all hope of healing ? We hoped for peace , but no peace came.We hoped for a time of healing , but found only terror .

ID:	559
INPUT:	Áadi kééhojit'į́įgo Hérad yę́ę daaztsą́ . Áko , ShiYe' Ííjipdę́ę́' wóshdę́ę́' ch'ínínááh bidííniid , níigo Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God yá halne'ii biniit'aa yee haadzíi'ii bohoolyaa .
PRED:	So Herod died , and he said to Herod , “ This message from the Lord , the God of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	and they stayed there until Herod 's death . This fulfilled what the Lord had spoken through the prophet : “ I called my Son out of Egypt . ”

ID:	560
INPUT:	Áádóó Éísa éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo táá' náhááh binih Aháíjah biye' Béíyasha éí Térzah kin haal'áagi Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é binazhnit'áago naadiin dį́į́' nááhai .
PRED:	In the third year of Asa 's reign , King Asa of Judah began to rule over Israel in the fourth year of King Asa 's reign in Israel .
GOLD:	Baasha son of Ahijah began to rule over all Israel in the third year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . Baasha reigned in Tirzah twenty-four years .

ID:	561
INPUT:	Nihoodzoh biyi'jígo hasht'ehodít'éego áyósin ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' agháago yá'ádaat'éehii lą'ígo ná áyósin .
PRED:	I want you to enjoy the grain of grain , and you have plenty of grain .
GOLD:	He sends peace across your nationand satisfies your hunger with the finest wheat .

ID:	562
INPUT:	Áko abínígo diné bich'į' yéíłti' , áádóó i'íí'ą́ągo she'asdzą́ą́ daaztsą́ áádóó , Baa nidíínaał , shi'di'níigo bee shich'į' ha'oodzíi'ii hoos'įįdgo baa niséyá .
PRED:	I said to the people , “ I have seen your wife , and you have seen my wife .
GOLD:	So I proclaimed this to the people the next morning , and in the evening my wife died . The next morning I did everything I had been told to do .

ID:	563
INPUT:	Nibee haz'áanii doo baa shił nihoozhǫǫhgóogo éí shich'į' nahwii'náago dasétsą́ą doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	But if I were not in trouble , I would not be paralyzed with joy .
GOLD:	If your instructions had n't sustained me with joy , I would have died in my misery .

ID:	564
INPUT:	Éí , Ííjip dine'é nohłíinii , nihitahgi Féro áádóó bá nidaal'a'í bik'ijį' bee éédahózinii índa t'óó bik'eda'ayóii áyiilaa ni' .
PRED:	And now , you people of Egypt , have performed miraculous signs among Pharaoh and wonders among Pharaoh .
GOLD:	He performed miraculous signs and wonders in Egyptagainst Pharaoh and all his people .

ID:	565
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ábijiní , Díishą' háí bitsiits'iin bik'i si'ą́ , áádóó háísh bízhi' bikáá' ?
PRED:	“ Who is the head of his head ? ” he asked . “ Who is the head of the earth ? ”
GOLD:	he asked , “ Whose picture and title are stamped on it ? ”

ID:	566
INPUT:	éí bijį́įdi hazhó'ó dínóosééł biniyé hasht'einilaa áádóó k'idííníláhígíí ła'a jį́ nizhónígo nooséełgo íinilaa , nidi t'óó báhádzidgo yínííł áde nídíníílt'į́įłgo baa yínííł nanináa doo .
PRED:	You have prepared a little while you have prepared , and now you will be very old when you grow up , you will live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	They may sprout on the day you set them out ; yes , they may blossom on the very morning you plant them , but you will never pick any grapes from them.Your only harvest will be a load of grief and unrelieved pain .

ID:	567
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biyi'dóó doo bits'ą́ą́' yóó'adoo'dił da biniyé ts'ídá alą́ąjį' diné bídahólníhígíí táá' niinínil ; Daniel éí ajítahgo alą́ąjį' hóhólnííh .
PRED:	The king was taken away from the kingdom of the kingdom of the royal palace , and Daniel was taken into the Three .
GOLD:	The king also chose Daniel and two others as administrators to supervise the high officers and protect the king 's interests .

ID:	568
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iidzííhjí náádahaniihii
PRED:	Offerings for the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Procedures for the Sin Offering

ID:	569
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Christ t'áágééd dahinohnáago Ízrel dine'é doo bídadíínóht'i'góó naałdeeh nít'éé' . Diyin God bił aha'deet'ą́ yee nihoní'áanii doo nihídéét'i' da nít'éé' . Ił chohoo'į́ nihee ádingo Diyin God t'áágééd kééhoht'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę béédaałniih .
PRED:	And when you were living in Christ , you would not be deceived by the people of Israel . For God had made us a covenant with the people of Israel , for you have never been forgotten .
GOLD:	In those days you were living apart from Christ . You were excluded from citizenship among the people of Israel , and you did not know the covenant promises God had made to them . You lived in this world without God and without hope .

ID:	570
INPUT:	Diné nabóhonitaahgo ha'ólnínígíí bik'ihojidlí , háálá na'íhonitaah bik'esdeesdlį́į'go bééhoozingo iináájí naat'á ch'ah Diyin God haididoo'ááł , éí Bóhólníihii ayóó'ádabó'níinii bíí' dooleełgo yee yich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	May God be merciful to us , for he has given us victory over the cross of the earth , for he has given them the crown of the Lord , the God of his people .
GOLD:	God blesses those who patiently endure testing and temptation . Afterward they will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love him .

ID:	571
INPUT:	Nidi Neiyómii hazháá'áád nidilt'éhígíí ábijiní , Nílááh , nihimá bighangóó nídóht'aash . Shí áádóó ádajídinígíí nihaa jiinohba' yę́ęgi át'éego Bóhólníihii nihił hólǫ́ǫgo nihaa jooba' doo .
PRED:	But Naomi said to her daughter-in-law , “ Go back to your mother , ” she said . “ Go back to the home of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But on the way , Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law , “ Go back to your mothers ' homes . And may the Lord reward you for your kindness to your husbands and to me .

ID:	572
INPUT:	Áko ánáázhdoo'niid , Shinanit'a'í nílíinii , ha'át'íishą' biniyé ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo shikéé' nahídá ? Haashą' yisdzaa ? Ha'át'íí doo yá'áshóonii shį́įshą' baa niséyá ?
PRED:	“ Oh , my lord , my servant ? ” he asked . “ What did I have done ? Why did I have done evil ? ”
GOLD:	Why are you chasing me ? What have I done ? What is my crime ?

ID:	573
INPUT:	T'áadoo aa nídaaht'íní , áko nihí ałdó' doo nihaa nídahódóot'įįł da ; t'áadoo át'éégóó t'áadoo diné bá hadahohdziihí , áko nihí ałdó' t'áadoo át'éégóó diné doo nihá hadadoodzih da ; bąąhági át'éii ahá yóó'adahidoh'aah , áko nihí ałdó' nihibąąhági át'éii nihá yóó'adahididoot'ááł ;
PRED:	Do n't let anyone condemn you , ” he said . “ Do n't let anyone condemn you , and do n't let anyone be forgiven . He will forgive us , and he will forgive us . ”
GOLD:	“ Do not judge others , and you will not be judged . Do not condemn others , or it will all come back against you . Forgive others , and you will be forgiven .

ID:	574
INPUT:	Nidi doo dadoohts'į́į́hgóogo nihi'áshodahódli'ígíí biniinaa shii' sizíinii nidahont'ingóó yicha doo , áádóó Bóhólníihii bidibé naakaii bidisnáago yóó'abidoojaa'ígíí biniinaa shinák'eeshto' t'áá íiyisí náálį́įgo yishcha doo .
PRED:	But if you hear the prayers of the wicked , I will weep and weeping and weeping and weeping .
GOLD:	And if you still refuse to listen , I will weep alone because of your pride.My eyes will overflow with tears , because the Lord 's flock will be led away into exile .

ID:	575
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bich'į' ádił asisziihígíí biniinaa yee hashkéii yee atíshiilaajį' ha'ííníshníi doo , índa shá na'ak'íyáłti'go bee ádąąh dahosist'ánígíí shá yá'át'ééh neheleeh ; adinídíinjį' shił nidoo'ashgo bit'áá ákogi át'éii yideestsééł .
PRED:	I am the Lord , who has made me innocent , and I will be ashamed of my people . I will see what I am saying , and I will see what is right .
GOLD:	I will be patient as the Lord punishes me , for I have sinned against him.But after that , he will take up my caseand give me justice for all I have suffered from my enemies.The Lord will bring me into the light , and I will see his righteousness .

ID:	576
INPUT:	Nihił dahółánígíí nahjį' kódabi'dólne' laanaa nisin !
PRED:	May all who fear him be put to shame .
GOLD:	I just wish that those troublemakers who want to mutilate you by circumcision would mutilate themselves .

ID:	577
INPUT:	Díí kin bii' sohodizin bibee haz'áanii át'é . Dziłghą́ą'gi kin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí éí t'áá bił áádóó bik'i dinaago haz'ánígíí t'áá sahdii ats'ádeet'ą́ , áádóó t'áá íiyisí hodiyingo haz'ą́ą doo . Díí lą́ą kin bii' sohodizin bibee haz'áanii át'é , jó'akon .
PRED:	This is what happened to the Temple of the Temple of the Lord : “ Look , it is holy and holy to the Temple of the sanctuary . This is the Temple of the Temple . ”
GOLD:	And this is the basic law of the Temple : absolute holiness ! The entire top of the mountain where the Temple is built is holy . Yes , this is the basic law of the Temple .

ID:	578
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God yá naal'a'í baazhníyáago bił hojoolne' . Áko ání , Nílááh , ak'ah naa nahóniihgo nąąh háá'áhígíí niná'ayídlé , áádóó ni áádóó na'áłchíní ak'ah yidziihígíí bee ákidaahdlá .
PRED:	Then God told him , “ Go and tell you what you have done . Go and buy your olive oil and olive oil for you . ”
GOLD:	When she told the man of God what had happened , he said to her , “ Now sell the olive oil and pay your debts , and you and your sons can live on what is left over . ”

ID:	579
INPUT:	Shizhé'é bighangóó nihideesh'nééł t'áá íiyisí bídin nilį́į́ nít'é'ígíí k'ad ákǫ́ǫ́ yínééł , nidi ha'át'íishą' biniyé dinéshchíín shee níní'į́į́' ?
PRED:	I will not go home to my father 's home , but you are very stubborn and rebellious . Why are you looking for me ?
GOLD:	I can understand your feeling that you must go , and your intense longing for your father 's home . But why have you stolen my gods ? ”

ID:	580
INPUT:	Hoł łá'í nohłį́įgo nihąąh nídahineeshgizhígíí éí doo yílá bee nihąąh nídahineeshgizhii át'ée da , nidi ts'ísee k'ehgo bąąhági ádanoht'éhígíí nahjį' kóyiilaago Christ bee nihąąh nídahineeshgizhii át'é .
PRED:	You are not jealous of you , but you are not jealous of God 's sinful nature . You are not like a sin offering to Christ .
GOLD:	When you came to Christ , you were “ circumcised , ” but not by a physical procedure . Christ performed a spiritual circumcision — the cutting away of your sinful nature .

ID:	581
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii atíjíł'íinii índa diné bídahólníihii t'áá ákogi át'éego deíkáahii biniinaa názníłts'ingo doo yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	The righteous will be disturbed by the righteous , and those who do what is right .
GOLD:	It is wrong to punish the godly for being goodor to flog leaders for being honest .

ID:	582
INPUT:	Shí átsé Záíyan ábidideeshniił , Níníł'į́ , níníł'į́ , áko hane' yá'át'éehii yaa halne'ii Jerúsalem baa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	“ I will tell you , ‘ Look , ' says , ‘ I will tell you the Good News . ' ”
GOLD:	I was the first to tell Zion , ‘ Look ! Help is on the way ! ' I will send Jerusalem a messenger with good news .

ID:	583
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí óola naat'á gish yee Esther yich'į' yideeztsih . Áko Esther nízhdii'na'go aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó jiizį' .
PRED:	So the king took the gold and held it up before Esther . So Esther got up and stood before Esther .
GOLD:	Again the king held out the gold scepter to Esther . So she rose and stood before him .

ID:	584
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' t'ááká ła'da yah ooya' lágo ; t'áá hazhó'ó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é ninádaalnishii t'éiyá yah anídaakah doo , háálá éí dadiyin , nidi dine'é t'áá ałtso éí Bóhólníihii bá hada'dzisíid doo .
PRED:	But no one can enter the Temple of the Lord , for no one can enter the sanctuary of the priests and Levites will enter the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Remember , only the priests and Levites on duty may enter the Temple of the Lord , for they are set apart as holy . The rest of the people must obey the Lord 's instructions and stay outside .

ID:	585
INPUT:	Áádóó Biizáliyel bíni' bíighahgo Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii bii' hólǫ́ǫgo hóyą́ągo áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįhgo áádóó bił ééhózingo índa naanish ał'ąą ádaat'éii yiyiichįįhgo áyósin .
PRED:	Then Bezalel made the Spirit of God and the Spirit of God , along with knowledge and understanding .
GOLD:	The Lord has filled Bezalel with the Spirit of God , giving him great wisdom , ability , and expertise in all kinds of crafts .

ID:	586
INPUT:	Áko t'ááłá'í damóo azlį́į'jį' jilą'í bidziilgo hoł aha'didoot'ááł , nidi éí damóo aleehígíí ałníí'góó hoolzhishgo didlidgo nááhániihii índa náá'iiniihígíí áidoosįįł . Áádóó ałtso ábi'didooldįįł nideet'áanii baa hoolzhiizhjį' ni'iiłchǫǫhii éí diyingo haz'ánígi t'áá íiyisí doo haldingóó áhodoolííł .
PRED:	In fact , many will be put to Anointed at the end of the Anointed year of all the grain offerings and grain offerings , which will be rebuilt . Then the priests will be destroyed , and all the priests will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The ruler will make a treaty with the people for a period of one set of seven , but after half this time , he will put an end to the sacrifices and offerings . And as a climax to all his terrible deeds , he will set up a sacrilegious object that causes desecration , until the fate decreed for this defiler is finally poured out on him . ”

ID:	587
INPUT:	Áádóó jó'akon , diné yíl'áhígíí ła' hadoolghaazhgo ání , Na'nitiní , nánooshkąąh , shiye' nilíinii t'áá éí t'éiyá she'a<unk> 'ígíí shá dínííł'įįł ;
PRED:	Some of the crowd shouted , “ Teacher , my son , please come to me , my son . ”
GOLD:	A man in the crowd called out to him , “ Teacher , I beg you to look at my son , my only child .

ID:	588
INPUT:	Tł'oh bee yilzhéhí áádóó bee nihwiildlaadí áádóó tł'oh bee naaljoołí áádóó tsénił índa béégashii bee náníljishí bik'ą́ą́h da'iizhaazhii háádahak'ashgo éí naadiin naaki shékel wolyéii bą́ą́h ílį́ .
PRED:	Your father , barley , barley , barley , barley , and donkeys , and inininininininininininu .
GOLD:	The charges were as follows : a quarter of an ounce of silver for sharpening a plowshare or a pick , and an eighth of an ounce for sharpening an ax or making the point of an ox goad .

ID:	589
INPUT:	Áko ádíshní , Bóhólníihii , ha'át'íishą' baa nideeshaał ? Áko Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíí' , Nídiidáahgo , Damáskasjį' dínááh , baa nidíínaałii biniyé nini'deeltínígíí t'áá ałtso áadi bee nił hodoonih .
PRED:	“ What do you want to do ? ” I asked the Lord . “ Get up to Damascus , ” the Lord said , “ and go to Damascus to Damascus . ”
GOLD:	“ I asked , ‘ What should I do , Lord ? ' “ And the Lord told me , ‘ Get up and go into Damascus , and there you will be told everything you are to do . '

ID:	590
INPUT:	Mózes éí díí bee haz'áanii yee Ízrel dine'é yich'į' hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	These are the instructions regarding the Law of Moses .
GOLD:	This is the body of instruction that Moses presented to the Israelites .

ID:	591
INPUT:	Éí bitsį' doo doodį́įł da ; daaztsą́ągo bits'íís doo bídahididoohnáał da ; éí nihidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	You must not eat any meat or eat it . You must not defile your body .
GOLD:	You may not eat the meat of these animals or even touch their carcasses . They are ceremonially unclean for you .

ID:	592
INPUT:	Ákohgo Íísa éí hazhé'é bizaad jidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yéego bąą háni'go hajííchah , áko hazhé'é ábijiní , Shizhé'é nílíinii , t'áá shǫǫdí shí ałdó' shik'ijiinídliih .
PRED:	When Esau heard his father 's father , Jacob bowed down to the ground and said , “ Please let my father marry me . Please let my father marry me . ”
GOLD:	When Esau heard his father 's words , he let out a loud and bitter cry . “ Oh my father , what about me ? Bless me , too ! ” he begged .

ID:	593
INPUT:	Éfesasgi Apálas hane' yá'át'éehii yaa halne'
PRED:	Paul Preaches in Ephesus
GOLD:	Apollos Instructed at Ephesus

ID:	594
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii t'áá ákogi ájít'éhígíí yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo , áko doo ákwii é'ét'éii baa nijigháago , índa diné t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii doo daaldinii yaa naakaígíí baa nijiyáago , da' éísh diné jiináa doo ? T'áá ákogi ádaat'éii baa nijiyáhígíí doo há bééhodoonih da , háálá hoł nilíinii bik'ijį' dzizlį́į'go índa ádił adzisiihgo ízhdiilyaaígíí t'áá éí biniinaa dazdootsaał .
PRED:	But if the righteous are righteous , what is right and right , then why should the wicked be ashamed of the wicked ? Do n't you realize that the wicked will die , for those who do what is right and right ? ”
GOLD:	However , if righteous people turn from their righteous behavior and start doing sinful things and act like other sinners , should they be allowed to live ? No , of course not ! All their righteous acts will be forgotten , and they will die for their sins .

ID:	595
INPUT:	Bí lą́ą nihaa dahojoobá'ígo ádaniit'éego nihénáálnii' ni' , háálá aa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	He remembered his unfailing love , for he remembered his unfailing love endures forever .
GOLD:	He remembered us in our weakness.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	596
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , níí' nilíinii bitahjį' ał'ąą dine'é anáásą́ągo nidahaazná ; nikin bii' hodílzinii dayííłchǫ' ; Jerúsalem kints'iil ádayiilaa .
PRED:	O God , you have become a desolate nation , O God , and you have destroyed Jerusalem .
GOLD:	O God , pagan nations have conquered your land , your special possession.They have defiled your holy Templeand made Jerusalem a heap of ruins .

ID:	597
INPUT:	Shizhé'é bik'éí bidine'é bitahgóó díínááł , áádę́ę́' shiye' be'asdzą́ą́ dooleełígíí bił nídíít'ash .
PRED:	“ Follow my sister , my sister , and go out to my wife . ”
GOLD:	Go instead to my father 's house , to my relatives , and find a wife there for my son . '

ID:	598
INPUT:	Díí yiziłígíí bee nihá hahodoolzhish ; éí t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh alą́ąjį' nínádízi'ígíí nihá át'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	“ On the first day of the year of the month of the year of the month of the month .
GOLD:	“ From now on , this month will be the first month of the year for you .

ID:	599
INPUT:	Áko Dził Álivz adah góyaa k'adę́ę dashdiigháahgo , t'óó ahayóí bikéé' nidaakaígíí éí ádahooníiłii ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso dayiiłtsánígíí bąą bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dadilwoshgo Diyin God yaa dahaniihgo yaa nídiikai ,
PRED:	As they went to the Mount of Olives , they followed the news of the disciples and shouting , “ The glory of God ! ”
GOLD:	When he reached the place where the road started down the Mount of Olives , all of his followers began to shout and sing as they walked along , praising God for all the wonderful miracles they had seen .

ID:	600
INPUT:	Hágo nihidííniid nít'éé' ; dooda danoozį́į́' ; éí bąą nihich'į' dah didiishnii' nít'éé' ; doo ła' shaa ná'áhodéélt'į́'í da .
PRED:	“ Come to me , ” he said . “ I 'm not a shepherd to me .
GOLD:	“ I called you so often , but you would n't come.I reached out to you , but you paid no attention .

ID:	601
INPUT:	áko áda'ahidoo'niid , Haa'íshą' , díí doo nidahidii<unk> da , nidi háí bíí' dooleeł biniyé yáá'iilt'e' baa nidiikah . Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo kónínígíí bohodoolnííł biniyé ákódzaa : Shi'éé' ałtaadeis'nii' , índa shi'é'ígíí yiniyé yáá'iilt'e' yaa naaskai . Áko siláo ákódáát'įįd .
PRED:	“ Let us tell us , ‘ Let 's go to the cross of the countryside . ' ” And the soldiers said , “ He did n't want to enter the Temple of God and his armor . ” So the soldiers did as they did .
GOLD:	So they said , “ Rather than tearing it apart , let 's throw dice for it. ” This fulfilled the Scripture that says , “ They divided my garments among themselves and threw dice for my clothing. ” So that is what they did .

ID:	602
INPUT:	Áádóó akéédę́ę́' naagháhígíí yaa náánádzáago t'áá ákót'éego yich'į' hanáánáádzíí' , áko nít'éé' , Deeshááł , shizhé'é , dííniid , nidi t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ deeyáa da .
PRED:	Then he returned to his home , and he said to his father , “ I am coming to meet you , but he said , ‘ I 'm not here . ' ”
GOLD:	Then the father told the other son , ‘ You go , ' and he said , ‘ Yes , sir , I will . ' But he did n't go .

ID:	603
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí David áyidííniid , Filístiya dine'é bich'į' hidíídáałgo bił ahidíígą́łígíí doo bíninil'ą́ą da , háálá t'ahdii ashkii nílį́ ; bí éí t'áá ániid naagháádą́ą́' ana'ał'íinii nilį́ .
PRED:	David said to Saul , “ A Philistine Philistine Philistine Philistine army is coming to attack us . He is the son of Jesse , and he is a son of Jesse . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be ridiculous ! ” Saul replied . “ There 's no way you can fight this Philistine and possibly win ! You 're only a boy , and he 's been a man of war since his youth . ”

ID:	604
INPUT:	Diné ła'da doo yá'ádaat'éehii bits'ą́ą́dóó ho'díídee'go łeets'aa' ił nilį́įgo choo'íinii nahojílin doo , diyingo áho'diilyaa doo , índa kin bee bóhólníihii bá chojoo'į́į doo , t'áá ałtsojį' yá'át'ééh ájooníił doo biniyé hasht'eho'diilyaa doo .
PRED:	Those who die will be like a shelter from the sanctuary of the sanctuary of the sanctuary . They will be better off than to live in the house of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	If you keep yourself pure , you will be a special utensil for honorable use . Your life will be clean , and you will be ready for the Master to use you for every good work .

ID:	605
INPUT:	éidí shich'ą́ą́h naazh'áázh , áko doo t'áá shí t'éiyá bich'į' ahééh nisin da , nidi doo Jew dine'é danilíinii da'oodlánígíí áłah nídaadleehgóó t'áá ałtso ałdó' bich'į' ahééh danízin .
PRED:	And I thank you because I am giving thanks to you , but they do n't want to thank the church .
GOLD:	In fact , they once risked their lives for me . I am thankful to them , and so are all the Gentile churches .

ID:	606
INPUT:	Móreshethdóó diné nilíinii Máíkah éí Heziikáíyah Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Júdah dine'é t'áá ałtso yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Dá'ák'ehgóó nihwiildlaadígíí nahalingo Záíyan hoolyéegi nihodiyooldlał , áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áhígíí éiyá t'óó yáádaa'áa dooleeł , áádóó Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ánígi dził éí tsin bee hodíłch'ilgi ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ályaaígíí nahalin dooleeł .
PRED:	In that day King Hezekiah of Judah began to rebuild the Temple of King Hezekiah of Judah . He said , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : A tree of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Judah , and Jerusalem will be rebuilt in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	They said , “ Remember when Micah of Moresheth prophesied during the reign of King Hezekiah of Judah . He told the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Mount Zion will be plowed like an open field ; Jerusalem will be reduced to ruins ! A thicket will grow on the heightswhere the Temple now stands . '

ID:	607
INPUT:	Shą́ą́' , t'ah nihitah naashá yę́ędą́ą́' díí bee nihił dahweeshne' ni' , t'áásh béédaałniih ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you remember what I told you about this time ? ”
GOLD:	Do n't you remember that I told you about all this when I was with you ?

ID:	608
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God éí nihokáá' dine'é t'áá íiyisí ayóó'ájó'níigo bąą haYe' t'ááłá'í há yizhchínígíí baazhníłtį́ , áko t'áá háiida boodlą́ągo baa dzólíhígíí éí doo ádoodįįł da , nidi iiná doo ninít'i'ii bee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	For God loved the world because he loved the Son of God , who lives in him . Anyone who believes in him will never die in eternal life .
GOLD:	“ For this is how God loved the world : He gave his one and only Son , so that everyone who believes in him will not perish but have eternal life .

ID:	609
INPUT:	Łahgo kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii náánáłahjį' ádeididooniił , Soł<unk> 'éi , Bóhólníihii bibee ak'ihojidlíii bídeídíikił , áádóó t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii há deiit'į́į doo ! Shí ałdó' ákǫ́ǫ́ díyá .
PRED:	Those who live in the city will say , ‘ We will say , ‘ Come and let us go to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ! '
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	610
INPUT:	Ła' ahijoolchííł éí hazhé'é dadzódziih áádóó dahamá doo bik'ideijidlíi da .
PRED:	Those who are born to their father and mother will be blessed .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	611
INPUT:	Łah sodizin bá náhoot'aahgóó náánéiikah , nít'éé' ch'ikę́ę́h léi' , naalte' nilį́įgo níłch'i bi'iiníziinii nabiiłáago náásgóó ádahodooníiłii yaa halne' lágo nihidááh níyá , éí yinaalte' nilíinii lą'í yá ní<unk> bįįhgo naagháá lá .
PRED:	One day as Jesus was praying , a woman named a woman named Nicodemus , a woman named him . He said , “ Do n't let us go out to meet the girl in the field . ”
GOLD:	One day as we were going down to the place of prayer , we met a slave girl who had a spirit that enabled her to tell the future . She earned a lot of money for her masters by telling fortunes .

ID:	612
INPUT:	Áko bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní , T'áá háiida bi'éétsoh naaki bee hólónígíí , éí bee ádinígíí ła' baazhdoołtsos , áádóó t'áá háiida ch'iyáán bee hólónígíí ałdó' t'áá ákózhdoonííł .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Anyone who believes in the robe you will eat it , and anyone who eats it . Anyone who eats it will eat it . ”
GOLD:	John replied , “ If you have two shirts , give one to the poor . If you have food , share it with those who are hungry . ”

ID:	613
INPUT:	Ni'iildlaad baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó ná'álkad baa hwiilzhíísh ; adéesyéél baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó yáti' baa hwiilzhíísh .
PRED:	A time to cry and a time to a time and a time to a time .
GOLD:	A time to tear and a time to mend.A time to be quiet and a time to speak .

ID:	614
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii dílzin yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo . Dayiiłtse'ígíí bik'ehgo doo einít'į́į da doo , índa yidiits'a'ii bik'ehgo doo ánihwii'aah da doo ,
PRED:	What sorrow awaits the Lord , and do n't understand what he tells you .
GOLD:	He will delight in obeying the Lord.He will not judge by appearancenor make a decision based on hearsay .

ID:	615
INPUT:	Éí bąą danihoolghalii éí t'áá ałtso dabidi'doolghał . Ni'ana'í t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo yisnááh dadooleeł ; nihighada'iisdláii éí bigháádahidoo'nił . Dandoolghał biniyé nidaniniłchéii éí dadíílghał biniyé naa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	Therefore , all your enemies will be taken away from your enemies , and your enemies will be taken away from your enemies .
GOLD:	“ But all who devour you will be devoured , and all your enemies will be sent into exile.All who plunder you will be plundered , and all who attack you will be attacked .

ID:	616
INPUT:	nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin bich'éédą́ą'gi , Sálaman bichaha'oh góne' Jesus nijighá .
PRED:	When Solomon arrived at the Temple , he was sitting in the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	He was in the Temple , walking through the section known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	617
INPUT:	Ch'ah dijoolí bikáá' átáa'gi tł'óółts'ósí yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí bee bíhidoolchah biniyé bíheestł'ǫ́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	On the top of the cart , he made a long curtain for the Ark of the Lord , just as he had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	They attached the medallion with a blue cord to Aaron 's turban , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	618
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' diné doo yá'ádaashóonii ahíikaigo baa yíkai ; éí Sálaman yę́ę biye' Riihobówam honiyé bidziilgo ída'diilyaa ; íídą́ą́' Riihobówam t'ah ániid naagháago ádíkásti'go doo bohoníłdzil da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But when the wicked arrived at the wicked , Solomon 's son , was very angry with Rehoboam 's son Rehoboam . He was very angry with Rehoboam 's son Rehoboam .
GOLD:	Then a whole gang of scoundrels joined him , defying Solomon 's son Rehoboam when he was young and inexperienced and could not stand up to them .

ID:	619
INPUT:	Shoo , Diyin God naagé nihá nílíinii , ak'ah bik'i yeiniziidgo yínísį́į'ii binii' níníł'į́ !
PRED:	See , O God , you have anointed your anointed king !
GOLD:	O God , look with favor upon the king , our shield ! Show favor to the one you have anointed .

ID:	620
INPUT:	Áádóó k'aa' yee adziiłt'óohgo ana'í tainooskaad ; nída'iil<unk> go bee t'óó bił dahóóląąd .
PRED:	When the arrows tried to capture the arrows , they tried to kill him .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	621
INPUT:	Bik'aa' yee adziiłt'óohgo ana'í tainooskaad ; nída'iil<unk> go áyiilaago yik'ee t'óó bił dahóóląąd .
PRED:	The arrows of the archers tried to capture the arrows of the enemy , and the people were terrified .
GOLD:	He shot his arrows and scattered his enemies ; great bolts of lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	622
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí diné hágo bizhdííniidgo Mízpeh kin shijaa'gi Bóhólníihii bá áłah ájiilaa ,
PRED:	Then Samuel called for Mizpah , and the people gathered at Mizpah at Mizpah .
GOLD:	Later Samuel called all the people of Israel to meet before the Lord at Mizpah .

ID:	623
INPUT:	Dził Lébanan ní'áhídi kéédahoht'íinii , gad tahgóó danihighan ádaohłaii , nihił hahoníígaigo dooládó' nihik'édí hódlǫ́ǫ da doo . Asdzání éí awéé' bídii'na'go bił hahoníígaiígíigi át'éego nił hahodínóogah !
PRED:	O Lebanon , the cedars of Lebanon , the cedars of Lebanon , will be like a young woman in the field , like a woman in the field .
GOLD:	It may be nice to live in a beautiful palacepaneled with wood from the cedars of Lebanon , but soon you will groan with pangs of anguish — anguish like that of a woman in labor .

ID:	624
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Bóhonee'ą́ągo wódahdi yádiłhił bí'néél'ąądgo áádóó bóhonee'ą́ągo nahasdzáán bee niłdzilgo si'áanii naaskáá' ládą́ą́' , áadi índa lą́ą Ízrel dine'é baa nidadziskaii biniinaa ha'áłchíní ałtso yóó'ahideeshkał ni , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And this is what the Lord says : “ As surely as the heavens above the earth , the heavens and the earth will be shaken , but I will forgive your children . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Just as the heavens can not be measuredand the foundations of the earth can not be explored , so I will not consider casting them awayfor the evil they have done.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	625
INPUT:	Danizhé'é yę́ę kéyah bee béédahózin dooleeł biniyé t'áá náshiinídą́'ídi tsé adeiztsih yę́ę doo nahjį' kódadíílíił da .
PRED:	You know that your ancestors did not forget the land you gave to the rest of the ancient boundary .
GOLD:	Do n't cheat your neighbor by moving the ancient boundary markersset up by previous generations .

ID:	626
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii yee ákászaaz , áádóó ts'ídá ba'ahódlíii yee ákászaaz .
PRED:	He himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself .
GOLD:	He will wear righteousness like a beltand truth like an undergarment .

ID:	627
INPUT:	Shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é bida'íínóhsin , áádóó nihiDiyin God bich'į'go dadinohyin doo .
PRED:	Be careful to obey all my commands , and be holy to God .
GOLD:	The tassels will help you remember that you must obey all my commands and be holy to your God .

ID:	628
INPUT:	Melkízedek éí Éíbram yik'ijisdli'
PRED:	Abram Blesses Abram
GOLD:	Melchizedek Blesses Abram

ID:	629
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii t'áá bíni'dii daaztsáanii índa naaldlooshii ałchinii nibiisdláadii bik'ah t'áá ha'át'íhída biniyé chodaoł'į́į doo , nidi ts'ídá t'ááká daoyą́ą́' lágo .
PRED:	“ You must never eat any animal that is ceremonially unclean until the next day . You must never eat any animal .
GOLD:	The fat of an animal found dead or torn to pieces by wild animals must never be eaten , though it may be used for any other purpose .

ID:	630
INPUT:	Asdzání saad hal'į́įgo báháchį'ii bits'ą́ądi honoojíidi kééhojit'į́į́jígo agháago yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	Better to be angry with a woman in the wilderness , but it 's better to live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	It 's better to live alone in the desertthan with a quarrelsome , complaining wife .

ID:	631
INPUT:	Jéíkab dine'é danohłíinii áádóó Ízrel dine'é daohdziihígíí t'áá atsą́ą́dóó nánihidiinilii éí iishch'id biyi'dóó náás nihiníjaa'ii dashíísółts'ą́ą́' :
PRED:	“ Listen to me , O Jacob of Jacob and Jacob , you descendants of Jacob .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , descendants of Jacob , all you who remain in Israel.I have cared for you since you were born.Yes , I carried you before you were born .

ID:	632
INPUT:	Áádóó diné lą'í dabiyi'dę́ę́' níłch'i bi'iiníziinii hahaazhjéé' , éí dadilwoshgo ádaaní , Ni Christ Diyin God biYe' nílį́ ! Nidi Christ jílį́įgo bił béédahózingo bąą dzideeztehgo hadadoodzihígi t'áadoo bee bá hojiił'a' da .
PRED:	Then many men who had been raised from the demons , shouting , “ You are the Son of God ! You know that he is the Son of God 's Son , but we do n't believe him . ”
GOLD:	Many were possessed by demons ; and the demons came out at his command , shouting , “ You are the Son of God ! ” But because they knew he was the Messiah , he rebuked them and refused to let them speak .

ID:	633
INPUT:	Dooládó' bibee éédahózinii ayóó ádaat'ée da áádóó t'óó bik'eda'ayóii ayóó ábóodziil da ; aláahgo bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí hool'áágóó bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ ; éí oochííłdę́ę́' áádóó oochííłgóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	See how many miraculous signs and wonders ! For the Kingdom of God has given him great power and power to generation .
GOLD:	How great are his signs , how powerful his wonders ! His kingdom will last forever , his rule through all generations .

ID:	634
INPUT:	Áádóó díí ha'át'íí shį́į́ dahináanii dį́į'go yiiłtsánígíí t'ááłá'í nítínígo bit'a' dahastą́ągo t'áá naazį́į́ nít'éé' bii'dę́ę' nidi anáá' yee dadilkǫǫh , áko éí t'áadoo dadiiłheełí i'ii'aah áádóó niyiiłkaah kódaaní : Diyin , diyin , diyin , éí Bóhólníihii Diyin God Aláahgo Ayóó'áhóodziilii , hool'áádę́ę́' hojílóonii , k'ad hojílóonii , índa jidoogáałii !
PRED:	When the living beings saw four living beings , the one who had four wings and the wings of the living beings said , “ Come , O Sovereign Lord , and help us ! ” And he said , “ The Lord , the God of your God is coming ! ”
GOLD:	Each of these living beings had six wings , and their wings were covered all over with eyes , inside and out . Day after day and night after night they keep on saying , “ Holy , holy , holy is the Lord God , the Almighty — the one who always was , who is , and who is still to come . ”

ID:	635
INPUT:	Áko ánihidishní , Aheełt'éego nitsídaahkees , ahaa a'ááh danohsin , ałk'isóó danohłį́įgo ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'ní , nihá ádahwiinít'į́'ígo , índa a'ohgo ádaa nitsídaahkees .
PRED:	And I tell you , dear brothers and sisters , be merciful to your fellow believers . Love your love and love .
GOLD:	Finally , all of you should be of one mind . Sympathize with each other . Love each other as brothers and sisters . Be tenderhearted , and keep a humble attitude .

ID:	636
INPUT:	Áádóó díí naałniihígíí łį́į́' ałdó' baa níłnii' doo ; dzaanéezda , ghą́ą́'ask'idiida , téliida índa ana'í dah deínéhígi naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso ałdó' baa níłnii' doo .
PRED:	It was not a serious horse that had not been sold by the camels , donkeys , donkeys , and all the animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	This same plague will strike the horses , mules , camels , donkeys , and all the other animals in the enemy camps .

ID:	637
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Béíyal-píyor yich'į' dahodeesáá'
PRED:	A Call to Idolatry
GOLD:	Moab Seduces Israel

ID:	638
INPUT:	Jesus éí diné łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ą́ągo néidiisá
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Man on a skin disease .
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	639
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	's Covenant Renewed

ID:	640
INPUT:	Shi'ana'í bidziilii índa shik'ee dadiniihii yits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshííłtį́ , háálá éí shiláahgo ádabóodziil nít'éé' .
PRED:	He rescued me from my enemies ; he rescued me from the Almighty .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	641
INPUT:	éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áá shí nidi nihik'ijį' nishłį́įgo ał'ąą dine'é dabinááł nihiníi'gi atídanihish'į́į doo , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am sending you to face the nations in front of you .
GOLD:	Therefore , I myself , the Sovereign Lord , am now your enemy . I will punish you publicly while all the nations watch .

ID:	642
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóí áłah silį́į'go ch'é'étiinjį' nidi doo hoo'a' da , áko Diyin God bizaad bee bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	A large crowd followed him and told him what God had said .
GOLD:	Soon the house where he was staying was so packed with visitors that there was no more room , even outside the door . While he was preaching God 's word to them ,

ID:	643
INPUT:	Bíni'dii doo da'oo'į́į da dooleeł biniyé bináá' ádaniłdįįh , áádóó t'áá áłahjį' bich'į' nidahwiiłnáanii bik'ijį' dandaaz le' .
PRED:	Let the eyes of their eyes be crushed , and let their eyes fall into trouble .
GOLD:	Let their eyes go blind so they can not see , and let their backs be bent forever . ”

ID:	644
INPUT:	áko éí dashdiiyáago aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bisiláo bindanit'a'í baa hodizhdoo'ááł biniyé bich'į' hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	So he went to the leading priests and the high priest to ask him what he had said .
GOLD:	and he went to the leading priests and captains of the Temple guard to discuss the best way to betray Jesus to them .

ID:	645
INPUT:	Dóola yázhí , doodaii' dibé yázhída éí bits'íís t'áá ha'át'éhígida alááh , doodaii' a'oh níísánígíí éí náádi'yííłnihgo t'áá ni íinínízingo nááhániihii t'éí nááhíłniih doo , nidi ádee háínídzíí'jí nááhániihii át'éego éí doo ná dínóodzįįł da .
PRED:	“ You must not sacrifice a lamb or a lamb or a lamb or a lamb for a burnt offering . You must not offer it to you .
GOLD:	If a bull or lamb has a leg that is too long or too short , it may be offered as a voluntary offering , but it may not be offered to fulfill a vow .

ID:	646
INPUT:	Jó'áko nít'éé' háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' Jesus hashtł'ish áyiilaago ajoo'į́ áhoolaa lá .
PRED:	Then Jesus took the Sabbath day and laid it on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	because it was on the Sabbath that Jesus had made the mud and healed him .

ID:	647
INPUT:	Mó'ab éí shibii' tá'ádísgisí át'é . Íídam bikáa'jį' shikee' ahideeshxą́ą́ł . Filístiya dine'é éí bik'eh díshdlį́į'go hadideeshwosh .
PRED:	“ I will take my feet , ” Moab said , “ and I will shout with my feet . ”
GOLD:	But Moab , my washbasin , will become my servant , and I will wipe my feet on Edomand shout in triumph over Philistia . ”

ID:	648
INPUT:	Yíní'ínígíí áádóó k'ad ádaat'éii índa náásgóó ádahodooníiłii k'ad bee ak'e'íłchí .
PRED:	“ Look , you are coming to see what you are saying , and now I am writing to those who are mature in your presence .
GOLD:	“ Write down what you have seen — both the things that are now happening and the things that will happen .

ID:	649
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh dideeshniił ? Shich'į' haadzíí' áádóó ałdó' shá ádzaa ; shich'į' nahwiisnáá'dóó bik'ijį' hazhóó'ógo yisháał doo .
PRED:	“ Why do you say to me ? Why do you say , ‘ I am like a tree ? '
GOLD:	But what could I say ? For he himself sent this sickness.Now I will walk humbly throughout my yearsbecause of this anguish I have felt .

ID:	650
INPUT:	Ayóogo níyolígíí ííyolgo áyiilaa , áko tó náádadiidáhígíí ádahodiilzee' .
PRED:	He made a wind wind , and the wind stopped the wind with a mighty wind .
GOLD:	He calmed the storm to a whisperand stilled the waves .

ID:	651
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Diné áshłaaígíí shíni' neis'ą́ ; éí bąą diné áádóó naaldlooshii áádóó nidaa'na'ii índa nidaat'a'ii t'áá bił nahasdzáán bikáá' áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ I have made my people , and animals that scurry along the ground . I will destroy the birds of the earth and animals . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ I will wipe this human race I have created from the face of the earth . Yes , and I will destroy every living thing — all the people , the large animals , the small animals that scurry along the ground , and even the birds of the sky . I am sorry I ever made them . ”

ID:	652
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'éii biniinaa atídabi'dil'íinii bik'idahojidlí , háálá yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii daabíí' .
PRED:	God blesses those who are righteous , for he has given justice to the Kingdom of Heaven .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are persecuted for doing right , for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs .

ID:	653
INPUT:	Áádóó diyingo naal'a'í tó bee bóhólnííh nilíinii kóníigo diséts'ą́ą́' , Diyin nílíinii , honílóonii índa hool'áádę́ę́' honílóonii , ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ánít'éego díí bee ánihwiyí'aah .
PRED:	Then I heard the angel of the angel of God , saying , “ I have heard you , O God , and your life is right . ”
GOLD:	And I heard the angel who had authority over all water saying , “ You are just , O Holy One , who is and who always was , because you have sent these judgments .

ID:	654
INPUT:	Háálá dadine'é ayóó ádabóodziilii índa doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą́'góó shikéyah yaatįįh yíná ; náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí biwoo' índa náshdóítsohtsa'ii biwózhah nidahalin .
PRED:	For I am like a lion , a lion , and a lion is like a lion .
GOLD:	A vast army of locusts has invaded my land , a terrible army too numerous to count.Its teeth are like lions ' teeth , its fangs like those of a lioness .

ID:	655
INPUT:	Áko á naal'a'í índa bada'áłchíní alą́ąjį' nizhnínil , índa náá'ákéé' góne' Líyah áádóó ba'áłchíní nináájí'nil , áádóó Réíchel índa Jóseph éí ts'ídá akéédę́ę́' nizhnínil .
PRED:	So they chose Rachel and his servant , along with the oldest sons , Leah , Leah , and Leah . So Rachel took Leah to Rachel .
GOLD:	He put the servant wives and their children at the front , Leah and her children next , and Rachel and Joseph last .

ID:	656
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Zerábabel yeidiní'áanii
PRED:	Zerubbabel Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Promises for Zerubbabel

ID:	657
INPUT:	ádił nida'ayiilzí'ígíí biniinaa aláahgo naat'áanii nihindant'áago ádeinilaaígíí éí kéyah bikáá'góó t'óó ahayóí bá nida'nt'ą' áádóó ałdó' baa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihits'íís índa danihilį́į́' yee ádídahólnííh , áko nihí éí t'áá íiyisí ádił nitsiniikai .
PRED:	“ We have committed many sins because of our sins , and our bodies have been filled with joy . We have been filled with joy and filled with joy . We have been filled with joy and blood .
GOLD:	The lush produce of this land piles up in the hands of the kings whom you have set over us because of our sins . They have power over us and our livestock . We serve them at their pleasure , and we are in great misery . ”

ID:	658
INPUT:	<unk> yim kin haal'áii , Sháíyan kin shijaa' , Anéí<unk> kin shijaa' ,
PRED:	From the tribe of Ephraim , Bethel ,
GOLD:	Hapharaim , Shion , Anaharath ,

ID:	659
INPUT:	Áádóó tó bidáń'dítį́įhgi éí bich'éédą́ą́'góó atiinígi t'áá íiyisí t'ah abíínídą́ą́' ałní'ní'ą́ąjį' diné áádóó asdzání índa ak'idadi'yiitįįhii bich'į' bee haz'áanii bee bik'eda'ashchínígíí jííłta' , áko diné t'áá ałtso éí bee haz'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí wólta'go ts'ídá hazhó'ó deidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	When the gate was filled with the gate , it was written in the gateway on the wall . The women were being read to the people 's people and women and women and women who were listening to the Law of the Law .
GOLD:	He faced the square just inside the Water Gate from early morning until noon and read aloud to everyone who could understand . All the people listened closely to the Book of the Law .

ID:	660
INPUT:	áko Sáíman Peter éí nayé'ágizhgo ííłní , Háishą' baa yáníłti' ? bidiní .
PRED:	Simon Peter replied , “ Who is the one who is speaking to you ? ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter motioned to him to ask , “ Who 's he talking about ? ”

ID:	661
INPUT:	Ákondi díí niye' ałjiłnii yił naaldeehgo ninaalye'é bee hiníná yę́ę ałtso yik'óoyáago nádzáhígíí , t'áá áko béégashii yáázh neesk'ahii bá síníłhį́ !
PRED:	But if you are your son , you are buried in your field , you will have sex with the calf you have sex with your son . ”
GOLD:	Yet when this son of yours comes back after squandering your money on prostitutes , you celebrate by killing the fattened calf ! '

ID:	662
INPUT:	Diyin God iiná yaa bił hózhóonii
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Live to Please God

ID:	663
INPUT:	Háálá kéyah bikáá' t'áá át'éé bee yíłhéél , áko kéyah bikáa'gi nílótsoh éí nanise' áádóó tsin naazkaadii bineest'ą' yi'oh niinítseedígíí ałtso dayííyą́ą́' , índa Ííjip kéyah bikáá' t'áá át'éé nít'éé' ch'il áádóó tsin naazkaadii índa nanise' daditłée'ii doo ła' yidzíi' da .
PRED:	For the land of Egypt spread throughout the land of Egypt , and the trees of Egypt ate the trees of the trees and trees that had never been planted in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	For the locusts covered the whole country and darkened the land . They devoured every plant in the fields and all the fruit on the trees that had survived the hailstorm . Not a single leaf was left on the trees and plants throughout the land of Egypt .

ID:	664
INPUT:	Ak'is , doodaléi' alah nilíinii ła' bik'i ni'iizt'óodgo áádóó ch'iyáán bee ádingo ,
PRED:	“ If a friend 's sister has been sold , or if he has no food ,
GOLD:	Suppose you see a brother or sister who has no food or clothing ,

ID:	665
INPUT:	Áádóó tálent t'ááłá'í ba'ít'ánígíí ałdó' níyáago ádííniid , Shinanit'a'í , nééhasingo diné hashkéii nílį́ , háálá t'áadoo k'éé'dídléehgi ná'ígish , áádóó t'áadoo ná'oołch'ihgi hééł áná'iil'įįh ,
PRED:	Then one of the servant came to the king and said , “ My master , do n't eat any crops from your crops , and you will plant crops .
GOLD:	“ Then the servant with the one bag of silver came and said , ‘ Master , I knew you were a harsh man , harvesting crops you did n't plant and gathering crops you did n't cultivate .

ID:	666
INPUT:	<unk> nas , éí Christ bá bił nideiilnishii , áádóó <unk> <unk> ayóó'óósh'níinii shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	Give us the gift of Christ , and we are my greetings to the Messiah .
GOLD:	Greet Urbanus , our co-worker in Christ , and my dear friend Stachys .

ID:	667
INPUT:	Jó'akonee' déédadołjahii t'áá ánółtso éí honooyééł nihinídaazt'i'ii danohłíinii , didadoołjé'ígíí biih hohkááh áádóó honooyééł biyi' naanídeínóhkááh . Díí shits'ą́ą́dóó nihee dahodooleeł ; yínííł bik'ee shoojée' doo .
PRED:	So I will tell you everything you have done , and you will die in the wilderness . You will die in the wilderness , and you will die .
GOLD:	But watch out , you who live in your own lightand warm yourselves by your own fires.This is the reward you will receive from me : You will soon fall down in great torment .

ID:	668
INPUT:	Manáseh éí Íífreiyim yik'ijį' nilį́į doo ; Íífreiyim éí Manáseh yik'ijį' nilį́į doo , áádóó t'áá ła' bizhi'ee Júdah dine'é yik'ijį' nídidoot'ash . Azhą́ díí t'áá ałtsojį' kóhoolaa nidi , t'ah hach'į' báháchį'go hak'ijį' k'ídées'nii' .
PRED:	Manasseh will be his people , Manasseh , and Manasseh will be his fist against Judah . He will strike his fist against the people of Judah , even though he is still poised to strike the ground .
GOLD:	Manasseh will feed on Ephraim , Ephraim will feed on Manasseh , and both will devour Judah.But even then the Lord 's anger will not be satisfied.His fist is still poised to strike .

ID:	669
INPUT:	Niníbaal si'ą́ągi hótsaago ánílééh áádóó ła' t'áadoodaaí bíni'dii kééhwiit'į́įgi dáádadeezbaalii deidiłts'ǫǫd ; niníbaal bitł'óól nineezgo ádanile'go índa bá anídaalkałígíí niłdzilgo adaniłkaał .
PRED:	“ Take an end of the tent and broken it . Let it be broken into the dust of the earth , and its strength is broken .
GOLD:	“ Enlarge your house ; build an addition.Spread out your home , and spare no expense !

ID:	670
INPUT:	Ákót'éego sodadołzingo Diyin God Yisdánihiiníiłii bił yá'át'ééh índa bił hóshǫ́ .
PRED:	Pray that God is good to us , and he has given you good things .
GOLD:	This is good and pleases God our Savior ,

ID:	671
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin haal'áagi asdzání ła' , bąąhági ááníiłii nilį́įgo , Férisii bighan góne' dzizdáago ajiyą́ągo bił bééhoozin , áko tózis tsé alabáster yolyéhígíí bee ályaago ak'ah yee yah ayíí'ą́ ,
PRED:	One day a woman named Jesus at the town of religious law and was sitting in the house of the Pharisees . And while he was wearing a beautiful robe in the house of the man ,
GOLD:	When a certain immoral woman from that city heard he was eating there , she brought a beautiful alabaster jar filled with expensive perfume .

ID:	672
INPUT:	Áádóó Ish-bósheth yę́ę bitsiits'iin éí Hííbran kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii David yeiní'ą́ągo áyidííniid , Shoo , ni'ana'í Saul yę́ę éí ni'niiłhį́ yę́ę biye' Ish-bósheth kǫ́ǫ́ bitsiits'iin . Saul yę́ę áádóó ba'áłchíní éí Bóhólníihii díí jį́ aláahgo naat'áanii bóhonishníihii yá k'éidiidlaa .
PRED:	One day Saul 's head , and he said to David , “ Look , I am the one of Saul 's enemies ! I am the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	When they arrived at Hebron , they presented Ishbosheth 's head to David . “ Look ! ” they exclaimed to the king . “ Here is the head of Ishbosheth , the son of your enemy Saul who tried to kill you . Today the Lord has given my lord the king revenge on Saul and his entire family ! ”

ID:	673
INPUT:	Áko díí t'áá ákwíí jį́ didlidgo náá'iiniihii át'é ; éí Dził Sáínaidi bee nihoot'áanii éí łikání halchingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániih doo biniyé át'é .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord at Mount Sinai . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	This is the regular burnt offering instituted at Mount Sinai as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	674
INPUT:	Áádóó Bábilandóó dine'é éí eda'alyaii Sá<unk> nath wolyéii ádayiilaa , <unk> hahdóó dine'é éí eda'alyaii Néí<unk> wolyéii ádayiilaa , índa Héímathdóó dine'é éí eda'alyaii Asháíma wolyéii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He made the people of Babylon who made the idols of Succoth . He made the people known as far as the citizens of Babylon . He also built an ambush for the territory of Hamath and the territory of Hamath .
GOLD:	Those from Babylon worshiped idols of their god Succoth-benoth . Those from Cuthah worshiped their god Nergal . And those from Hamath worshiped Ashima .

ID:	675
INPUT:	Nidi Béílam haadzíi'go Béílak ííłní , Shą́ą́' nił hweeshne'go ádíshní , Bóhólníihii ánínígíí t'éiyá t'áá át'é bi'deeshłííł , dishníi ni' ?
PRED:	But Balaam told Balak , “ Do n't you understand what the Lord has done ? ”
GOLD:	But Balaam replied to Balak , “ Did n't I tell you that I can do only what the Lord tells me ? ”

ID:	676
INPUT:	Áko ánááhodoo'niid , Ni'jį' aniłt'e' . Ákohgo ni'jį' ajííłt'e' , nít'éé' tł'iish silį́į'go bits'ą́ąjį' Mózes yáájiiltáál .
PRED:	Then he called out to him , “ If you were thrown into the morning , it was from the snake . ” So Moses called the snake .
GOLD:	“ Throw it down on the ground , ” the Lord told him . So Moses threw down the staff , and it turned into a snake ! Moses jumped back .

ID:	677
INPUT:	Jó , diné doo yá'áshóonii bijéí yee adánoolníinii yee ádaa ha'niih , áádóó diné bił adáá háníinii yik'ijidlí ; Bóhólníihii éí yijoołxá .
PRED:	The wicked are a stubborn heart , but the heart of the Lord hates the proud .
GOLD:	For they brag about their evil desires ; they praise the greedy and curse the Lord .

ID:	678
INPUT:	Shaa yisínínah áádóó wooch'ííd t'éiyá baa dzíínílíhígíí biniinaa kóníłtsogo lą́ą bee atí'él'íinii shits'ą́ą́dóó nik'i hwiidooleeł ni .
PRED:	Do n't let me tell you what I am telling you about .
GOLD:	This is your allotment , the portion I have assigned to you , ” says the Lord , “ for you have forgotten me , putting your trust in false gods .

ID:	679
INPUT:	áyidííniid , Diné t'áá ádzaagóó neinitingo yóó'ayii'éésh dadohníigo díí diné bił shaa noohkai , áko nihinááł nabídééłkid . Jó akonee' , díí diné bik'i dahodooh'aahígíí bąąhági át'éii bąąh ádingo shił bééhoozin ;
PRED:	Then he said to the people , “ Get up and teach me what you have done . You know what you have done to me , and you will know what I am doing . ”
GOLD:	and he announced his verdict . “ You brought this man to me , accusing him of leading a revolt . I have examined him thoroughly on this point in your presence and find him innocent .

ID:	680
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ła' Diyin God bił ałgha'disht'áah doo jinízingot'ááłáhídi míildi bízneeztą́ą' nidi , t'ááłáhídi bich'į' t'ą́ą́' háázhdoodzihígíí doo bízhneel'ą́ą da .
PRED:	No one can argue with God 's people , but no one can escape from them .
GOLD:	If someone wanted to take God to court , would it be possible to answer him even once in a thousand times ?

ID:	681
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ah abíínídą́ą́' nídahidiijéé' , áko jį́honaa'éí tó yik'i'diiłdíingo éí Mó'ab dine'é náwónanídę́ę́' tó diłgi át'éego łichíi'go dayiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	As soon as the sun was on the sun , the sun covered the sun , and it covered it with a flood .
GOLD:	But when they got up the next morning , the sun was shining across the water , making it appear red to the Moabites — like blood .

ID:	682
INPUT:	Nidi ádadííniid , Nahjį' t'ą́'ájį' yiizįįh ! T'óó kónígháníjį' kééhat'į́ yiniyé níyáhígíí ánihwii'aahii í'diilyaa lá ! Ádahodiilníłígíí biláahgo ádandiilnííł . Áádóó diné éí Lat yich'į' dah diijée'go dáádílkał yik'ijį' dahashjizhgo k'asdą́ą́' dáádílkał k'ídeizti' .
PRED:	But they said to Lot , “ Be quiet ! Be quiet ! ” So Lot said , “ Be quiet ! We are afraid of what you have done . ” So they got up and left the doors of the guard .
GOLD:	“ Stand back ! ” they shouted . “ This fellow came to town as an outsider , and now he 's acting like our judge ! We 'll treat you far worse than those other men ! ” And they lunged toward Lot to break down the door .

ID:	683
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Jó , éí bąą Síízar bíhígíí Síízar baa nídahoh'nííł , áádóó Diyin God bíhígíí Diyin God baa nídahoh'nííł .
PRED:	“ Look , ” he said , “ give it to Caesar , and give it to Caesar . ”
GOLD:	“ Well then , ” he said , “ give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar , and give to God what belongs to God . ”

ID:	684
INPUT:	kójíníigo , Nihílááh , náyónaanídi nihidááhjí kin sinilíjį' doh'aash , ákwii t'áá noo'áázhgóó télii yázhí t'ah doo adiyeehígíí dahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo bik'ídooh'ash , éí k'e'dooh'ałgo nídoohłóós .
PRED:	“ Go and meet him , ” he told him . “ When you enter the wilderness , you will find a young donkey to go into the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	“ Go into that village over there , ” he told them . “ As you enter it , you will see a young donkey tied there that no one has ever ridden . Untie it and bring it here .

ID:	685
INPUT:	Hódzą́ kin niiní'ą́ ; tsosts'idgo bíyah da'nii'áago áyiilaa ;
PRED:	He built seven altars for seven days , and he created them .
GOLD:	Wisdom has built her house ; she has carved its seven columns .

ID:	686
INPUT:	Ábsalam daaztsą́
PRED:	Absalom 's Death
GOLD:	Absalom 's Defeat and Death

ID:	687
INPUT:	Riihobówam náás adideesdéél
PRED:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Shemaiah 's Prophecy

ID:	688
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad , baa nánooshkąąh , ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo shíísíníłts'ą́ą́' ; bááh ádaał ts'íísígíí ła' ná nídiishkaahgo dííyį́į́ł , áko éí bee nidziilgo bikiin náánáádáał doo .
PRED:	Now listen to me , my servant , my servant , and you will eat a basket of bread . Then you will return to your enemies .
GOLD:	Now do what I say , and let me give you a little something to eat so you can regain your strength for the trip back . ”

ID:	689
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii Jííhu éí Jiiháshafat yideezteh
PRED:	Jehu Kills Ahab 's Reign
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat Appoints Judges

ID:	690
INPUT:	Áko éí haigo doo áhodooníił daígíí bíká sodadołzin .
PRED:	Pray that you will never be able to pray .
GOLD:	And pray that your flight will not be in winter .

ID:	691
INPUT:	Ha'áłchíní bizhé'é ádinii danilį́į le' ! Hwe'asdzą́ą́ éí bąąh áhásdįįdii nilį́į le' !
PRED:	May his father be the wife of his father , whose mother is a widow .
GOLD:	May his children become fatherless , and his wife a widow .

ID:	692
INPUT:	Áko Júdah kéyahgi Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó dinééh léi' naagháá nít'éé' ; éí Júdah bighandóó nijigháago Líívai dine'é jílį́įgo ákwii t'óó átsééd kééhojit'į́ .
PRED:	He lived in Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem . He lived in Bethlehem in Judah and lived in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	One day a young Levite , who had been living in Bethlehem in Judah , arrived in that area .

ID:	693
INPUT:	Áko Bíyer-shííbagóó náájí'ná .
PRED:	Then they returned to Beersheba .
GOLD:	From there Isaac moved to Beersheba ,

ID:	694
INPUT:	Dinéshą' ha'át'íí át'éego ba'át'e' ádin doo , índa bi'dizhchį́įgo t'áá ákogi át'ée doo ?
PRED:	“ Why do you have no children ? How can he be born ?
GOLD:	Can any mortal be pure ? Can anyone born of a woman be just ?

ID:	695
INPUT:	Áko Léíkish kin haal'áádę́ę́' Jáshowa dah diiyáago Églan kin haal'áajį' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso hoł yíkaigo kin haal'áii biníjíshzhiizh áádóó bik'i jiijéé' ,
PRED:	So Achish left Lachish and attacked the town of Israel . Then he went out to the town of Israel and attacked it .
GOLD:	Then Joshua and the Israelite army went on to Eglon and attacked it .

ID:	696
INPUT:	éí diyin dabidi'níinii da'ana'í nihináágóó áhą́dígi , doodaii' nízaadi kéédahat'íinii t'áá éí nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́góó kéédahat'íinii dabidiyin ádaat'é .
PRED:	Our enemies are far beyond the Euphrates River , but they live far beyond the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	They might suggest that you worship the gods of peoples who live nearby or who come from the ends of the earth .

ID:	697
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus de ádzaago éí asdzání yik'i nághalgo áyidííniid , Asdzání , nik'i dahodii'ah yę́ęshą' háájí ? Da' dinéésh doo ła' atínidi'doolníiłgo yee ná haadzíi' da ?
PRED:	Jesus looked up and said to the woman , “ Where are a woman ? ” And he asked , “ Is n't it a man like a woman ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus stood up again and said to the woman , “ Where are your accusers ? Did n't even one of them condemn you ? ”

ID:	698
INPUT:	Jó , kót'éego baa hane' , Diyin God iiná doo ninít'i'ii nihaidiní'ą́ , éí iinánígíí haYe' bii' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For God has given him eternal life , and he has given life to eternal life .
GOLD:	And this is what God has testified : He has given us eternal life , and this life is in his Son .

ID:	699
INPUT:	Háálá ts'ísee k'ehgo át'éii be'adáhonooni' éí Níłch'i Diyinii yik'ijį' naaldzil , t'áá ákót'éego ałdó' Níłch'i Diyinii éí ts'ísee k'ehgo át'éii yik'ijį' naaldzil , áko díí kót'éego ałts'ą́ą́jí nidlį́įgo baa nideeshaał danohsinii doo bídeínóhhah da dooleeł .
PRED:	For the Spirit gives you sinful nature to do what is right in the wilderness , so that you can not do what is right in the wilderness . And if you do what is right , you will do .
GOLD:	The sinful nature wants to do evil , which is just the opposite of what the Spirit wants . And the Spirit gives us desires that are the opposite of what the sinful nature desires . These two forces are constantly fighting each other , so you are not free to carry out your good intentions .

ID:	700
INPUT:	Nidi ázhdidooniił , Ánihidishní , Nidaahkaidę́ę́' doo shił bééhózin da . Bąąhági át'éii baa deínóhkáahii t'áá ánółtso , shits'ánóhkááh !
PRED:	But he said , “ I tell you , ‘ You know what is right , and you do n't know what is right .
GOLD:	And he will reply , ‘ I tell you , I do n't know you or where you come from . Get away from me , all you who do evil . '

ID:	701
INPUT:	T'óó kónígháníjį' nááhást'ą́ , éí Lébanan kéyahgi dá'ák'eh bikáá' nida'nt'ą' dooleeł , índa dá'ák'eh bikáá' nida'nt'ą' yę́ę éí tsin bee hodíłch'il doo .
PRED:	“ This is what happened to the Lebanon mountains of Lebanon , Lebanon , and its fruit will produce fruit .
GOLD:	Soon — and it will not be very long — the forests of Lebanon will become a fertile field , and the fertile field will yield bountiful crops .

ID:	702
INPUT:	Áko David ba'áłchíní bee baa ha'niihii índa Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'íinii yee ayóó ádaat'éii éí doo Júdah dine'é biláahgo ayóó ádajít'ée da dooleeł biniyé Júdah dine'é átsé dabiníbaal t'áá bił Bóhólníihii yisdábidoonił .
PRED:	And David 's descendants will be honored in Jerusalem , and the glory of the Lord will save Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will give victory to the rest of Judah first , before Jerusalem , so that the people of Jerusalem and the royal line of David will not have greater honor than the rest of Judah .

ID:	703
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Riihobówam bida'asdzą́ą́ áádóó bida'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní t'áá ałtso éí biláahgo Méíyakah t'áá íiyisí ayóó'áyó'ní , háálá tseebííts'áadah be'asdzą́ą́ áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní éí hastą́diin índa naadiin tseebíí biye'ké áádóó bitsi'ké hastą́diin bá neheezhchį́ .
PRED:	When Rehoboam married Rehoboam 's wives , he became very old , and he had other wives and daughters . He had eight sons and daughters and daughters .
GOLD:	Rehoboam loved Maacah more than any of his other wives and concubines . In all , he had eighteen wives and sixty concubines , and they gave birth to twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters .

ID:	704
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin tsé da'ílíinii índa aa yílyáii bee naashch'ąą'ígíí ła' baa yádajiłti'go hodiizts'ą́ą'go áháłní ,
PRED:	When they heard the Temple of the Temple , he tore his beautiful clothes and beautiful clothes in the Temple . He said ,
GOLD:	Some of his disciples began talking about the majestic stonework of the Temple and the memorial decorations on the walls . But Jesus said ,

ID:	705
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , dííyee' nináałgo t'įįhdígoígíí át'é , nidi ná naal'a'í bighandóó danilíinii náás ahididoolchíłígíí náás hodeeshzhiizhgóó bá bee háínídzíí' , Da' díísh diné bibee é'él'į' bik'ehgo át'é , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ?
PRED:	O Lord your God , do n't be your servant in your household . You are your servant , O Lord , your servant , the God of your ancestors , says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	And now , Sovereign Lord , in addition to everything else , you speak of giving your servant a lasting dynasty ! Do you deal with everyone this way , O Sovereign Lord ?

ID:	706
INPUT:	Áko nihitahgi nihá aląąjį' naazíinii biyahoniishłįįh , háálá shí ałdó' aląąjį' á sézį́ . Shinááł Christ ti'hooznii'go éí baa hashne' , áádóó bee bi'oh adidilyéehii yit'íní dooleełígíí bił ałts'ą́ą́' anisk'iiz doo . Ánihidishní ,
PRED:	So if you have been given to each other , you will be given to each other , for I am telling you what I am giving you the authority of Christ . And if I tell you what I am saying , I will be given to you .
GOLD:	And now , a word to you who are elders in the churches . I , too , am an elder and a witness to the sufferings of Christ . And I , too , will share in his glory when he is revealed to the whole world . As a fellow elder , I appeal to you :

ID:	707
INPUT:	Áko Mózes haa hodiní'ánígíí éí Géed dine'é áádóó Rúben dine'é índa Jóseph biye' Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí éí Ámor dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Sáíhan bee bóhólnííh yę́ę índa Béíshan hahoodzodóó aláahgo naat'áanii Ag bee bóhólnííh yę́ę kéyahgi kin hadaas'áhígíí índa binaagóó kédaayah haidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	So Moses gave them victory over the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and Manasseh son of Manasseh . He gave them victory over the Amorites and the Amorites in the land of the Amorites .
GOLD:	So Moses assigned land to the tribes of Gad , Reuben , and half the tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph . He gave them the territory of King Sihon of the Amorites and the land of King Og of Bashan — the whole land with its cities and surrounding lands .

ID:	708
INPUT:	Hatsiits'iin áádóó hatsii' aghaałgaiigi át'éego łigai , yasígi át'éego łigai , áádóó hanáá' kǫ' dah nídíno'ígíí nahalin ;
PRED:	The white hair like white white white white white white white white hair , like fire .
GOLD:	His head and his hair were white like wool , as white as snow . And his eyes were like flames of fire .

ID:	709
INPUT:	Bitsii' łeezh yik'ídayiighaasgo daachxa índa atíńdadinidleeh ; kódaaníigo hadadeeshghaazh , Héi' ! Héi' ! Ayóó át'éego kin haal'áii jílį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę ákwii táłkáa'di tsinaa'eeł neisnilii t'áá ałtso jit'ínígíí yee da'ast'įįdii ! Éí t'ááłáhídi ahéé'ílkidjį' t'áá ádzaaí dzizlį́į́' !
PRED:	When they cry out to the ground , they cry out to weeping and weeping and cry , “ Oh , how terrible it is a terrible noise for a city ! It is a great city ! ”
GOLD:	And they will weep and throw dust on their heads to show their grief . And they will cry out , “ How terrible , how terrible for that great city ! The shipowners became wealthyby transporting her great wealth on the seas.In a single moment it is all gone . ”

ID:	710
INPUT:	Nihił kééhat'į́į doo ; nihitahgi nihikin hadaas'áagi łahgo náhodii'aah , t'áá bił yá'áhoot'éhígi kééhat'į́įgo ádadoohłííł ; t'áadoo bide ádahwíínóhsiní .
PRED:	“ You will live among you , and you will live in the towns of the town where you live . Do n't be afraid of them .
GOLD:	Let them live among you in any town they choose , and do not oppress them .

ID:	711
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é naanish yídeiniłkadgo ádił nideílníísh .
PRED:	So the people of Israel tried to speak for their sin .
GOLD:	So the Egyptians worked the people of Israel without mercy .

ID:	712
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́į́dą́ą́' Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdgo ádee haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	That day the Lord was angry with this message . He said ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord was very angry with them , and he vowed ,

ID:	713
INPUT:	Ásher dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Náftalai dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	“ Asher will west of the tribe of Asher , west , and west will west .
GOLD:	Naphtali 's land lies south of Asher 's , also extending from east to west .

ID:	714
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá ałtso nich'į' bádahachį'ii ádaa yádadínóozįįł áádóó bíni' dadooląąłgo t'áadoo nídandlíní da doo índa yéego nich'į' nidaaldzilii ádadoodįįł .
PRED:	All who are angry with you will be destroyed , and those who are proud will be destroyed . We will be destroyed and destroyed .
GOLD:	“ See , all your angry enemies lie there , confused and humiliated.Anyone who opposes you will dieand come to nothing .

ID:	715
INPUT:	Ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níigo shídahooł'aahii danohłį́įgo diné t'áá ałtso bił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	And if you love me , you will know that you are my followers .
GOLD:	Your love for one another will prove to the world that you are my disciples . ”

ID:	716
INPUT:	Doo t'áá ákogi áhooníiłii t'áá ałtso bąąhági át'éii ádaat'é , nidi bąąhági át'éii doo biniinaa da'dootsaałii ła' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The righteous will die because of their sins , but those who sin will be forgiven .
GOLD:	All wicked actions are sin , but not every sin leads to death .

ID:	717
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi áhoot'éhígíí bee nił hweeshne' nidi doo yinídlą́ą dago , yá'ąąshdi áhoot'éhígíí bee nił hweeshne'go haash yit'éego áłt'ąą éí yidíídląął ?
PRED:	I told you what I told you about the world , but when you believe in heaven , they asked them what you have done for them ?
GOLD:	But if you do n't believe me when I tell you about earthly things , how can you possibly believe if I tell you about heavenly things ?

ID:	718
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó áhánígo hak'éígíí éí hamáda , hazhé'éda , haye'da , hatsi'da áádóó bił hajíí'áazhda ,
PRED:	He led his sons out of shame , and his sons had sons and daughters .
GOLD:	The only exceptions are his closest relatives — his mother or father , son or daughter , brother ,

ID:	719
INPUT:	Télii éí tádiindi mííldóó ba'aan ashdladi neeznádiin éí bits'ą́ą́dóó Bóhólníihii bich'į' nályéhígíí hastą́diindóó ba'aan t'ááłá'í lá .
PRED:	The donkeys of the camp was 35 donkeys .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys , of which 61 were the Lord 's share ;

ID:	720
INPUT:	Jó nidi kóní , Saad éí níighahgóó hólǫ́ ; nihizálátahdóó índa nihijéí bii' hólǫ́ǫgo bee yádaałti' ; t'áá éí saad woodlą́ągo baa dahwiilne' .
PRED:	But you say , ‘ Look , ' you say , “ and tell us what you have seen . You have told us what you say .
GOLD:	In fact , it says , “ The message is very close at hand ; it is on your lips and in your heart. ” And that message is the very message about faith that we preach :

ID:	721
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God doo hóyą́ą da ílį́į nidi , nihokáá' dine'é yiláahdi hóyą́ , áádóó Diyin God doo bidziil da ílį́į nidi , nihokáá' dine'é yiláahdi ábóodziil .
PRED:	For God is greater than the world , but he is greater than he is greater than the world .
GOLD:	This foolish plan of God is wiser than the wisest of human plans , and God 's weakness is stronger than the greatest of human strength .

ID:	722
INPUT:	kéyahdóó átsé daneest'áanii ałtso áłah ádaahłééh ; éí nihikéyah Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígóó nídaneest'áanii ła' ts'iizis bii' hééł ádadooh<unk> go Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bízhi' dólzin doo biniyé náhodii'áníjį' nidahidoohkááł .
PRED:	“ Get rid of your crops and take the crops of the land the Lord your God is giving you . Do n't be able to destroy the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	put some of the first produce from each crop you harvest into a basket and bring it to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored .

ID:	723
INPUT:	Ats'íís éí anáá' t'éí nilį́įgoshą' ha'át'íísh yee adiits'a' doo ? Ats'íís éí ajaa' t'éí nilį́įgoshą' ha'át'íísh yee ałchin doo ?
PRED:	“ Why ca n't you hear the body ? Why are the body of a body ?
GOLD:	If the whole body were an eye , how would you hear ? Or if your whole body were an ear , how would you smell anything ?

ID:	724
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné bíla' bąąh dah haz'áanii ííłní , K'ídílchííd . Áko k'ídeeshchidgo bíla' t'áá łahjí át'éhígi át' éego hadaałt'é násdlį́į́' .
PRED:	So the man reached his hand and said , “ Get up ! Get up ! ” So the man reached out and grabbed it .
GOLD:	Then he said to the man , “ Hold out your hand. ” So the man held out his hand , and it was restored , just like the other one !

ID:	725
INPUT:	Nihich'ah éí nihitsiinídaazt'i' doo , áádóó kéé' nisoo'eez doo ; doo yínííł naahkai da doo , áádóó doo atíńdadinohdleeh da doo , nidi doo ákwii ádaot'įįdii bił nidadínóołnah áádóó ałch'į' dadinoh'níi doo .
PRED:	You will be buried with your head , and you will never be able to mourn for her . You will be filled with joy , and you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Your heads will remain covered , and your sandals will not be taken off . You will not mourn or weep , but you will waste away because of your sins . You will groan among yourselves for all the evil you have done .

ID:	726
INPUT:	Bee yisdá'iildééh ayóó át'éii
PRED:	Greetings from God
GOLD:	A Warning against Drifting Away

ID:	727
INPUT:	ábizhdííniid , Jéfthah ání , Ízrel dine'é éí Mó'ab kéyahígíí índa Áman dine'é bikéyahígíí t'áadoo bighadeit'ą́ą da ,
PRED:	Then Jephthah said to Jephthah , “ The Israelites have not been divided by the land of Moab and Ammon . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what Jephthah says : Israel did not steal any land from Moab or Ammon .

ID:	728
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bił hózhǫ́ǫ dooleełgo bíká bił chohoo'į́ , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii nayólíii bits'ą́ą́' ádoodįįł .
PRED:	The godly are glad , but those who trust in the wicked are crushed .
GOLD:	The hopes of the godly result in happiness , but the expectations of the wicked come to nothing .

ID:	729
INPUT:	hastóí danilíinii , tsíłkéí danilíinii , ch'ikéida , áłchínída índa sáaniida ałtso nidaałtseed , nidi bítáa'gi da'asdzohii bit'áahjį' dadohkááh yíila' . Shikin bii' sohodizindóó hahodoolzhish . Áko Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígi hastóí danilíinii nidadziłtseedgo baa nízhdiikai .
PRED:	“ Son of man , you women , women , women , women , and women . You must not be put to the Temple of the Lord . You must be put to the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Kill them all — old and young , girls and women and little children . But do not touch anyone with the mark . Begin right here at the Temple. ” So they began by killing the seventy leaders .

ID:	730
INPUT:	Áádóó nááhághą́ąhjį' Her biye' <unk> yah , Jerúsalem ałníí'dóó dinéhígíí yinanit'a'í nilíinii tsé néíztł'in .
PRED:	Next we stood at the top of the guard of the guard , stood at the top of the guard of the guard .
GOLD:	Rephaiah son of Hur , the leader of half the district of Jerusalem , was next to them on the wall .

ID:	731
INPUT:	Áádóó bitsiit'áádóó bidee' neeznáá hadaaz'áii áádóó adee' náánáła' háá'áhígíí éí bidááhdóó táa'go naa'aníídee'go éí bináá' hólǫ́ áádóó bizéé' hólǫ́ǫgo ayóó ánísht'é nízingo ádá yálti'go índa adee' yadaa'ááh nít'éé' yę́ę biláahgo nitsxaaz noolninii éí ááhyiłníinii shił bééhodoozįįł niizį́į́' .
PRED:	I saw ten horns of the horns of the horns of the horns of the horns of the beast and the horns of the beast , and I could know how much I am ?
GOLD:	I also asked about the ten horns on the fourth beast 's head and the little horn that came up afterward and destroyed three of the other horns . This horn had seemed greater than the others , and it had human eyes and a mouth that was boasting arrogantly .

ID:	732
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Zerowáíyah biyáázh Jó'ab áshííł'įįdígíí nił bééhózin ; éí Ízrel dine'é bisiláo dah deínéehii binanit'a'í nidilt'éego , éí Ner biye' Ábner áádóó Jííther biye' Améísa áyííł'įįdígíí baa ákoninizį́į́' . Jó , t'áá k'é hólǫ́ǫgo anaa' hólónígi át'éego éí diné nidilt'é nidzistseedgo bidił haziiz bee ákádzíszaazígíí áádóó hakee' bii' dziz'eezígíí ałdó' dił bąąhgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	Joab son of Zeruiah — the commander of Zeruiah — the commander of the army of Israel , and Abner 's commander , were commander of his army . He also killed Abner and his sons , who had been slaughtered by his feet . He also killed by his feet and killed by his feet .
GOLD:	“ And there is something else . You know what Joab son of Zeruiah did to me when he murdered my two army commanders , Abner son of Ner and Amasa son of Jether . He pretended that it was an act of war , but it was done in a time of peace , staining his belt and sandals with innocent blood .

ID:	733
INPUT:	Jesus ak'eh deesdlį́į'ii k'ehgo Jerúsalem góne' ííyá
PRED:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	734
INPUT:	Nihwiiłdlaadgo tsé nahjį' hayiiznil áádóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii agháago yá'át'éhígíí k'iidííláínda ałníi'gi bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí hayíítł'ingo dego yaa'áago áyiilaa , áádóó ałdó' ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' bąąh haha'nííh biniyé haz'ą́ągo áhoolaa , áádóó índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii yá'át'éhígíí bąąh dah dadínóodah nízingo yaa ninánítaah , nidi ch'il na'atł'o'ii dík'ǫ́zhígíí bąąh hazlį́į́' lá .
PRED:	You put up a piece of wine , and put it into a garden . Then he broke it into the upper room of wine and olive oil on the ground . Then he broke it into the garden , and he planted it with the grapes .
GOLD:	He plowed the land , cleared its stones , and planted it with the best vines.In the middle he built a watchtowerand carved a winepress in the nearby rocks.Then he waited for a harvest of sweet grapes , but the grapes that grew were bitter .

ID:	735
INPUT:	Áko t'áá shí yiiłtsą́ , áádóó baa ch'íhoní'ą́ągo ádíshní , Díí Diyin God biYe' át'į́į́ lá .
PRED:	So I saw him and said , “ This is what God says : This is the Son of God ! ”
GOLD:	I saw this happen to Jesus , so I testify that he is the Chosen One of God . ”

ID:	736
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' aláahgo naat'áanii ánáábideesh'niid , Aláahgo naat'áanii bił hóshǫ́ǫ́ ládą́ą́' bíni' tooh nílínígíí biláahdi naat'áanii danilíinii naaltsoos shá bich'į' ádadoolnííł , áko dabikéyahgóó ch'íhideesháałgo Júdah kéyahjį' anáásdzáajį' shadadi'doo'ááł .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ If I want to go back to the Euphrates River , let the king go out to Judah and return to Judah . ”
GOLD:	I also said to the king , “ If it please the king , let me have letters addressed to the governors of the province west of the Euphrates River , instructing them to let me travel safely through their territories on my way to Judah .

ID:	737
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul bá nidaal'a'í éí David yich'į' yee hadaasdzíí' . Áádóó David ádííniid , Aláahgo naat'áanii baadaaní yishłeehgo t'įįhdígo haniih át'éii át'éego shaa nitsóhkees ? Jó , diné hojooba' át'éii áádóó doo aláahgo ch'íbi'dit'áahii yee' nishłį́ .
PRED:	Then Saul said to David , “ I am the king , ” David replied , “ for you have plenty for yourself . I am poor and poor ! ”
GOLD:	When Saul 's men said these things to David , he replied , “ How can a poor man from a humble family afford the bride price for the daughter of a king ? ”

ID:	738
INPUT:	Háálá Filístiya dine'é ałtso nidootsiłgo Táir índa Sáídan kin haal'áii yíká anájahii daadziihígíí t'áá ałtso ádooldįįłgo bich'į' hoolzhish , áko Bóhólníihii éí Káftor kéyahdóó Filístiya dine'é daadziihígíí yidooghą́ą́ł .
PRED:	For the Philistines are determined to destroy Tyre and Sidon . A Message that the Lord will destroy Tyre and the Philistines and the Philistines .
GOLD:	“ The time has come for the Philistines to be destroyed , along with their allies from Tyre and Sidon.Yes , the Lord is destroying the remnant of the Philistines , those colonists from the island of Crete .

ID:	739
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó tadzooskaígíí baa dadziiskaidi shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó ádajiilaaígíí éí shízhi' diyinii t'áá íiyisí bik'édí nishłį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when the people of Israel heard that they were scattered among the nations , they would not listen to my name .
GOLD:	Then I was concerned for my holy name , on which my people brought shame among the nations .

ID:	740
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus haadzíi'go ííłní , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kóní : Diné doo bááh t'éí yee hináa da doo , nidi saad t'áá ałtso Diyin God yee hahadziihii yee hináa doo .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ This is what the Scriptures say : The Scriptures say , ‘ We will live in the Scriptures . '
GOLD:	But Jesus told him , “ No ! The Scriptures say , ‘ People do not live by bread alone . ' ”

ID:	741
INPUT:	T'ah doo daha<unk> góó danéesée nidi , ch'il náánáła' nidanise'ígíí t'áá yítséedi daniiłnah .
PRED:	There were no longer some of the trees , but some seeds fell from Macedonia .
GOLD:	While they are still flowering , not ready to be cut , they begin to wither more quickly than grass .

ID:	742
INPUT:	Kót'éego Bóhólníihii éí Job yich'į' hahaasdzíí'dóó bik'ijį' Bóhólníihii éí Tííman kin haal'áádóó diné Élifaz wolyéii ííłní , Ni índa nik'is nidilt'éego doo ákót'éégóó shá hadahisoohdzí'ígíí biniinaa t'óó báhádzidgo shibee atí'él'íinii bee nihich'į' bił tsííkééz , háálá shá naal'a'í Job éí t'áá ákogi át'éego shá hahasdzíi'gi át'éego t'áadoo shá hadasoohdzíi' da .
PRED:	So the Lord gave Job this message to Eliphaz : “ I am the Lord , ” Job replied . “ You have not given me a vision that I am innocent in the city of the Lord .
GOLD:	After the Lord had finished speaking to Job , he said to Eliphaz the Temanite : “ I am angry with you and your two friends , for you have not spoken accurately about me , as my servant Job has .

ID:	743
INPUT:	Áko dashdii'áazhgo kintaa'aztiinígíí bibąąhgóó kin léi' bich'éédą́ą'gi télii yázhí dahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo bik'ízhní'áázh , áko k'e'jíí'ah .
PRED:	So they went to the house and found a young donkey sitting beside the road beside the road .
GOLD:	The two disciples left and found the colt standing in the street , tied outside the front door .

ID:	744
INPUT:	T'áá nihéédahosésįįd yę́ędóó wóshdę́ę́' Bóhólníihii bich'į' nidaałteehgo bik'ijį' danohłį́įgo hodideeshzhiizh .
PRED:	And when I came to the Lord , I will bring them back to their enemies .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been rebelling against the Lord as long as I have known you .

ID:	745
INPUT:	Kót'éego hadzoodzíi'go t'áá Gáliliigi nijigháá nít'éé' .
PRED:	He told them what he had happened .
GOLD:	After saying these things , Jesus remained in Galilee .

ID:	746
INPUT:	Naaki góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Símiyan dine'é bá ánáánályaa ; Símiyan dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin ; éí Júdah dine'é bikéyah łahjį' bá'doodzo .
PRED:	In the second year of the tribe of Simeon , Simeon ( which means “ The tribe of Simeon will remain faithful in Judah . )
GOLD:	The second allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Simeon . Their homeland was surrounded by Judah 's territory .

ID:	747
INPUT:	Háálá aa a'ááh nínízinii yót'ááh hiníláii bilááh át'é áádóó nit'áá aaníinii k'os bíneel'ą́ .
PRED:	For your unfailing love is from the heavens , and the clouds of the clouds .
GOLD:	For your unfailing love is higher than the heavens.Your faithfulness reaches to the clouds .

ID:	748
INPUT:	índa ak'áán t'ááłáhídi hahakaahgo dibé yázhí tsosts'idígíí bik'eh nítį́įgo bił náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .
GOLD:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	749
INPUT:	Áko Áman dine'é binanit'a'í éí Jéfthah binaal'a'í áyidííniid , Jó , Ízrel dine'é éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' náá'nééł yę́ędą́ą́' Árnan tooh nílínídóó Jábak tooh nílíníjį' índa Jórdan toohjį' shikéyah shighadeideest'ą́ . Éí bąą k'ad éí kédaayahígíí hasht'ehodít'é bił nihaa náhididíí'ááł .
PRED:	The king of Israel said to Jephthah , “ Look , I am going out of the Arnon River to the Jabbok River to the Jabbok River to the Jabbok River . I will bring you out of the Jordan River to the Jordan River . ”
GOLD:	The king of Ammon answered Jephthah 's messengers , “ When the Israelites came out of Egypt , they stole my land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River and all the way to the Jordan . Now then , give back the land peaceably . ”

ID:	750
INPUT:	Áádóó nída'njahgi niikaigo nihe'azis ąą ádeiilyaa nít'éé' ; t'ááłá'í niitínígo nihibéeso t'áá át'é azis bii' <unk> nil lá , áko éí béeso naa nídaniijaa' .
PRED:	We took care of our money and put it on the Sabbath day of our sacks . We put the money in the field , and we put it into the sack of the money .
GOLD:	But as we were returning home , we stopped for the night and opened our sacks . Then we discovered that each man 's money — the exact amount paid — was in the top of his sack ! Here it is ; we have brought it back with us .

ID:	751
INPUT:	Háálá diné daneeznáádę́ę́' náádiijée'go , doo nááda'doogeh da , doo nidi ahaa dabi'dii'níił da doo , nidi yá'ąąshdi diyingo nidaal'a'ígíigi ádaat'é .
PRED:	For we have not been raised from the dead , but we will never be able to do anything in heaven .
GOLD:	For when the dead rise , they will neither marry nor be given in marriage . In this respect they will be like the angels in heaven .

ID:	752
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad íinínízin ládą́ą́' ádił da'asiihígíí bá yóó'anídí'aah , doodaii' ninaaltsoos bii' shízhi' sínízohígíí k'éé'<unk> xǫǫłgo baa nánooshkąąh .
PRED:	But now , let us forgive their sins and forgive their sins . ”
GOLD:	But now , if you will only forgive their sin — but if not , erase my name from the record you have written ! ”

ID:	753
INPUT:	T'áadoo náháchį'í índa hashké nániidzįįhii yóó'adí'aah . T'áadoo ádił náhodílchiłí ; éí doo yá'áshónígi ándoolííł .
PRED:	Do n't let your anger fall into sin , and do n't let them be disgraced .
GOLD:	Stop being angry ! Turn from your rage ! Do not lose your temper — it only leads to harm .

ID:	754
INPUT:	Áko diné éí Jóseph bikin góne' yah ayíí'eezhgo tó yeiníką́ągo hakee' táádadzizgiz , áádóó dahatélii yá nida'azhjaa' .
PRED:	So Joseph took Joseph into the house of Joseph and threw his feet into his feet . He threw his feet into his feet and threw it into water .
GOLD:	The manager then led the men into Joseph 's palace . He gave them water to wash their feet and provided food for their donkeys .

ID:	755
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God nilíinii bibee adziilii bee yisháał doo . Ni t'éiyá t'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí baa yáshti' doo .
PRED:	I will speak to the Lord your God , for I am telling you what is right .
GOLD:	I will praise your mighty deeds , O Sovereign Lord.I will tell everyone that you alone are just .

ID:	756
INPUT:	Bábilan nílíinii , Bóhólníihii hoo'áłígíí doo nínízingóó biniinaa łoh ná niiní'ą́ągo biih yíníyá ; doo baa ákonínízingóó nééhoozingo ni'diiltsood .
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let your enemies fall into the trap of the trap of Babylon .
GOLD:	Listen , Babylon , for I have set a trap for you.You are caught , for you have fought against the Lord .

ID:	757
INPUT:	Jesus éí siláo neeznádiingo yinanit'a'í nilíinii bá naal'a'í néidiisá
PRED:	Jesus took the captain of the Jordan
GOLD:	The Faith of a Roman Officer

ID:	758
INPUT:	T'áá háiida diyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' náá'iiłniihgo t'áá hazhó'ó doo Bóhólníihii t'éí yich'į' náá'iiłniihgóó nidi éí t'áá aaníí ábidi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	Anyone who refuses to worship the Lord is not a priest , but those who worship the Lord will not die .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who sacrifices to any god other than the Lord must be destroyed .

ID:	759
INPUT:	Mózes éí deenásts'aa' yiyiisxį́įgo bidiłígíí éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi t'áá át'é yik'íistah .
PRED:	So Moses killed the ram 's blood , and he sits on the altar of the altar .
GOLD:	and Moses slaughtered it . Then Moses took the ram 's blood and splattered it against all sides of the altar .

ID:	760
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , T'áá háiida éí náádahaniihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' náájiiłniihgo éí nááhániihii ła' Bóhólníihii baazhdidoo'áałgo hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego náájiiłniih doo .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : If you present a peace offering to the Lord , you will offer sacrifices to the Lord as a peace offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . When you present a peace offering to the Lord , bring part of it as a gift to the Lord .

ID:	761
INPUT:	Áádóó Adóram éí naalte' binaanishii yinant'áago ábi'diilyaa ; Aháílad biye' Jiiháshafat éí naat'áaniishchíín nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of your master , who was forced to reign in charge of the royal historian .
GOLD:	Adoniram was in charge of forced labor . Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the royal historian .

ID:	762
INPUT:	Shoo , shizhé'é , ni'éé' bidííłgizhígíí dah yistsosgo níníł'į́ , háálá ni'éé' bidííłgizhígíí áádóó t'áadoo niyéł<unk> daígíí díí bee nił bééhózin : nił bééhózin índa yíní'į́įgo doo yá'áshónígi t'áadoo ániishłaa da , doodaii' bee haz'áanii t'áadoo nił k'íníti' da índa t'áadoo nich'į' ádił asésiih da . Shidiyííłhééł biniyé shíkanítáá nít'éé' nidi t'áadoo ná hashja'iishłaa da .
PRED:	“ Look , my father 's robe , ” says the Lord. “ You have not defiled my robe , for I have never sinned against you . I have not abandoned you , but I have not sinned against you . I have never sinned against you . ”
GOLD:	Look , my father , at what I have in my hand . It is a piece of the hem of your robe ! I cut it off , but I did n't kill you . This proves that I am not trying to harm you and that I have not sinned against you , even though you have been hunting for me to kill me .

ID:	763
INPUT:	hadaałt'é ní'doodleeł biniyé k'íhidílnííh , áádóó nibee adziilii bee béédahózinii índa bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóigo ádahooníiłii diyingo ná naal'a'í Jesus bízhi' bee ádanile' .
PRED:	Be careful to make a covenant with you , so that you will be honored by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Stretch out your hand with healing power ; may miraculous signs and wonders be done through the name of your holy servant Jesus . ”

ID:	764
INPUT:	Áádóó Jánathan éí David áyidííniid , Yiską́ągo dah yiitįįh ; dah nánídaah yę́ęgi doo dah sínídáágóó nídahozdoosah .
PRED:	Jonathan said to David , “ You will prepare the Passover meal at the entrance of the Temple . ”
GOLD:	Then Jonathan said , “ Tomorrow we celebrate the new moon festival . You will be missed when your place at the table is empty .

ID:	765
INPUT:	T'ah doo nihaa niikááh yę́ędą́ą́' Fílipaidi ti'dahwiisii'nii' áádóó t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádanihi'diilyaago nihił béédahózin . Ákondi nihiDiyin God bee doo dasiiti'góó Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó hane' yá'át'éehii bee nihił dahwiilne' , azhą́ nihik'ijį' danilíinii lą'í nidi .
PRED:	We did n't know that we did n't know that we did n't know our plan . We did n't know God 's Good News . But we did n't know that we do what we have done .
GOLD:	You know how badly we had been treated at Philippi just before we came to you and how much we suffered there . Yet our God gave us the courage to declare his Good News to you boldly , in spite of great opposition .

ID:	766
INPUT:	Áádóó Jiiháshafat éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ííłní , Bína'ídíłkid , baa nánooshkąąh , Bóhólníihii ha'át'íí didooniił díí jį́ .
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat asked the king of Israel , “ Let 's ask the Lord , why should we do this today ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jehoshaphat added , “ But first let 's find out what the Lord says . ”

ID:	767
INPUT:	Áko Hágeiyai haadzíi'go ání , Lą́'ąą , díí diné áádóó díí dine'é shináałgo ákódaat'é , ní Bóhólníihii , índa t'áá ałtso yindaalnishii ałdó' ákódaat'é , áádóó áadi náádayiiłniihígíí éí doo dadílzin da .
PRED:	Then Haggai said , “ This is what the Lord says : The people of all the nations are saying , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	Then Haggai responded , “ That is how it is with this people and this nation , says the Lord . Everything they do and everything they offer is defiled by their sin .

ID:	768
INPUT:	ákwe'é bitah doo dahats'ídígíí hadaałt'é áńdaahdle'go , Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bee nihaa honíyá , dabidohní .
PRED:	But if you do n't need to get the Kingdom of God , give us victory . ”
GOLD:	Heal the sick , and tell them , ‘ The Kingdom of God is near you now . '

ID:	769
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí saad yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo kin haal'áhígíí jííkeedii haa deideez'ą́ , éí Tímnath-síírah kin haal'áii éí dziłgo nahaz'ánígóó Íífreiyim dine'é bikéyah biyi' , ákwii kin haal'áago áńjiidlaago ákwii kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	After this , the Lord gave this message to the people of Ephraim , who had been allocated to the hill country of Ephraim , who lived in the hill country of Ephraim .
GOLD:	For the Lord had said he could have any town he wanted . He chose Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim . He rebuilt the town and lived there .

ID:	770
INPUT:	Áram ba'áłchíní éí Uz áádóó <unk> áádóó <unk> her índa <unk> daolyé .
PRED:	The descendants of Moses was unable to do this , and the descendants of Esther .
GOLD:	The descendants of Aram were Uz , Hul , Gether , and Mash .

ID:	771
INPUT:	Áádóó ni nee diné áádóó asdzání dideeshtah , índa haastihii áádóó ániid naagháii ni nee dideeshtah áádóó ni nee dinééh índa ch'ikę́ę́h dideeshtah .
PRED:	“ I will hand you over to the men and women , ” says the woman , “ and I will make her young and young . ”
GOLD:	With you I will shatter men and women , old people and children , young men and young women .

ID:	772
INPUT:	Áádóó nááda'iiłniihii bits'ą́ą́dóó ła' : Habéíyah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Kaz ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Barziléíyai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ; éí hastiin náánáła' Gíliyad dine'é Barziléíyai wolyéii bitsi' ła' hwe'asdzą́ą́ silį́į'go éí bízhi'ígíí házhi' silį́į́' .
PRED:	And one of the priests , one of the family of Phinehas , one of the descendants of Gilead . He also married one of the descendants of Gilead . He also married one of the tribe of Gilead .
GOLD:	Three families of priests — Hobaiah , Hakkoz , and Barzillai — also returned . ( This Barzillai had married a woman who was a descendant of Barzillai of Gilead , and he had taken her family name . )

ID:	773
INPUT:	Danihiníghangóó díí t'áadoo daohsání : éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' neeznáá daníjoolgo t'ááłá'ígo shijoolii , éí Bóhólníihii baa nídahidoh'aahii , doodaii' wáin ániidíii , doodaii' áliv tsin naazkaadii bineest'ą' bik'ah neeznáá daníką́ągo t'ááłá'í sikánígíí , éí Bóhólníihii baa nídahidoh'aahii , doodaii' nihilį́į́' áádóó nihidibé alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii náádahołniihii , doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhída bee ádee hadasoohdzíi'ii bee náádaho łniihii , doodaii' t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo náádahołniihii , doodaii' bił dah ní'diilnihgo náádahołniihii ,
PRED:	“ You must not eat any of your grain offerings or grain offerings , wine , olive oil , or olive oil , or olive oil , or olive oil , or olive oil , or olive oil , or olive oil , or olive oil , or olive oil .
GOLD:	“ But you may not eat your offerings in your hometown — neither the tithe of your grain and new wine and olive oil , nor the firstborn of your flocks and herds , nor any offering to fulfill a vow , nor your voluntary offerings , nor your sacred offerings .

ID:	774
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é hanaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá ałtso nidadoołtsxił , Bóhólníihii áhodííniidii éí t'áadoo ádadziidzaa da .
PRED:	The armies of the nations will completely destroy the nations , and the Lord did not destroy them .
GOLD:	Israel failed to destroy the nations in the land , as the Lord had commanded them .

ID:	775
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi baa hodoolzhish , tooh nílínídóó Ííjip kéyahdi tooh nílíníjį' Bóhólníihii éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' yąąh yoołch'íih doo , áádóó Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , t'ááłá'í nootínígo áłah ánihidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	On that day the Lord will bring you into the Nile River , and the river of Egypt will be filled with grain and grain .
GOLD:	Yet the time will come when the Lord will gather them together like handpicked grain . One by one he will gather them — from the Euphrates River in the east to the Brook of Egypt in the west .

ID:	776
INPUT:	tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii yindadoolnishgo yaa daneesánígíí ałtso yíníłta' .
PRED:	When he was thirty years old , he went to the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	List all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who are eligible to serve in the Tabernacle .

ID:	777
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii Mózes baa deet'áanii biyi' bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo ání , Béégashii éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' haił'éesgo t'áadoo bíchį́į́h bąąh nida'sooł'ání . Diyin God daats'í béégashii t'éiyá yaa nitsíkeesgo ádííniid ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you keep the law of Moses ' law , ” Moses replied . “ Do n't you spend the night with a threshing floor ? ”
GOLD:	For the law of Moses says , “ You must not muzzle an ox to keep it from eating as it treads out the grain. ” Was God thinking only about oxen when he said this ?

ID:	778
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	779
INPUT:	Ch'ikę́ę́h nílíinii , shich'į' dah díníit'aahgo nitsíníkeesgo shíísíníłts'ą́ą́' . Nidine'é áádóó nizhé'é bighandóóígíí baa yoonééh .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to me , and say , ‘ Listen to me , my father 's family . '
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	780
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh díí náádahaniihii éí ádił nida'iiszíi'ii t'óó yéédabiyiiłníihii át'é .
PRED:	But this is the account of the year of all the sins of their sins .
GOLD:	But instead , those sacrifices actually reminded them of their sins year after year .

ID:	781
INPUT:	Iibrónahdóó dah náádii'náago Ííziyan-gííber hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left Succoth and camped at Kehelathah .
GOLD:	They left Abronah and camped at Ezion-geber .

ID:	782
INPUT:	Hágo , Diyin God yaa naayáii níníł'į́ . Diné bitahgóó yaa naagháii t'óó bik'eda'ayóí .
PRED:	Come , O God , and he has done many things among the wicked .
GOLD:	Come and see what our God has done , what awesome miracles he performs for people !

ID:	783
INPUT:	éí doodaii' shíká adoolwołígíí ádingo náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí nahalingo nidashidiyoołdlał .
PRED:	I am like a lion or a lion ; a lion is like a lion .
GOLD:	If you do n't , they will maul me like a lion , tearing me to pieces with no one to rescue me .

ID:	784
INPUT:	Éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yik'ee bádahóóchįįd , áko hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Éfesas dine'é bidiyin Daiyána éí ayóó át'é !
PRED:	When they heard this , they cried out to him , “ Let 's get out of Ephesus ! ” So they cried out , “ It is the god of Ephesus ! ”
GOLD:	At this their anger boiled , and they began shouting , “ Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! ”

ID:	785
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman ázhdííniid , T'áá aaníí kin ayóó át'é bii' kééhót'į́į dooleełii ná áshłaa ; éí bii' honílǫ́ǫgo ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	Solomon replied , “ I will live in the Temple , and I will live forever . ”
GOLD:	Now I have built a glorious Temple for you , a place where you can live forever ! ”

ID:	786
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hinishná ; ákót'éego Ízrel dine'é bitahgi díí saad nawólta' ts'ídá t'áá aaníí doo bee hanáádíídzih da .
PRED:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I am telling you the people of Israel what is right .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you will not quote this proverb anymore in Israel .

ID:	787
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán nílíinii , shidił nídóół'įįh lágoáádóó bíni' shiinéé' diits'a' doo .
PRED:	Listen to me , O earth , and I hear my voice .
GOLD:	“ O earth , do not conceal my blood.Let it cry out on my behalf .

ID:	788
INPUT:	Rábah kin haal'áagi éí ghą́ą́'ask'idii nida'ałchozhgo áhodeeshłííł , áádóó Áman dine'é bikéyahdi dibé bighan naaznilgo ádeeshłííł , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nihił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	“ I will bring them back to Rabbah , ” says the Lord. “ I will destroy the sheep and goats and goats , and I will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will turn the city of Rabbah into a pasture for camels , and all the land of the Ammonites into a resting place for sheep and goats . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	789
INPUT:	Bikáá' adání yikáá' nida'iikaah ; ni'góó nida'azkaadgo da'ayą́ áádóó da'adlą́ ; naat'áanii danohłíinii , nídoohjeehgo naagé nídaałtłah .
PRED:	Let the table table make the table , and let them drink your shield . Come and wake up , wake up !
GOLD:	Look ! They are preparing a great feast.They are spreading rugs for people to sit on.Everyone is eating and drinking.But quick ! Grab your shields and prepare for battle.You are being attacked !

ID:	790
INPUT:	Ákwe'é ídahooł'aahii , Yéego da'iinohdlą́ągo dahinohná , bijiníigo biya<unk> niiłįįhgo bi'oodlą' yee dabidziilgo dah yikahgo ájiilaa , áádóó , Ach'į' nidahwiiłnáanii lą'í bibahididiikahgo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biih hidiikah , jiníigo bich'į' hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	Jesus said to his disciples , “ You are the Messiah , ” they said . “ He is a strong man of God , and we will enter the Kingdom of God , and we will enter the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	where they strengthened the believers . They encouraged them to continue in the faith , reminding them that we must suffer many hardships to enter the Kingdom of God .

ID:	791
INPUT:	Áádóó nihił nishłį́į doo , áádóó niha'áłchíní nídahoodleełgo k'ee'ąą nooht'į́įłgo ánihideeshłííł , índa bohoníłdzilgo nihił ahadi'nisht'ą́ągo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will give you your descendants , and I will give you your descendants . I will make you a covenant with you , and I will make you a covenant .
GOLD:	“ I will look favorably upon you , making you fertile and multiplying your people . And I will fulfill my covenant with you .

ID:	792
INPUT:	Áádóó booyéełgo dabibeeldléí atiingóó yá dayíłkaad .
PRED:	They threw their garments on the road and threw them on the road .
GOLD:	As he rode along , the crowds spread out their garments on the road ahead of him .

ID:	793
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí mána yee dayíízhi' ; ch'il <unk> yander bináá' nahalingo łigai , áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh bááh dá'áka'í nímazí bił ályaaígíí halniih .
PRED:	The people of Israel said , “ We 've been filled with milk and honey . ”
GOLD:	The Israelites called the food manna . It was white like coriander seed , and it tasted like honey wafers .

ID:	794
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii nanise'iísh ha'át'íhída t'áá bee ádoolníiłgo át'é ? Da' éísh ła' bąąh k'élniihgo łeets'aa' t'áá bąąh dah náhidiit'áahgo ádoolnííł ?
PRED:	“ Is it the first of the vineyard ? Is it the first part of the vineyard of the field ?
GOLD:	Can its wood be used for making things , like pegs to hang up pots and pans ?

ID:	795
INPUT:	Shidine'é yaa nidaakaígíí hanisíidgo nił bééhodoozįįłígíí biniyé ya'niiltł'ǫ́ǫgo bighą́ą́'dóó ha'alzíidii índa bee ohoníłdzilii ániishłaa .
PRED:	You know what I am going to see my people , for I am filled with weeping and sorrow .
GOLD:	“ Jeremiah , I have made you a tester of metals , that you may determine the quality of my people .

ID:	796
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii ádahodííniid , Jó , diné ninás'áhígíí nił bééhózin . Ha'át'éegoshą' háí shideelchid diní ?
PRED:	Then the disciples said , “ Look , what do you know ? Who touched me ? Who touched me ? ”
GOLD:	His disciples said to him , “ Look at this crowd pressing around you . How can you ask , ‘ Who touched me ? ' ”

ID:	797
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'áadoo nánídlíníii baa nida'aldeeh ; jó , diné doo yá'ádaashóonii ádayoolíłígíí bik'ehgo diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bich'į' áánííł , áádóó diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii ádayoolíłígíí bik'ehgo diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bich'į' áánííł . Díí ałdó' éí t'áadoo nánídlíní da , dishní .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked fall into the land of the wicked , for they do what is right . I say to the wicked , “ I am innocent , ” says the wicked .
GOLD:	And this is not all that is meaningless in our world . In this life , good people are often treated as though they were wicked , and wicked people are often treated as though they were good . This is so meaningless !

ID:	798
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' bee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'ii , ak'idi'yiitįįh t'áá ałtso yiláahdi át'éii , éí Christ Jesus bee nihijéí índa nihintsékees yaa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	And God has given you a gift from the gift of peace and peace . He is greater than Christ Jesus Christ , and he will care for you .
GOLD:	Then you will experience God 's peace , which exceeds anything we can understand . His peace will guard your hearts and minds as you live in Christ Jesus .

ID:	799
INPUT:	áádóó áshíłní , Paul , t'áadoo nił yé'í ; Síízar ts'ídá t'áá bidááhdóó yidíízįįłí ; jó'akon , bił nił oo'ołígíí Diyin God t'áá ałtso neinínil .
PRED:	Paul said to me , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid of Caesar ! Look ! ”
GOLD:	and he said , ‘ Do n't be afraid , Paul , for you will surely stand trial before Caesar ! What 's more , God in his goodness has granted safety to everyone sailing with you . '

ID:	800
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , saad nanil'ingo béédi'dootį́įłii ła' bee handziih , áádóó Ízrel dine'é hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii ła' bee bich'į' handziih ;
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against the people of Israel , and say it to one of the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give this riddle , and tell this story to the people of Israel .

ID:	801
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' ni'góó nideiskaadígíí éí óola bik'ésti'go áyiilaa .
PRED:	He overlaid the gold with gold and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid the floor in both rooms with gold .

ID:	802
INPUT:	Éí bąą Néíyaman éí łóód a<unk> yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ánígíí nididoolnah k'ad áádóó na'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ałdó' hool'áágóó bitah yiłnih doo . Índa yasgi át'éego łigaigo łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hodoolna'go Iiláísha bits'ą́ąjį' dashdiiyá .
PRED:	So Naaman left the leprosy and said to the priest , “ The descendants of Naaman will be healed , and the leprosy will be left as white as the leprosy . ”
GOLD:	Because you have done this , you and your descendants will suffer from Naaman 's leprosy forever. ” When Gehazi left the room , he was covered with leprosy ; his skin was white as snow .

ID:	803
INPUT:	Sáíman Peter ánáázhdoo'niid , Bóhólníihii , doo t'áá shikee' t'éiyá da nidi shíla' índa shitsiits'iin ałdó' táádíígis !
PRED:	Peter replied , “ Lord , you are not my feet , but I wash my feet . ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter exclaimed , “ Then wash my hands and head as well , Lord , not just my feet ! ”

ID:	804
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Ni ałdó' ashdla'go kin hadaas'á bee nóhólníih doo .
PRED:	Then he told them , “ You will rule over five towns with five cities . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ Well done ! ' the king said . ‘ You will be governor over five cities . '

ID:	805
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iithiyópiya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í <unk> kah baa hane'go yidiizts'ą́ą'go , Jó , nik'ijį' nidoobah biniyé yigááł , ha'níigo baa hojíínii'go Heziikáíyah yich'į' anáá'ííł'a' kóníigo ,
PRED:	When Ethiopia heard that the king of Aram had heard that he had told him , “ Look , he has sent us to fight against Hezekiah . ”
GOLD:	Soon afterward King Sennacherib received word that King Tirhakah of Ethiopia was leading an army to fight against him . Before leaving to meet the attack , he sent messengers back to Hezekiah in Jerusalem with this message :

ID:	806
INPUT:	naanish t'ááłá'íígíí hanaanish danilį́į́ léi' t'áá ákwii ba'ałk'ee dzizdáago nidajishnish , háálá níbaal ííł'íní dajílį́ .
PRED:	There was a few night , and he reigned in his tent . He was a reward for his tent .
GOLD:	Paul lived and worked with them , for they were tentmakers just as he was .

ID:	807
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo yanáalk'idę́ę́' hadáájoot'áazhgo kin haal'áhíjį' ajíí'áázh . Kin bighą́ą'di Sámuel éí Saul bił ahił nahodzisne' .
PRED:	So Saul got up and went out to the town of Saul and told him what Saul had happened .
GOLD:	When they came down from the place of worship and returned to town , Samuel took Saul up to the roof of the house and prepared a bed for him there .

ID:	808
INPUT:	Nishtł'ají yee shits'iiyah déesnii' doo nít'éé' áádóó nish'náájí yee shináz'nii' doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	I looked at my right hand , and I saw my right hand .
GOLD:	Your left arm would be under my head , and your right arm would embrace me .

ID:	809
INPUT:	Doo hada'ísídół'į́į́'góó t'áadoo hooyání nídoodáałgo , da'ołhoshgo nihik'ídoogááł .
PRED:	He did n't let them go , and he wo n't sleep .
GOLD:	Do n't let him find you sleeping when he arrives without warning .

ID:	810
INPUT:	Esther éí asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh ábi'diilyaa
PRED:	Esther 's Queen Esther
GOLD:	Esther Becomes Queen

ID:	811
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' bijééhkał índa ał<unk> dzihgo yił haadaaskaigo , Bik'i dah didíílnih , dahałníigo nídahookąąh .
PRED:	Then you will listen to their ears and ears , and they will say to them , “ Please give us victory ! ”
GOLD:	A deaf man with a speech impediment was brought to him , and the people begged Jesus to lay his hands on the man to heal him .

ID:	812
INPUT:	Kót'éego áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii bich'į' yádaołti' doo , Bóhólníihii haa yit'éego nich'į' énáhoosįįd ? áádóó , Bóhólníihii haa yit'éego hanáánáádzíí' ? dabidohníi doo .
PRED:	“ And what will happen to the Lord ? What will you do ? ” he asked . “ What will you do ? ”
GOLD:	“ This is what you should say to the prophets : ‘ What is the Lord 's answer ? ' or ‘ What is the Lord saying ? '

ID:	813
INPUT:	Jóseph haye'ké Ííjip kéyahgi há yizhchínígíí éí naaki , áko Jéíkab ba'áłchíní t'áá ałtso Ííjip kéyahgi nínánígíí éí tsosts'idiin .
PRED:	Joseph had two sons in Egypt , and Joseph 's oldest son Joseph had seventy sons in Egypt .
GOLD:	In addition , Joseph had two sons who were born in Egypt . So altogether , there were seventy members of Jacob 's family in the land of Egypt .

ID:	814
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá háiida ch'į́įdii yádabiiłti'ii índa da'diłgąshii bikéé' dashdiiyáago ajił baa nijigháhígíí hak'ijį' nishłį́į doo , índa hadine'é bits'ą́ąjį' hodiyeeshxééł .
PRED:	“ All who follow the spirits of the dead will go out to the grave , and they will kill him . ”
GOLD:	“ I will also turn against those who commit spiritual prostitution by putting their trust in mediums or in those who consult the spirits of the dead . I will cut them off from the community .

ID:	815
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Zekaráíyah yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Zechariah ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to Zechariah from the Lord :

ID:	816
INPUT:	Áádóó índa Dził Sáínaidę́ę́' Mózes éí tsé dilkǫǫhii naakigo bikáa'gi neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii joojihgo dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hadah níjoodáałgo hanii' bits'ádi'nílídígíí doo baa ákoznízingóó nídzídzá ; jó , Diyin God bił ałch'į' yájíłti' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then Moses left Mount Sinai and the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the Covenant of the Covenant . He saw that he had left the mountain of God had left them .
GOLD:	When Moses came down Mount Sinai carrying the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , he was n't aware that his face had become radiant because he had spoken to the Lord .

ID:	817
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' ájíní , T'áá áhoołts'íísígo baa nániideeshkąąłii laanaa nisin ; nánooshkąąh , dooda , doo shididííniił da . Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Yíníkeed , shimá ; jó , dooda , doo nidideeshniił da .
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ I want to pray for you . I want to ask you to ask the king , ‘ I will never ask you , ' he replied , ‘ I will never ask you . ' ”
GOLD:	“ I have one small request to make of you , ” she said . “ I hope you wo n't turn me down. ” “ What is it , my mother ? ” he asked . “ You know I wo n't refuse you . ”

ID:	818
INPUT:	Íífad bikáa'gi ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí éí óola áłts'óózígo neheeshgizhígíí áádóó yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí áádóó łichxí'ígíí índa áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii baa nahodeesgį'go iichįįhgo íífad ályaaígi át'éego áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then he took the ephod of the ephod and made the ephod of finely woven linen , purple , and scarlet thread . He made the ephod with blue , purple , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Bezalel made the chestpiece with great skill and care . He made it to match the ephod , using finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	819
INPUT:	ATaa' bich'į' Jesus honít'i'ii nilį́
PRED:	Jesus , the Father of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus , the Way to the Father

ID:	820
INPUT:	Áko naal'a'í ábizhdííniid , Níléí diné nihidáahjį' yigáłígíishą' háí át'į́ ? Áko naal'a'í ání , Shinanit'a'í át'į́ . Ákohgo ch'ikę́ę́h binii'jį' yik'é'ésti' .
PRED:	Then he asked the angel , “ Get up and go out into the sleep of the man ? ” And she said , “ Yes , my lord the woman is covered with her face . ” So she became a virgin .
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master. ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	821
INPUT:	Tó ak'i ch'ídzíłhałígi át'éego t'óó báhádzidgo hoł yéé' áhooł'įįh ; tł'ée'go níyoltsoh hoł yóó'iighááh .
PRED:	They cry out to him , and the wind blows against him .
GOLD:	Terror overwhelms them like a flood , and they are blown away in the storms of the night .

ID:	822
INPUT:	Nihádahachįįhgo ts'ídá bąąhági ádaohnééh lágo ; t'áá nihádahachį'go o'ó'ááł lágo .
PRED:	Do n't let them be angry with anger ; do n't let them be crushed .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you. ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	823
INPUT:	Áko éidíígíí doo bee baa nídeiit'į́į́góogo , diné t'áá ałtso dabiidoodląął , áádóó Rome dine'é dadookahgo nihihodiyingo haz'ánígíí índa nihidine'é éí nihikéyah t'áá bił t'áá haz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' nihits'ą́ą́' deidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	And if you do n't believe me , you will believe the truth and believe that you will surely destroy us , and you will destroy us . ”
GOLD:	If we allow him to go on like this , soon everyone will believe in him . Then the Roman army will come and destroy both our Temple and our nation . ”

ID:	824
INPUT:	Job yich'į' haadzíi'go Iiláíhu bee bá haz'ą́
PRED:	Job spoke to Job :
GOLD:	Elihu Responds to Job 's Friends

ID:	825
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso Kéídeshdóó dah náádii'náago Dził Hor hoolyéejį' níná .
PRED:	So the Israelites left Kadesh and camped at Kadesh .
GOLD:	The whole community of Israel left Kadesh and arrived at Mount Hor .

ID:	826
INPUT:	áádóó éí ha'a'aahjí ch'íhoodzooígíí Gí<unk> kin shijaa'góó , áádóó <unk> zin haz'ánígóó , Rí<unk> ho<unk> kin shijaa' bich'į'go áádóó Níyah kin shijaa'jį' nááhodeesdzo ,
PRED:	From there the boundary went out to the east of the Jordan River . The boundary went to Shunem , and they went to Shunem .
GOLD:	Then it continued east to Gath-hepher , Eth-kazin , and Rimmon and turned toward Neah .

ID:	827
INPUT:	T'áá ni ádínínígíí bee ádá nináhonít'aah ; shí éí doo nánihonish'aah da ; t'áá aaníí , t'áá ni ádínínígíí bee ádaa nahólne' .
PRED:	I am telling you what is right , for I am telling you the truth .
GOLD:	Your own mouth condemns you , not I.Your own lips testify against you .

ID:	828
INPUT:	Nidi ni , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shinaage' nílį́ ; bee ił nishłíinii áádóó dah neesht'áałgo áshósinii nílį́ .
PRED:	But you , O Lord , are my shield ; you are my shield .
GOLD:	But you , O Lord , are a shield around me ; you are my glory , the one who holds my head high .

ID:	829
INPUT:	Doo yóó'áshidi'doolníił da biniyé yisdáshííłtį́ , áko adinídíín yideestsééł .
PRED:	He has rescued me from my eyes ; he has made me light .
GOLD:	God rescued me from the grave , and now my life is filled with light . '

ID:	830
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Hanéínai éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Éísa yaa níyáago íidííniid , Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í baa jiisínílíí' ; Bóhólníihii niDiyin God éí doo baa jiisínílíi' da ; éí bąą Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo doo bik'eh didíídleeł da .
PRED:	At that time King Asa of Judah went to the prophet of Judah and told him , “ The Lord has n't done what he did to do . You will not fear the king of Aram . ”
GOLD:	At that time Hanani the seer came to King Asa and told him , “ Because you have put your trust in the king of Aram instead of in the Lord your God , you missed your chance to destroy the army of the king of Aram .

ID:	831
INPUT:	Áman dine'é índa Síriya dine'é bik'eh hodeesdlį́į́'
PRED:	Aram and the Arameans
GOLD:	David Defeats the Ammonites

ID:	832
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi Diyin God k'ehgo hináanii ásdįįd , áko diné bitahgi t'áá ákogi át'éii doo ła' naagháa da ; t'áá ałtso diné diyoolyéełgo bidił bits'ádoonah biniyé ahéeshjéé' ; t'ááłá'í nítínígo bik'is danilíinii yee deidoolohii t'éí hádaat'į́ .
PRED:	Those who live in the world are destroyed by God 's sight , and no one can flee to death . They will be put to death .
GOLD:	The godly people have all disappeared ; not one honest person is left on the earth.They are all murderers , setting traps even for their own brothers .

ID:	833
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii héti'ii azis bii' dá'deestł'ǫ́ , áádóó doo ákwii áát'įįdii bidáń'da'díłkad .
PRED:	I can not stop the door , and I will not stop their guilt .
GOLD:	My sins would be sealed in a pouch , and you would cover my guilt .

ID:	834
INPUT:	Júdas éí James biye' índa Júdas Iskáriyat , éí nináhodidoo'áłígíí .
PRED:	Judas Iscariot , Judas , the son of Judas , who later betrayed him .
GOLD:	Judas ( son of James ) , Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	835
INPUT:	Nidi na'adlo' t'áá deíłt'éeh doo biniyé ats'áhaaskaii , éí doo ákwii ádaaníiłii bił yówehjį' Bóhólníihii ho'doołnih . Ízrel dine'é bitahgi hasht'ehodít'ée le' !
PRED:	But may the Lord be humiliated , and may the whole community of Israel be celebrated in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	But banish those who turn to crooked ways , O Lord.Take them away with those who do evil.May Israel have peace !

ID:	836
INPUT:	Áko bá nahós'a'jį' daats'í ninádííjih , índa bighangóó atiinígíí daats'í nił bééhózin doo .
PRED:	Do n't you know what is happening to your home ? Do n't you know what is right in the town ? ”
GOLD:	Can you take each to its home ? Do you know how to get there ?

ID:	837
INPUT:	Jó , éí Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii yisdáshidoołtéełgo Diyin God bich'į' baa ahééh nisin ! Ákohgo t'áá shí ánísht'éego Diyin God yee has'áanii shíni' bee bi'íínísin ; jó , ts'ísee k'ehgo bąąhági át'éii yee has'áaniida bi'íínísin .
PRED:	I thank the Lord Jesus Christ , the one who gives thanks to me , and I am giving thanks to God as a sin offering to the law of God .
GOLD:	Thank God ! The answer is in Jesus Christ our Lord . So you see how it is : In my mind I really want to obey God 's law , but because of my sinful nature I am a slave to sin .

ID:	838
INPUT:	Éí kodi nihił áhoot'éhígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé , áádóó nihijéí hada'ólníigo ánihizhdoolííl ałdó' biniyé nihich'į' ahóół'a' .
PRED:	But you will know that you are righteous , and your hearts are too proud for each other .
GOLD:	I have sent him to you for this very purpose — to let you know how we are doing and to encourage you .

ID:	839
INPUT:	Éí bąą Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Bóhólníihii kót'éego baa haadzíí' , Aháláane' , shínaaí ! Aháláane' , shideezhí ! Aháláane' , bóhonishníihii ! Aháláane' , yee ayóó át'éii ! doo daaníigo haa atínídadindleehgo daacha da doo !
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ This is what the message of Jehoiakim son of Jehoiakim , the son of Jehoiakim of Jehoiakim , the Lord , who has told me , “ I will weep ! ”
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says about Jehoiakim , son of King Josiah : “ The people will not mourn for him , crying to one another , ‘ Alas , my brother ! Alas , my sister ! 'His subjects will not mourn for him , crying , ‘ Alas , our master is dead ! Alas , his splendor is gone ! '

ID:	840
INPUT:	Nidi shí éí hool'áágóó Jéíkab biDiyin God baa hashne' áádóó baa hashniihgo bich'į' hashtaał doo .
PRED:	But I will sing praises to Jacob , and I will sing praises to the God of Jacob .
GOLD:	But as for me , I will always proclaim what God has done ; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob .

ID:	841
INPUT:	T'ah náábíláahgo diné t'áá ałtso bitahdóó diné t'áá nitsídaakeesii áádóó Diyin God deidísinii áádóó bada'ahódlíii índa adááh hání yijoołxáii náhidííla ; éí miilgo , neeznádiingo , ashdladiingo índa neeznáago diné yindant'áa doogo nídiinííł .
PRED:	Then all the people of Israel will serve God , who will serve God and serve him . He will send fifty men to battle , and he will rule over them .
GOLD:	But select from all the people some capable , honest men who fear God and hate bribes . Appoint them as leaders over groups of one thousand , one hundred , fifty , and ten .

ID:	842
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é ła' kéyahgi bik'ídadziskaigo David bił baa jíkai . Bááh ła' bada'dzistsoodgo yiyííyą́ą́' ; tó ałdó' ła' baa dadzizką́ągo yoodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	They took some of the land of Egypt , and they ate it and drank from the land of Egypt . They ate it and drank some water for the water .
GOLD:	Along the way they found an Egyptian man in a field and brought him to David . They gave him some bread to eat and water to drink .

ID:	843
INPUT:	T'ah abínídą́ą́' aa a'ááh nínízinii baa hane'go háni'dii diists'a'go áshílééh , háálá ni naa jííníshłí . Yishááł dooleełgóó bínashiníłtin , háálá shii' sizíinii nich'į' cho'ooł'į́įgo níká déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	Let me listen to your unfailing love , for I am telling you what I am saying , for I am in your unfailing love .
GOLD:	Let me hear of your unfailing love each morning , for I am trusting you.Show me where to walk , for I give myself to you .

ID:	844
INPUT:	Áko shik'is jílį́ shííní'níigo , t'áá náshididííłtéłígi át'éego nááhodidííłtééł .
PRED:	“ You are my brother , my brother , ” he said .
GOLD:	So if you consider me your partner , welcome him as you would welcome me .

ID:	845
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díldzííł ! ShiDiyin God yisdáshíłteeh ! Háálá shida'ana'í t'áá ałtso biniishjaa' náhidíníłhaal . Doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii biwoo' dahíníti' .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord my God , for you have rebelled against me , for you have rebelled against all my enemies .
GOLD:	Arise , O Lord ! Rescue me , my God ! Slap all my enemies in the face ! Shatter the teeth of the wicked !

ID:	846
INPUT:	T'áá biyázhí nishłį́į́dóó wóshdę́ę́' atíshi'dil'į́į́ nít'éé' áádóó k'asdą́ą́' danástsaah nít'éé' ; nits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' báádahadzidii bik'ee ti'hooshnííh ; t'áadoo ánááhó'ne'<unk> da .
PRED:	As I was born from my earliest earliest earliest youth , I was sick , and no one was sick .
GOLD:	I have been sick and close to death since my youth.I stand helpless and desperate before your terrors .

ID:	847
INPUT:	Pásher ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan tsosts'id .
PRED:	The family of Pashhur
GOLD:	The family of Pashhur1,247

ID:	848
INPUT:	naat'áanii danilíinii tó yíká ida'iizgeed ; diné binanit'a'í danilíinii bigish yee tó yíká nida'azgeed . Áko honoojíídóó Mátanah hoolyéégóó Ízrel dine'é dah náádii'ná ;
PRED:	So the king 's men dug a well of water for the well of the well . So the men of Israel returned from the wilderness .
GOLD:	Sing of this well , which princes dug , which great leaders hollowed outwith their scepters and staffs. ” Then the Israelites left the wilderness and proceeded on through Mattanah ,

ID:	849
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizindóó índa aláahgo naat' áanii bighandóó yódí ałtso ayííyį́ , áko Sálaman éí naagé óola yee ádayiilaaígíí t'áá át'é éí Sháíshak ayííyį́ .
PRED:	They captured the Ark of the Lord 's Temple and took all his shields and gold . So Solomon took all the gold shields of the Lord .
GOLD:	He ransacked the treasuries of the Lord 's Temple and the royal palace ; he stole everything , including all the gold shields Solomon had made .

ID:	850
INPUT:	Áádóó aa doolyéełii bich'į' nizh'nínilgo , ada'azláii dah nídazhdiił'a' .
PRED:	He sent the gifts to the people , and he sent them to the heavens .
GOLD:	After delivering the payment , Ehud started home with those who had helped carry the tribute .

ID:	851
INPUT:	Nída'dókeedígíí t'áá ałtso ba'iyínííł , áádóó ninaalye'é nighayii'níiłii t'áadoo bínéíníkeedí .
PRED:	Do n't be able to get away from your wealth , or your wealth is left .
GOLD:	Give to anyone who asks ; and when things are taken away from you , do n't try to get them back .

ID:	852
INPUT:	David éí dibé nidanilkaadii áádóó béégashii nidanilkaadii t'áá át'é néísná . Áko diné dabilį́'ígíí alą́ąjį' ats'ádeineeskaadgo ádaaní , Díí David binaalye'é ádaat'é .
PRED:	David captured all the flocks and herds of sheep and goats and goats . And David counted the flocks of sheep and goats . This is what David had commanded .
GOLD:	He also recovered all the flocks and herds , and his men drove them ahead of the other livestock . “ This plunder belongs to David ! ” they said .

ID:	853
INPUT:	Áko hahóóyá bijį́ tsin naazkaad dabi'iil danizhóníii éí tsin naazkaadii páam wolyéhígíí bi'iil áádóó tsin dadíłch'ilii bi'iil índa tó nílį́į́dę́ę́' k'ai' ałdó' nidahidoołjołgo bee chaha'oh ádadoohłííł , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo tsosts'id yidoołkááł .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the trees of the trees of branches , branches , branches , palm trees , branches , branches , and branches from the trees of the Lord your God . Then you will provide seven times for seven days .
GOLD:	On the first day gather branches from magnificent trees — palm fronds , boughs from leafy trees , and willows that grow by the streams . Then celebrate with joy before the Lord your God for seven days .

ID:	854
INPUT:	naaldlooshii dabikéshgaan dahałgizhígíí áádóó doo bita' nida'azbaalii índa nída'at'aałígíí éí daohsą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ You must not eat any animal that has split hooves , and you may eat it .
GOLD:	You may eat any animal that has completely split hooves and chews the cud .

ID:	855
INPUT:	Shoo , kǫ́ǫ́ sézį́ ; Bóhólníihii binááł áádóó ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii binááł shaa dahołne' . Háishą' bibéégashii bigha nishtį́ ? Háishą' bitélii bigha nishtį́ ? Háishą' bi'délo' ? Háishą' bide íinisin ? Háishą' bee naho'diiniihii sheinínilgo shíni' ííłdingo áyiilaa ? Éí nihił k'éédahodeeshdǫǫł .
PRED:	Look , I am standing before the Lord . Who is the one who has anointed me ? Who has anointed me ? Who has given me victory over the donkey ? Who has given me victory ? Who has given me victory ? Who has given me victory over ? ”
GOLD:	Now testify against me in the presence of the Lord and before his anointed one . Whose ox or donkey have I stolen ? Have I ever cheated any of you ? Have I ever oppressed you ? Have I ever taken a bribe and perverted justice ? Tell me and I will make right whatever I have done wrong . ”

ID:	856
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus t'áadoo hach'į' hanáádzíi' da , áko Páílat díidíígíí yik'ee t'óó bił ahayóí .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ No , ” Pilate replied .
GOLD:	But Jesus said nothing , much to Pilate 's surprise .

ID:	857
INPUT:	Ayóó'óósh'níinii éí jádí , doodaii' bįįhką' nahalin , jó'akon . Tsé yítł'inígíí bine'dę́ę'go sizį́įgo tsésǫ'gi tsin yistł'ǫ́ǫgo dádiníbaalígíí yiníká déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	My lover is like a deer , as a deer , as a deer , whose wings were decorated with carvings of water .
GOLD:	My lover is like a swift gazelleor a young stag.Look , there he is behind the wall , looking through the window , peering into the room .

ID:	858
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é t'áá dah yinééł nít'éé' índa dé'éyóní hatahgi t'óó átsééd kéédahat'ínígíí ádił nida'iisí'ígíí bá yóó'anídidoot'ááł , háálá t'áadoo yaa ákodaníziní ádił nida'iisíí' .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel have sinned against their sin and foreigners , for they have sinned against their sins . They have committed their sins for their sins .
GOLD:	The whole community of Israel will be forgiven , including the foreigners living among you , for all the people were involved in the sin .

ID:	859
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii bizaad bidziilígíí bąą , Ha'át'íí lá baa naniná ? háísh yididooniił ?
PRED:	“ What do you say to the king , ‘ What is the Almighty ? '
GOLD:	His command is backed by great power . No one can resist or question it .

ID:	860
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii hach'į' haadzíi'go tsits'aa' ádajiilaago Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin tł'óo'di dáń'dítį́įhgi nidadziz'ą́ .
PRED:	Then the king took the Ark of the Lord and stood in front of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	So now the king ordered a chest to be made and set outside the gate leading to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	861
INPUT:	Áko nihí Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , ał'ąą ádóone'é nohłínígíí bik'ehgo díí kéyah ałtaa doohdzoh .
PRED:	“ You are the tribes of Israel , O Israel , and give this land to the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Divide the land within these boundaries among the tribes of Israel .

ID:	862
INPUT:	Kin hadaas'áhígíí nihikédaayahgi táa'go kin haal'áii t'áá nihí ádá nidadidooh'ááł ; éí kédaayah Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ You must build three cities of refuge in the land of the Lord your God is giving you . You will occupy the land you are giving you .
GOLD:	Then you must set apart three cities of refuge in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	863
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii díí bee aha'deet'áanii danihizhé'é yę́ę doo yee yił ahada'deest'ą́ą da , nidi nihí díí jį́ dahinii'nánígíí t'áá áníiltso nihił ahada'deest'ą́ .
PRED:	This is what the covenant of the Lord says : “ We have not been circumcised for our ancestors , but we will not die . ”
GOLD:	The Lord did not make this covenant with our ancestors , but with all of us who are alive today .

ID:	864
INPUT:	Áko diné t'ááłá'í níyá nahalingo diné t'áá ałtso t'ááłáhígi ahíikai ; tó bidáń'dítį́į́h bich'éédą́ą́'góó atiinígi áłah nilį́ , áko bee haz'áanii yína'niłtinii Ézra , Mózes yee has'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' yee hahaasdzíi'ii díí'ááł , deidííniid .
PRED:	So all the people of Israel went to the main room of the gateway on the main street Gate . They said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says to Moses . ”
GOLD:	all the people assembled with a unified purpose at the square just inside the Water Gate . They asked Ezra the scribe to bring out the Book of the Law of Moses , which the Lord had given for Israel to obey .

ID:	865
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go hazháá'áád nít'é'ígíí bił Mó'ab kéyahdóó nihééjíkai , háálá Mó'ab kéyahgi díí baa hozdiizts'ą́ą́' : haash yit'éego Bóhólníihii bidine'é yik'iinít'į́į'go ch'iyáán yeidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	So Ruth got up and went to the land of Moab , for the Lord heard what he had said to Moab , “ What is the land the Lord has given us today . ”
GOLD:	Then Naomi heard in Moab that the Lord had blessed his people in Judah by giving them good crops again . So Naomi and her daughters-in-law got ready to leave Moab to return to her homeland .

ID:	866
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go índa jį́įgo t'áá áłahjį' dilwoshgo tsé yee ni'ídiilgéeshgo dziłgóó áádóó dajishcháá'góó naaghá .
PRED:	On the day of the night , the mountains will cry out to the mountains and the hills .
GOLD:	Day and night he wandered among the burial caves and in the hills , howling and cutting himself with sharp stones .

ID:	867
INPUT:	Ménahem łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáhígíí t'áá ałtso éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Pekahiah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Menahem 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	868
INPUT:	Bí t'éiyá bee yisdádeeshááł ; t'óó áhodil'íinii éí doo Diyin God yidááhdóó nidoogáał da .
PRED:	No , I can not stand before God , nor will never stand before God .
GOLD:	But this is what will save me — I am not godless.If I were , I could not stand before him .

ID:	869
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii ła' áádóó nááda'iiłniihii ła' índa dinéda ła' , Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' íiyisí baa hane'ii , níigo yáłti'ii éí diné ba'áłchíní t'áá bił atídeeshłííł .
PRED:	And I will bring some of the prophets and priests to the Lord , and I will bring them out of the community .
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	870
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí óola bee ályaii éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii biyi' ata'naníbaalígíí bitsį́įjį' niiní'ą́ągo
PRED:	He placed the gold incense at the entrance of the Tabernacle and placed it at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He also placed the gold incense altar in the Tabernacle , in the Holy Place in front of the inner curtain .

ID:	871
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł díí nídaahdį́įh doo : éí náhodidoo' áłígi ákwii bízhi' dólzingo haz'ą́ągi tł'oh naadą́ą́' neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' áádóó wáin ániidíii neeznáá daníką́ągo t'ááłá'í siką́ągo áádóó tsin áliv bineest'ą' bik'ah neeznáá daníką́ągo t'ááłá'í siką́ągo índa nihilį́į́' áádóó nihidibé alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii náádahołniihii daahsą́ą doo . Ákódaaht'į́įgo díí bídahooł'aah doo : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá áłahjį' dadíínóhsin doo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord your God says : If you eat it , you will eat one of the grain offerings and grain offerings and grain offerings and grain offerings and olive oil , and you will be given to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Bring this tithe to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — and eat it there in his presence . This applies to your tithes of grain , new wine , olive oil , and the firstborn males of your flocks and herds . Doing this will teach you always to fear the Lord your God .

ID:	872
INPUT:	áká aníjílwo' ládą́ą́' , háni'dii áká aníjílwo' dooleeł ; nazh'nitin ládą́ą́' , háni'dii nazh'nitin dooleeł ;
PRED:	Come , take refuge , and ask , “ If you are being healed , take refuge in the crowd . ”
GOLD:	If your gift is serving others , serve them well . If you are a teacher , teach well .

ID:	873
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í honíle'go t'áá łáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tseebídiindóó ba'aan ashdladi mííl Asíriya dine'é bisiláo dah yinéłígíí neistseed , áko hoos'įįdgo nízhdiijée'go éí t'áá ałtso daneeznáago bits'íís dadziiłtsą́ , jó'akon .
PRED:	So the angel of the Lord came to the Lord and killed the army of Assyria . So the soldiers chased them down and killed them .
GOLD:	That night the angel of the Lord went out to the Assyrian camp and killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers . When the surviving Assyrians woke up the next morning , they found corpses everywhere .

ID:	874
INPUT:	Áádóó atsį' ayóó áhálniihgo hasht'ejiilaii índa łees'áán biłgo hayáázh Jéíkab bílák'ejííką́ .
PRED:	Then he took the bread and bread and bread and bread he gave Jacob a loaf of bread .
GOLD:	Then she gave Jacob the delicious meal , including freshly baked bread .

ID:	875
INPUT:	Bábilangi Belsházar aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo áłtsé náhááh góne' , Daniel hatsásk'eh bikáá' dziztį́įgo nijiiyeeł áádóó hoł áhóót'įįd . Áko baa nijiizyeelii baa hojoolne'go bee ak'e'jishchį́ :
PRED:	One day , during the fifth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Daniel 's dream , and visions visions visions visions visions visions visions visions visions .
GOLD:	Earlier , during the first year of King Belshazzar 's reign in Babylon , Daniel had a dream and saw visions as he lay in his bed . He wrote down the dream , and this is what he saw .

ID:	876
INPUT:	Áko Bábilan dine'é binanit'a'í danilíinii bá nidaal'a'í éí kéyahgi ayóó ánóolningo ádahóót'įįdígíí yínda'ídí<unk> kił biniyé hach'į' ayiis'a'go Diyin God hwíidínóotah biniyé t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nihoníłtį́ , áko hajéí bii' bee nitsídzíkeesii t'áá át'é bił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	Then the leaders of Babylon sent messengers to ask the king of Babylon to ask him what he had done . He sent them to ask him to ask him , “ You will know that God has made us right with you . ”
GOLD:	However , when ambassadors arrived from Babylon to ask about the remarkable events that had taken place in the land , God withdrew from Hezekiah in order to test him and to see what was really in his heart .

ID:	877
INPUT:	Máíkah éí e'elyaii yich'į' nahałá
PRED:	Micah Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Micah 's Idols

ID:	878
INPUT:	Áádóó diné doo hólǫ́ǫ́góó yiyiiłtsą́ągo áná'ookąąhii doo hólǫ́ǫ́góó t'óó bił ahóóyóí ; éí bąą bigaan yee ádá yisdá'ííjaa' áádóó bit'áá ákogi át'éii chánah í'diilyaa .
PRED:	When he saw the eyes of the people , he would not listen to his arm , and he saved them from his strong arm .
GOLD:	He was amazed to see that no one intervenedto help the oppressed.So he himself stepped in to save them with his strong arm , and his justice sustained him .

ID:	879
INPUT:	Rúben dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Júdah dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	“ These are the tribes of Reuben , east of the east side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	and then Judah , all of whose boundaries extend from east to west .

ID:	880
INPUT:	Áko hamá índa hatsilíké haa yíkai , nidi diné t'óó ahayóigo biniinaa doo hach'į' nookááh át'ée da .
PRED:	But his mother and his brothers did n't let them go into the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him , but they could n't get to him because of the crowd .

ID:	881
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Nihi'ana'í danilíinii t'áá aaníí nahjį' kódaalyaa ; binaalye'é daadziihígíí ałtso adahideezk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	They say , ‘ We are the enemy of our enemies ! We have destroyed everything they did . ' ”
GOLD:	They will say , ‘ See how our enemies have been destroyed.The last of them have been consumed in the fire . '

ID:	882
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Ííjip kéyahdi hoł íldee' , áádóó Íshmeiyel dine'é hoł yíkaígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó Féro bisiláo binanit'a'í , Pátifer wolyéii nahwiisnii' .
PRED:	So Joseph took him to Egypt , and all the people of Egypt came to Egypt . He was a captain of the guard of the guard .
GOLD:	When Joseph was taken to Egypt by the Ishmaelite traders , he was purchased by Potiphar , an Egyptian officer . Potiphar was captain of the guard for Pharaoh , the king of Egypt .

ID:	883
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Éran ííłní , Jó , Ízrel dine'é diyingo shaa nídeidiyii'aahígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó bił dah nídi'diilnihgo náádahaniihii t'áá át'é ałdó' níí' át'é ; éí ni'doolzį́'ígíí bąą naa diní'ą́ , áádóó hool'áágóó bik'eh hoogáałii át'éego niye'ké bił nihaa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Aaron , “ Look , the people of Israel belong to me , the Lord has given me as your special offering . I have given you as your special possession .
GOLD:	The Lord gave these further instructions to Aaron : “ I myself have put you in charge of all the holy offerings that are brought to me by the people of Israel . I have given all these consecrated offerings to you and your sons as your permanent share .

ID:	884
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bibikáá' náá'iiniihí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'é'étiingi si'ánígíí dił yik'ínéíłtah doo , áádóó ak'ahígíí yiidiłidgo Bóhólníihii bich'į' łikání halchin doo .
PRED:	Then the priest will sprinkle the blood of the altar in front of the Lord 's presence at the entrance of the Tabernacle . He must sprinkle the fat of the Tabernacle with the fat of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the priest will be able to splatter the blood against the Lord 's altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and he will burn the fat as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	885
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hadzoodzíi'go bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii ábizhdííniid , Háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne'ésh nááhodi'doo<unk> go bee haz'ą́ , dooda daats'í ?
PRED:	Jesus said to the teachers of religious law and Pharisees , “ Where are you trying to eat the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked the Pharisees and experts in religious law , “ Is it permitted in the law to heal people on the Sabbath day , or not ? ”

ID:	886
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é doo da'nohłį́į́góó ádanihííł'įįdii yee nihá nidahałt'i'ii doo náádadidoots'į́į́łgóó ádeeshłííł , dadine'é doo nihá nináádahałt'i' da dooleeł áádóó nidine'é ádił nida'iilzíihgo doo ánáádadoohdlíił da , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	“ I will make a remnant of the nations , ” says the Lord. “ You will not commit adultery . You will never again again again again , ” says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	I will not let you hear those other nations insult you , and you will no longer be mocked by them . You will not be a land that causes its nation to fall , says the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	887
INPUT:	Nidi biniinaanii éí bił kééhót'íinii t'áá bí bił nabik'íyádííłtih , áádóó diné náánáła' neinił'inii t'áadoo bits'ą́ą́' baa nahólne'í .
PRED:	But if you are wise , you must not be wise . Do n't be afraid of your neighbor .
GOLD:	When arguing with your neighbor , do n't betray another person 's secret .

ID:	888
INPUT:	Bits'áoz'a' bąąhgóó tsídii wót'áahdi nidaat'a'ii t'áá ałtso bit'oh ádayiilaa , bits'áoz'a' biyaagóó éí halgaigóó naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso ákǫ́ǫ́ nida'iishchį́ , áádóó bichaha'ohgóó ał'ąą dine'é ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	He planted the branches from the east side of the field , including the birds of the field , including the birds of the sky , and all the nations living there .
GOLD:	The birds nested in its branches , and in its shade all the wild animals gave birth.All the great nations of the worldlived in its shadow .

ID:	889
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii bee haz'áanii k'íiníti'go łoh yiih yighááh , nidi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii hataałgo bił nihoozhǫǫh łeh .
PRED:	The wicked are trapped by the wicked , but the godly are glad .
GOLD:	Evil people are trapped by sin , but the righteous escape , shouting for joy .

ID:	890
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii binaanish iiná yii' iilóós , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii ááníłígíí yee bąąhági át'éii yii' iilóós .
PRED:	The godly give life to the godly , but the life of the wicked bring life to life .
GOLD:	The earnings of the godly enhance their lives , but evil people squander their money on sin .

ID:	891
INPUT:	T'áá ni t'éí hodiyingo honílǫ́ǫ́dę́ę́' , yádiłhił bilááhdę́ę́' hadah dííní'į́į́' , áádóó nidine'é Ízrel niidlíinii áádóó kéyah nihaa dííní'ánígíí bik'ijídliih ; éí kéyahígíí danihizhé'é yę́ę bich'į' bee ádee hadíínídzíi'ii bikáa'gi abe' áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįd .
PRED:	“ You have hidden yourself from the sky , but you are a good land that you gave us a land flowing with milk and honey . Give us a land flowing with milk and honey .
GOLD:	Now look down from your holy dwelling place in heaven and bless your people Israel and the land you swore to our ancestors to give us — a land flowing with milk and honey . '

ID:	892
INPUT:	Áko díigi át'éego Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah kwáát'įįd ; kót'éego diné táa'go ayóó ádaat'éii atah jílį́ ho'di'ní .
PRED:	He did as Benaiah son of Jehoiada did as he did . He was the greatest among the people .
GOLD:	Deeds like these made Benaiah as famous as the Three mightiest warriors .

ID:	893
INPUT:	Ákohgo Daniel hakin góne' yah anídzoodzáago Hananáíyah áádóó Mísheiyel índa Azaráíyah éí hak'isóó danilíinii áhodoo'niidígíí bee bił náhojoolne' .
PRED:	Daniel went to the palace and told him what had happened . He told him what he had said .
GOLD:	Then Daniel went home and told his friends Hananiah , Mishael , and Azariah what had happened .

ID:	894
INPUT:	Áko Kéínan kéyahdi hazhé'é baa níjíkaigo áho'dool'įįdígíí bee bił dahojoolne'go ádajiní ,
PRED:	So he told his father what he had happened . He told them ,
GOLD:	When the brothers came to their father , Jacob , in the land of Canaan , they told him everything that had happened to them .

ID:	895
INPUT:	Jesus éí Lázaras daaztsánígíí ááhyiłní , nidi hanályį́įhgo ałhoshígíí ááhyiłní daznízin .
PRED:	Jesus also told Lazarus , “ Lazarus is already gone . ”
GOLD:	They thought Jesus meant Lazarus was simply sleeping , but Jesus meant Lazarus had died .

ID:	896
INPUT:	A'ohgo áda'dólzinii bik'idahojidlí , háálá éí nahasdzáán daabíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	God blesses the humble , for he will possess the earth .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are humble , for they will inherit the whole earth .

ID:	897
INPUT:	Áko Dan dine'é éí e'elyaii t'áá bí ádá dah dayiyiisį' . Manáseh biye' Gérsham nilíinii éí haye' Jánathan áádóó biye'ké éí kéyah nahós'a'gi yisnááh dadzizlį́į'jį' Dan dine'é bá nááda'iiłniihii dajílį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	He made a carved image that he made the carved image of the tribe of Dan and Aaron and his sons . He reigned in the land of Dan in the land of Dan in the tribe of Dan .
GOLD:	Then they set up the carved image , and they appointed Jonathan son of Gershom , son of Moses , as their priest . This family continued as priests for the tribe of Dan until the Exile .

ID:	898
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaadóó David éí Meihanéíyim kin shijaa'jį' jiníyáago Néíhash biye' Shóbai éí Áman dine'é bikin haal'áii Rábahdę́ę́' naagháii , áádóó Ámiyel biye' Méíkir éí Ló-dííbar kin shijaa'dę́ę́' naagháii índa Gíliyad dine'é Barziléíyai , éí Rógiilim kin shijaa'dę́ę́' naagháii
PRED:	So David went out to the City of David ( which means “ Greetings from the town of Laish ) . These are the clans of the clans of the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and scarlet son of Jonathan . These are the clans of Gilead .
GOLD:	When David arrived at Mahanaim , he was warmly greeted by Shobi son of Nahash , who came from Rabbah of the Ammonites , and by Makir son of Ammiel from Lo-debar , and by Barzillai of Gilead from Rogelim .

ID:	899
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' dinééh léi' Hííbrew dine'é nilį́įgo éí siláo binanit'a'í yá naal'a'í nilį́įgo bił naháatą́ą́ nít'éé' , áko neisiigeelígíí bee bił hwiilne'go ááhyiłníinii yee nihił hoolne' ; t'áá áníidlah neisiigeelígíí ááhyiłníinii bik'ehgo yee nihił hoolne' .
PRED:	About that time a man named Simon , the commander of the Hebrews , who had two men and two men . And we said , “ We 've told us what we 've told us . ”
GOLD:	There was a young Hebrew man with us in the prison who was a slave of the captain of the guard . We told him our dreams , and he told us what each of our dreams meant .

ID:	900
INPUT:	Kodóó dah doóya' lágo , baa nánooshkąąh ; nánísdzáago índa aa deeshłéełii ch'ídeeshjihgo nich'į' nideeshnił . Áko áhodííniid , Néínídzáajį' niba' sédáa doo .
PRED:	Do n't let me get away from your table , and I 'll stay away . ” So Naaman replied , “ I 'll go back to you . ”
GOLD:	Do n't go away until I come back and bring my offering to you. ” He answered , “ I will stay here until you return . ”

ID:	901
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii diné nihich'į' yi'iiłníihii t'áá ałtso ádadoołdįįł ; doo ła' baa a'áhí dadínóohsįįł da , áádóó t'ááká bidiyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' nidahoh<unk> yíila' , jó , ákódaaht'į́įgo łoh nihąąh niidoo'ááł .
PRED:	“ Then the Lord your God will destroy you , and you will destroy all the people of the Lord your God . Do n't let anyone be able to trap you .
GOLD:	“ You must destroy all the nations the Lord your God hands over to you . Show them no mercy , and do not worship their gods , or they will trap you .

ID:	902
INPUT:	Áko siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í haa níyáago hoołtsoodgo béésh da'ahólzha'í naakigo bee ho'<unk> <unk> níigo yee hooł'a' . Áko , Háísh át'į́ , índa , Ha'át'íishą' yaa naayá , níigo na'ídééłkid .
PRED:	So the officer took him into the chains of the guard , and he sent him to ask him what he had happened . “ Who is he ? ” he asked . “ What is he ? ”
GOLD:	Then the commander arrested him and ordered him bound with two chains . He asked the crowd who he was and what he had done .

ID:	903
INPUT:	Ákwe'é yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii Jerúsałemdę́ę́' Ántiyakjį' yíkai .
PRED:	About that time the prophet returned from Antioch of Syria .
GOLD:	During this time some prophets traveled from Jerusalem to Antioch .

ID:	904
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii binahont'ingo haz'ą́ągi kééhojit'ínígíí éí Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii bichaha'ohgi hojílǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Those who live in the Most High will live in the Most High in the Almighty .
GOLD:	Those who live in the shelter of the Most Highwill find rest in the shadow of the Almighty .

ID:	905
INPUT:	Dilní yee ádadííniidgo t'áá ałtso hasht'e'ádadiilyaa , nidi doo ła' dazhdoobah da , háálá diné t'áá yíl'áá nít'éé' t'óó báhádzidgo atíháshłééh .
PRED:	Then they said to each other , “ We will not fight against them , for I will not destroy them . ”
GOLD:	“ The trumpet calls Israel 's army to mobilize , but no one listens , for my fury is against them all .

ID:	906
INPUT:	Áádóó David áhodííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' doo náníldzidgóó Bóhólníihii ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii bich'į' k'ídíínílchidgo síníłhį́ ?
PRED:	“ Why are you afraid ? ” David demanded . “ Why are you going to kill the Lord 's anointed king ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why were you not afraid to kill the Lord 's anointed one ? ” David asked .

ID:	907
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii éí t'áá ákót'éego dahonít'i'ii łahgo át'éego ádeidoolííł biniyé t'áá nahont'inee t'áadoo le'é <unk> yééh .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked get into the wicked , so you will be able to teach the word of the wicked .
GOLD:	The wicked take secret bribesto pervert the course of justice .

ID:	908
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii nílíinii , Bóhólníihii baa hóniih , áádóó yee naa joozba'ii éí t'ááká baa yóónééh .
PRED:	Let me praise the Lord , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	Let all that I am praise the Lord ; may I never forget the good things he does for me .

ID:	909
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóí naa'ayiiłtł'iidgo t'áá aaníí ałk'i dahiniidéehgo áyiilaa áádóó ádadííniid , Soł<unk> <unk> , nihide áhósinii bidiltłish bits'ą́ąjį' dah didiijahgo t'áá nihí nihidine'é índa kéyah bii' nidanihi'diizhchį́ yę́ęgóó nídiidleeł .
PRED:	And he made a huge crowd to kill us . And he said , “ We will be able to kill you from the distant lands of the tribe of many nations . We will take possession of our land , and the land will be given to you . ”
GOLD:	They stumble and fall over each otherand say among themselves , ‘ Come , let 's go back to our people , to the land of our birth.Let 's get away from the sword of the enemy ! '

ID:	910
INPUT:	Éí bikéyahdóó nahjį' kóbi'diilyaago , Éí kéyah doo shídíínít'i'góó ts'ídá t'áadoo nééhosésįįd da , hałní nahalin doo .
PRED:	They came to me from the land of Egypt , and I did n't let them be like a storm .
GOLD:	But when it is uprooted , it 's as though it never existed !

ID:	911
INPUT:	chahałheełgi índa aniné bichaha'ohgi nidaháaztánígíí bik'i adinídíin doo , áádóó hózhǫ́ǫgo honít'i'góó nihoo'ish doo .
PRED:	The light of the light will be clothed in darkness , and the light will be clothed with joy .
GOLD:	to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death , and to guide us to the path of peace . ”

ID:	912
INPUT:	Jó , shidine'é doo ádahalyą́ą da ; doo shéédahósin da ; t'óó ádahodiilgis ; doo ak'ida'diitįįh da . Doo yá'áshǫ' ádeidoolíłígíí yaa dahóyą́ ; yá'át'éehii yaa nidadookahígíí doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	“ Look , my people are foolish , and they will never understand what I am doing . They will know what they are doing .
GOLD:	“ My people are foolishand do not know me , ” says the Lord. “ They are stupid childrenwho have no understanding.They are clever enough at doing wrong , but they have no idea how to do right ! ”

ID:	913
INPUT:	háálá hastą́ą́h jį́įjį' Bóhólníihii éí yádiłhił áádóó nahasdzáán áádóó tónteel índa biyi'di dahólóonii t'áá ałtso áyiilaa , áádóó tsosts'id jį́ azlį́į́' góne' hanáályį́į́' ; éí bąą Bóhólníihii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ yik'ijisdli' áádóó dílzingo ats'éidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	For the sixth day of the Lord came upon the earth and the earth and all the people of the earth . He blessed them for seven days , and he blessed them in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	For in six days the Lord made the heavens , the earth , the sea , and everything in them ; but on the seventh day he rested . That is why the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and set it apart as holy .

ID:	914
INPUT:	Áádóó Léíban éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Da' t'óósh shidá'í nílínígíí bąą t'áá níík'eh shá nanilnish doo ? Shił hólne' , díkwíishą' bik'é nanilnish doo ?
PRED:	“ Do you want me to prepare my enemies ? ” Laban replied . “ Why do you want me to work ?
GOLD:	Laban said to him , “ You should n't work for me without pay just because we are relatives . Tell me how much your wages should be . ”

ID:	915
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó éí kin haal'áhídóó dabilį́į́' áádóó bindaalye'é éí Ízrel dine'é dayoosbą́ągo t'áá bí ádá nídeidii'nil ; Bóhólníihii bizaad k'ehgo Jáshowa yich' į' yee haadzíi'ii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	So the people of Israel set up their homes and plunder the plunder of the Lord , just as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	Only the livestock and the treasures of the town were not destroyed , for the Israelites kept these as plunder for themselves , as the Lord had commanded Joshua .

ID:	916
INPUT:	Jó , nik'éí bąąh háíníł'áhígíí yee' t'áadoo biniyéhígóó nich'į' niná'doodlééł . Nee áchą́'íídéeni'go t'áadoo yił hanáádadólchídígóó t'áá daalchí'ígo íinilaa .
PRED:	Do n't worry about your relatives 's relatives , for you have defiled your own children .
GOLD:	“ For example , you must have lent money to your friendand demanded clothing as security.Yes , you stripped him to the bone .

ID:	917
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , yaa nidaaskaii bik'é k'éédabidídle' .
PRED:	Give back those who trust in the Lord , for he will pay them back .
GOLD:	Pay them back , Lord , for all the evil they have done .

ID:	918
INPUT:	Ádaat'éii índa yaa nidaakaígíí bá daníníł'į́į'go ha'íídíílniił , áko Jerúsalemgi baa niséyáhígíí t'áá ałtso doo t'áadoo biniyéhígóó baa niséyáágóó nił bééhodoozįįł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	Then you will see what you see , and you will say to them , ‘ You will know that I am the Lord , the God of Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	When you meet them and see their behavior , you will understand that these things are not being done to Israel without cause . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	919
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , t'áadoo áłchínígi át'éego nitsídaahkeesí ; jó , a<unk> gi át'éego doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'éii doo baa ákodanohsin da , nidi hóyáanii k'ehgo nitsídaahkees .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't know what is right , for you do n't know what is right .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't be childish in your understanding of these things . Be innocent as babies when it comes to evil , but be mature in understanding matters of this kind .

ID:	920
INPUT:	Mt . 26 : 1-5
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	921
INPUT:	Nihits'iizis bii' nooh nída'ołchíihii bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo áádóó nihibii' táá'oo'nihí bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo .
PRED:	I will bless you with your flocks and herds , and you will enjoy your commands .
GOLD:	Your fruit baskets and breadboardswill be blessed .

ID:	922
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' Béíyasha éidí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go Réímah kin haal'á ánéídléhígíí yik'i deeyáago Térzah kin haal'áagi kééhat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Balak heard this , he went to Ramah and went to Ramah to Ramah and went to Ramah .
GOLD:	As soon as Baasha of Israel heard what was happening , he abandoned his project of fortifying Ramah and withdrew to Tirzah .

ID:	923
INPUT:	Atiin bąąhgóó tó nílínígi ákwii tó jidoodlį́įłgo de dah jidínóot'ááł .
PRED:	The water will water water water into water , and water will be baptized .
GOLD:	But he himself will be refreshed from brooks along the way.He will be victorious .

ID:	924
INPUT:	Nihí yisdádahinoochą́'ígíí ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó yisnááh dasoolį́į'go shéédaołniih doo ; jó , dabijéí yee ajił k'ehgo adádanoolníigo áádóó eda'alyaii ajił k'ehgo yidádanoolníigo deiníł'íinii shits'ádahaaskaigo biniinaa yínííł naashá . Doo yildinígi át'éego ádił nida'iisí'ígíí yiniinaa ák'ee dadi'niih doo .
PRED:	“ You have become the wilderness of many nations , for you have defiled me by worshiping other gods . You have committed adultery by worshiping other gods and detestable idols , worshiping me .
GOLD:	Then when they are exiled among the nations , they will remember me . They will recognize how hurt I am by their unfaithful hearts and lustful eyes that long for their idols . Then at last they will hate themselves for all their detestable sins .

ID:	925
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah ajííyáago nida'iiłniihígíí ch'ízhneełkaadgo baa nízdiidzá ,
PRED:	Then he went to the Temple and began to enter the house of the priests .
GOLD:	Then Jesus entered the Temple and began to drive out the people selling animals for sacrifices .

ID:	926
INPUT:	Kin índa at'į́ éí azhé'é danilíinii bits'ą́ą́dóó ee nidahwiileeh , nidi e'asdzą́ą́ hóyáanii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó ee nihwiileeh .
PRED:	The descendants of the tribe of Levi are divided into two towns , but the Lord gives birth to a wicked wife .
GOLD:	Fathers can give their sons an inheritance of houses and wealth , but only the Lord can give an understanding wife .

ID:	927
INPUT:	Diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił . Mą'ii dahodoolghałii dajílį́į doo .
PRED:	The sword will be killed , and the sword will be killed .
GOLD:	They will die by the swordand become the food of jackals .

ID:	928
INPUT:	Dabibéégashii áádóó deit'ínígíí índa dabilį́į́' t'áá ałtso , da' éísh doo danihí da doo ? Haa'íshą' ákódadii'nííł , áko nihił kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ What do you know the calf and the calf ? We do n't want to live in such things ? ” they asked . “ What should we live ? ”
GOLD:	But if we do this , all their livestock and possessions will eventually be ours . Come , let 's agree to their terms and let them settle here among us . ”

ID:	929
INPUT:	Náábíkéé' góne' anáázh'niiltsąądgo ashkii náájíshchį́ , áko ánáázhdoo'niid , K'ad Bóhólníihii baa hashniih doo ; díí biniinaa ashkii Júdah bee jíízhi' , áádóó t'áadoo náá'jíshchį́į da .
PRED:	Then she became pregnant again and said , “ This is what the Lord says : This is what the Lord says : I will never again again again again again ! ”
GOLD:	Once again Leah became pregnant and gave birth to another son . She named him Judah , for she said , “ Now I will praise the Lord ! ” And then she stopped having children .

ID:	930
INPUT:	Ákondi ła' da'oołch'į́įdgo áádóó saad ídei'áahgo Christ yaa dahalne' , nidi ła' éí yá'át'éehgo nitsáhákees bee yaa dahalne' .
PRED:	But some of them were jealous of Christ 's baptism , but some of them were well respected by the Good News .
GOLD:	It 's true that some are preaching out of jealousy and rivalry . But others preach about Christ with pure motives .

ID:	931
INPUT:	nihik'ee dadiniihgo nihaa nídaat'į́į doo índa bindaałnishgo bee bilááh nídaasdlį́į'ii éí adeidiyoojih áádóó t'áá łichí'ígo nidaahkaigo adanihidoolííł índa t'óó baa'ihgo ááníłígíí áádóó ałjiłnii nílį́įgo t'áá łiníchí'í nits'ą́ą́' <unk> di'doołtsos .
PRED:	“ And if you are proud and refuse to teach them , you will enjoy what I am giving you to your own children and your wives and your wives and daughters .
GOLD:	They will treat you with hatred and rob you of all you own , leaving you stark naked . The shame of your prostitution will be exposed to all the world .

ID:	932
INPUT:	éí bąą dibé baa ádahołyáanii , Bóhólníihii áníinii dadoohts'į́į́h ,
PRED:	Therefore , listen to this message from the Lord :
GOLD:	Therefore , you shepherds , hear the word of the Lord .

ID:	933
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí dine'é áyidííniid , Díí jínígíí béédaałniih : éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' naalte' danohłį́ yę́ędóó ch'ínoonáa ni' , háálá Bóhólníihii éí díí kéyahdóó bibee adziilii yee ch'éénihí'nil , áko díík'ǫsh bił bááh ályaii t'áadoo nídaohdį́hí .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the people , “ Be sure that you are slaves in the wilderness of Egypt , for the Lord has chosen you from the land of Egypt . You must live in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ This is a day to remember forever — the day you left Egypt , the place of your slavery . Today the Lord has brought you out by the power of his mighty hand . ( Remember , eat no food containing yeast . )

ID:	934
INPUT:	Lą'í nááhaidi baa hózhǫ́ǫgo yihah wolyéhígíí baa hodoolzhishgo béeso hak'é naalyáhígíí bik'ehgo t'áá hó łahjį' ák'é ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	A few years later , the owner must pay the money for the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	If many years still remain until the jubilee , they will repay the proper proportion of what they received when they sold themselves .

ID:	935
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é ahoolchíiłii , náá'iiłniihii danilíinii éí diné bee dahólónígíí neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' baa dahajáah doogo bee bá nahaz'ą́ , éí bidine'é danilíinii ákódaadzaa , Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́dóó ahoolchíiłii nidi ákódaadzaa .
PRED:	“ These are the Levites who have been given to the priests who have given the Levites , and they have given them a solemn pact with the families of Abraham .
GOLD:	Now the law of Moses required that the priests , who are descendants of Levi , must collect a tithe from the rest of the people of Israel , who are also descendants of Abraham .

ID:	936
INPUT:	Áko Remaláíyah biye' Pííkah éí Júdah dine'é dahayóii t'áá ła'óo jį́ neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi mííl neistseed , háálá dahazhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii yóó'adazdeez'ą́ .
PRED:	So Pekah son of Remaliah , who killed the other men of Judah , had taken from the Lord their God .
GOLD:	In a single day Pekah son of Remaliah , Israel 's king , killed 120,000 of Judah 's troops , all of them experienced warriors , because they had abandoned the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	937
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	938
INPUT:	Áko Giihéízai éí Néíyaman bikéé' jiníyá . Áádóó Néíyaman bikéé' joolwołgo hoołtsą́ índa bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yii'dę́ę́' hadááyáago hadááh níyáago ání , Yá'ádahoot'ééhésh ?
PRED:	So Gehazi went to the chariot and followed him . When she saw him , she followed him , she ran out to meet him , and she asked him , “ How could he get up ? ”
GOLD:	So Gehazi set off after Naaman.When Naaman saw Gehazi running after him , he climbed down from his chariot and went to meet him . “ Is everything all right ? ” Naaman asked .

ID:	939
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul hazhé'é yázhí ábizhdííniid , Sámuel hazhó'ó nihił hoolne'go ánihidííniid , Télii éí shónídaozt'e' . Nidi Saul éí aláahgo naat'áanii jidooleełgo Sámuel hoł hoolne'ii t'áadoo bee hazhé'é yázhí bił hojoolne' da .
PRED:	Then Saul said to his father , “ Samuel 's two donkey ! ” But Saul replied , “ I did n't tell you the king of Saul . ” But Saul told the king what he had done .
GOLD:	“ He told us that the donkeys had already been found , ” Saul replied . But Saul did n't tell his uncle what Samuel said about the kingdom .

ID:	940
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí índa tł'ééhonaa'éí yidoojį́į́ł áádóó sǫ' doo da'diníłdíin da doo .
PRED:	I will cover the sun and the moon , and the stars will never be light .
GOLD:	The sun and moon will grow dark , and the stars will no longer shine .

ID:	941
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii áníinii dadoohts'į́į́h ; nízaadi tábąąhgóó kédaayahgóó nidahołne'go kódadohní , Ízrel dine'é tainooskaadii éí t'áá bí áłah ánéidoodlííł , áádóó dibé yaa áhályáanii bidibé yaa áhályánígi át'éego haa áhályą́ą doo ,
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord : “ Listen to the distant lands of the nations , O people of Israel , and bring their shepherd to their own sheep .
GOLD:	“ Listen to this message from the Lord , you nations of the world ; proclaim it in distant coastlands : The Lord , who scattered his people , will gather them and watch over themas a shepherd does his flock .

ID:	942
INPUT:	áádóó hastą́ą́h góne' bá yizhchínígíí <unk> yam wolyé , éí David be'asdzą́ą́ <unk> wolyéii biyáázh jílį́ . Díí David éí Hííbrangi bá neheezhchį́ .
PRED:	And the fourth was the father of David , the daughter of David , the daughter of David . These were the sons of David .
GOLD:	The sixth was Ithream , whose mother was Eglah , David 's wife.These sons were all born to David in Hebron .

ID:	943
INPUT:	Diné ła'da atíhodeeshłííł hó'níigo , hazéé'dóó kǫ' hazdoosihgo hwe'ana'í danilíinii bee ázhdoołdįįł ; ła'da atíhodeeshłííł hó'níigo t'áá ákót'éego nabidi'dootsił .
PRED:	I will destroy them like a flame of fire , and I will destroy them like a flame of fire .
GOLD:	If anyone tries to harm them , fire flashes from their mouths and consumes their enemies . This is how anyone who tries to harm them must die .

ID:	944
INPUT:	Sálaman éí hódzą́ yíká sodoolzin
PRED:	Solomon Asks for Wisdom
GOLD:	Solomon Judges Wisely

ID:	945
INPUT:	Nidi Neiyómii bahastiin Elímelek daaztsą́ , áko hayáázh nidilt'éhígíí bił ch'íjookai .
PRED:	But Naomi died , the daughter of Abimelech 's son , and his son came out out of the night .
GOLD:	Then Elimelech died , and Naomi was left with her two sons .

ID:	946
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii deidósinii éí Bóhólníihii yił ahídadínéelná ; bibee aha'deet'áanii bił béédahózingo áyósin .
PRED:	The Lord takes care of those who fear the Lord ; he knows how to fear his covenant .
GOLD:	The Lord is a friend to those who fear him.He teaches them his covenant .

ID:	947
INPUT:	Ákwii tł'iish k'aa' bit'oh anáyiil'įįhgo ná'álchíih doo áádóó biyázhí néidiiłjahgo bichaha'oh anéi'nił doo ; ákwii <unk> shóó' ałdó' t'ááłá'í nítínígo bi'áadii yił áłah nádleeh doo .
PRED:	They will throw it into a poisonous snake , and it will be used to grow up , and it will be accompanied by its prey .
GOLD:	There the owl will make her nest and lay her eggs.She will hatch her young and cover them with her wings.And the buzzards will come , each one with its mate .

ID:	948
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí Diyin God ííłní , Shizhé'é David yę́ę t'áá íiyisí ayóó át'éego baa a'ááh nínízingo bitsásk'ehgi nanisht'áago áshiinilaa .
PRED:	Then Solomon said to David , “ My father , my father , David , has made me beautiful in the place of honor .
GOLD:	Solomon replied to God , “ You showed great and faithful love to David , my father , and now you have made me king in his place .

ID:	949
INPUT:	Áádóó naanáházhahgo , Rííjiyam hoolyéedi nihił aní'éél , áádóó t'ááłá'í yiską́ągo shádi'ááhdę́ę́' deeyolgo náábiiskání <unk> yoliigi nihił aní'éél .
PRED:	So we traveled through the island of Cyprus and traveled through the island of Cyprus . The next day we traveled through the island of Cyprus .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	950
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí niníyáago áádóó bąąh nahóókaadgo bik'i dah deeshááł , áko tsídidoolyisgo nídooldzííł áádóó diné t'áá ałtso bił naakaígíí yóó'adínóodzoł , índa aláahgo naat'áanii t'éiyá bił nizhdeeshxał .
PRED:	I will go down to the ground , and look up , and look to the king , and look for all the people who have rebelled against him . ”
GOLD:	I will catch up with him while he is weary and discouraged . He and his troops will panic , and everyone will run away . Then I will kill only the king ,

ID:	951
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ądi doo nidashídídóołkił da . T'áá aaníí , t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá ha'át'íhída aTaa' shízhi' bee bídayínóhkeedgo , nihaididoo'ááł .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , I 'll ask you the truth . I tell you the truth , and you will ask the Father . ”
GOLD:	At that time you wo n't need to ask me for anything . I tell you the truth , you will ask the Father directly , and he will grant your request because you use my name .

ID:	952
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Diyin God ánáádoo'niid , <unk> ałníí' góne' haz'ą́ wóle'go tó ałts'ą́ą́hjí hólǫ́ǫ le' .
PRED:	Then God said to God , “ I have dug a piece of water in the middle of the Temple . ”
GOLD:	Then God said , “ Let there be a space between the waters , to separate the waters of the heavens from the waters of the earth . ”

ID:	953
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago Mózes éí díí bee haz'áanii bits'ą́ą́dóó daasaadígíí naaltsoos bii' bee ak'e'jishchį́įgo hazhó'ó hasht'ejiilaago
PRED:	So Moses wrote this letter on the Law of Moses and read it in the Book of Instruction .
GOLD:	When Moses had finished writing this entire body of instruction in a book ,

ID:	954
INPUT:	Díidíígíí bidahoolníiłgo danół'į́įgo Diné Silį́į'ii k'ad t'áá áyídídę́ę́' nihich'éédą́ą'jį' nidi , bił ahoolzhiizh lá danohsingo nihił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	“ When you see this , you will know that the Son of Man is near , and you will know that the Son of Man is near .
GOLD:	In the same way , when you see all these things taking place , you can know that his return is very near , right at the door .

ID:	955
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo dashíísóołts'ą́ą' da , áko t'áá nihí baa nidaahkaígíí bee atí'ádadołnéehgo shá dahodoołchįįł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But you will not listen to me , and you will be destroyed , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ But you would not listen to me , ” says the Lord . “ You made me furious by worshiping idols you made with your own hands , bringing on yourselves all the disasters you now suffer .

ID:	956
INPUT:	Áádóó Háíram bá nidaal'a'í éí tónteel bikáá' na'al'eeł bił béédahózinígíí éí Sálaman bá nidaal'a'í yił táłkáá'góó tsinaa'eeł biyi' nidaalnish doo biniyé dayííł'aad .
PRED:	Then Hiram sent this message to the ship of the sea , so he ordered that his servants would be thrown into the sea .
GOLD:	Hiram sent experienced crews of sailors to sail the ships with Solomon 's men .

ID:	957
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii báhóóchįįd , áádóó bisiláo ákǫ́ǫ́ yiyííł'aadgo nida'astseedígíí dayííghą́ą́' , índa bikin haal'áhígíí yits'ą́ą́' deidííłid .
PRED:	Then the king sent this message to the king , and he killed them and killed them .
GOLD:	“ The king was furious , and he sent out his army to destroy the murderers and burn their town .

ID:	958
INPUT:	Bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá ałtso díí jį́ bee nihich'į' haasdzí'ígíí ádaa daahsįįh , áko éí bee dahinohnáa doo áádóó k'ee'ąą dínóoht'į́įłgo kéyah biih doohnéełgo ádíí' ádadoohłíiłgo Bóhólníihii éí danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey all these commands that I am giving you today . Then you will live in the land the Lord swore to occupy .
GOLD:	“ Be careful to obey all the commands I am giving you today . Then you will live and multiply , and you will enter and occupy the land the Lord swore to give your ancestors .

ID:	959
INPUT:	Éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah hoo'a'ii dzizlį́į́' ; éí doo ho'didéeh da , áko náá'iiłniihii éí , Ts'ídá doo ni'didoodah da lá , hodidooniił ; naałniih éí hatsiits'iin bąąh hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The priest will pronounce the person ceremonially unclean , and the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . It will not be ceremonially unclean because he is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	the man is indeed infected with a skin disease and is unclean . The priest must pronounce him ceremonially unclean because of the sore on his head .

ID:	960
INPUT:	Áádóó bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áii nizhóníii bílátahdi dah naaznilígíí Bóhólníihii binááł t'áá áłahjį' hasht'eyósin doo .
PRED:	I will guard your lamps in the presence of the Lord , in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Aaron and the priests must tend the lamps on the pure gold lampstand continually in the Lord 's presence .

ID:	961
INPUT:	Háálá éí jínígíí biyi' Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ak'eh didoodleełgo bá ha'doo'ááł ; bi'ana'í k'éídidoodlííł biniyé éí jínígíí biyi' ak'eh didoodleeł ; diltłish adooldiłgo dił ádii' haididoolbį́įłgo bił hódínóołdoh , háálá náhookǫsjígo kéyahígíí Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígíí bíighahgóó Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nááhidoonihii bee hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will bring judgment against his enemies , for he will rule over the land of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the land of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will be allowed to rule over the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	For this is the day of the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , a day of vengeance on his enemies.The sword will devour until it is satisfied , yes , until it is drunk with your blood ! The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will receive a sacrifice todayin the north country beside the Euphrates River .

ID:	962
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí dinééh nidilt'éego Bóhólníihii binááł ayóó át'éego ádił ni'iisíí' , háálá Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' nááda'iiłniihgo t'áá íiyisí ák'eh dahal'į́ daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord had done , for he had sinned against the sins of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So the sin of these young men was very serious in the Lord 's sight , for they treated the Lord 's offerings with contempt .

ID:	963
INPUT:	Íínak jiináago hastą́diindóó ba'aan ashdla' honááhaigo Miithúzelah há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	When Lamech was 30 years old , he became the father of Enoch .
GOLD:	When Enoch was 65 years old , he became the father of Methuselah .

ID:	964
INPUT:	Nahachagiitsoh yááhiichahígi át'éegoósh łį́į́' dah náníljį́įhgo ádanile' ? <unk> tł'iidgo t'óó báhádzid łeh .
PRED:	Do you think of the locusts ? Do you think you are afraid of the locusts ?
GOLD:	Did you give it the ability to leap like a locust ? Its majestic snorting is terrifying !

ID:	965
INPUT:	Áko Jesus éí siláo binanit'a'í áyidííniid , Nílááh yínááł ; t'áá iinídlánígi át'éego ná ádoolnííł . T'áá áko hanaal'a'í náádiidzá .
PRED:	Jesus said to his officer , “ Go and stand in the presence of the church . ” So he went back to the church .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to the Roman officer , “ Go back home . Because you believed , it has happened. ” And the young servant was healed that same hour .

ID:	966
INPUT:	Nidi Jéíyel éí Hííber be'asdzą́ą́ nilíinii níbaal bá anídaalkałí ła' néidiitą́ áádóó bee atsidí néidii'ą́ , áko hazhó'ógo haa níyáago éí t'áá íiyisí <unk> deeyáago ajiłhosh , índa níbaal bá anídaalkałí hajaat'ah góne' yaa ayííłkaalgo ni'jį' yił i'ííłkaal , áko dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the wife of Jonah 's wife , the man who had taken her into the tent and filled him with her . Then he went to the tent and threw her into the tent .
GOLD:	But when Sisera fell asleep from exhaustion , Jael quietly crept up to him with a hammer and tent peg in her hand . Then she drove the tent peg through his temple and into the ground , and so he died .

ID:	967
INPUT:	Átséédą́ą́' bee aha'deet'áanii éí bik'eh hoogáałii hólǫ́ǫgo Diyin God bich'į' nahadláá nít'éé' , áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi Diyin God bich'į' nahadláago bił haz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	And because he made the covenant with the covenant of God , he broke the foundations of the earth and the earth .
GOLD:	That first covenant between God and Israel had regulations for worship and a place of worship here on earth .

ID:	968
INPUT:	T'áá háiida aYe' doo ádízhdéélt'i'góó hadziidziihígíí éí aTaa' doo hwee hólǫ́ǫ da , nidi aYe' ádízhdéélt'i'go hadziidziihígíí éí aTaa' nilíinii hwee hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Those who do n't have the Son of Man 's Son will also produce the Son of Man .
GOLD:	Anyone who denies the Son does n't have the Father , either . But anyone who acknowledges the Son has the Father also .

ID:	969
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Réímah kin haal'áagi iinéé' diists'ą́ą́' . Yínííł yee chanahałe'go áádóó ayóó át'éego atínídindleeh . Réíchel ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii yaa yicha , ba'áłchíní biniinaa habidi'yoolníhígíí doo yinízin da , háálá éí ábi'disdįįd .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Listen to Ramah , weeping and weeping and weeping and weeping for Rachel , for she has no children to mourn for Rachel .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ A cry is heard in Ramah — deep anguish and bitter weeping.Rachel weeps for her children , refusing to be comforted — for her children are gone . ”

ID:	970
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Azhą́ shį́į́ t'áá shí ádaa hashne' nidi , hashne'ígíí éí t'áá aaníí , háálá níyáádę́ę́' índa déyáágóó shił bééhózin , nidi nihí éí níyáádę́ę́' índa déyáágóó doo nihił béédahózin da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ As surely as I am telling you the truth , I know the truth , and you know that I am not from among you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ These claims are valid even though I make them about myself . For I know where I came from and where I am going , but you do n't know this about me .

ID:	971
INPUT:	Shich'į' ééhonísįįh ! Ayóó'ííní'níinii yisdádooltéłígíí biniyé nigaan nish'náájí bee shíká anilyeed .
PRED:	Save me , O God , for he has rescued me from your hand .
GOLD:	Now rescue your beloved people.Answer and save us by your power .

ID:	972
INPUT:	Éí biniinaa Diyin God éí wooch'ííd dajoodlą́ą doo biniyé na'nitin yóó'ahodoo'ishii hach'į' yi'iiłnííh .
PRED:	That is why God has sent me to preach the truth .
GOLD:	So God will cause them to be greatly deceived , and they will believe these lies .

ID:	973
INPUT:	Áko Mózes yaadaaní nilíní , Mídiya dine'é nilíinii Rúwel biye' Hóbab ííłní , Bóhólníihii , Kéyah nihaa dideesh'ááł , nihidííniidígóó yii'nééł ; hágo tį' , áko yá'át'éhígi ádaniil'į́į doo , háálá Bóhólníihii éí yá'ádaat'éehii Ízrel dine'é yeididoo'áałgo yee nihoní'ą́ .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the men of Midian , “ Who is the Lord , ” Moses said , “ I will give you this message from the land of the Lord , for I will give you victory over Israel . ”
GOLD:	One day Moses said to his brother-in-law , Hobab son of Reuel the Midianite , “ We are on our way to the place the Lord promised us , for he said , ‘ I will give it to you . ' Come with us and we will treat you well , for the Lord has promised wonderful blessings for Israel ! ”

ID:	974
INPUT:	t'áá ła' bizhi'ee díí t'áá ałtso kin hadaas'áhígíí binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił éí Béíya<unk> yer kin shijaa' bíighahjį' nineel'ą́ ; éí shádi'áahgi Réímath ałdó' hoolyé . Díí kéyah t'áá át'é Símiyan dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	and all the towns with their surrounding villages , along with their surrounding villages . This included the territory of the tribe of Ephraim , which included the territory of Seir . This is the clans of the tribe of Simeon .
GOLD:	including all the surrounding villages as far south as Baalath-beer ( also known as Ramah of the Negev ) .This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Simeon .

ID:	975
INPUT:	Ana'í nilíinii doo biya'iidooloh da . Diné doo yá'áshóonii doo atíbidoolíił da .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked fall into the trap of the wicked .
GOLD:	His enemies will not defeat him , nor will the wicked overpower him .

ID:	976
INPUT:	Éí bąą bik'eh dahonoł'į́ áádóó baa dahonohsą́ , háálá ał'ąą dine'é dabinááł díí nihibee hódzáanii áádóó nihibee ak'idi'yiitįįhii át'é ; éí díí yee nihwiiz'áanii t'áá ałtso deidiizts'ą́ą'go kódadidooniił , T'áá aaníí díí dine'é ayóó át'é hóyáanii índa ak'idi'yiitįįhii nilį́į́ lá .
PRED:	So be careful to obey all these decrees and regulations . This is the message you gave to all the nations that are true and true and true , and they will say , ‘ This is the true and true and true wisdom . '
GOLD:	Obey them completely , and you will display your wisdom and intelligence among the surrounding nations . When they hear all these decrees , they will exclaim , ‘ How wise and prudent are the people of this great nation ! '

ID:	977
INPUT:	Shízhi' bee hada'íínółnínígíí áádóó bídanołdzilígíí índa doo dasidínóołna'góó shił bééhózin .
PRED:	You know what I am saying , and you will be afraid of my name .
GOLD:	You have patiently suffered for me without quitting .

ID:	978
INPUT:	bighandi nádzáago dabik'isóó índa yił kéédahat'ínígíí áyididooniił , Shaa hohkááh , shił nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' , háálá shidibé yóó'ííłt'e'ígíí náádiiłtį́ .
PRED:	But when you return to my brothers and sisters , he will say to me , ‘ Let me be my shepherd . '
GOLD:	When he arrives , he will call together his friends and neighbors , saying , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep . '

ID:	979
INPUT:	Áko nídzíldzidgo ázhdííniid , Dooládó' kwe'é náhádzid da lá ! Díí t'áá aaníí Diyin God bighan lá ; yá'ąąsh bich'é'étiin át'éé lá .
PRED:	“ Oh , ” he said , “ we are afraid of us ! It is the Holy One of heaven . ”
GOLD:	But he was also afraid and said , “ What an awesome place this is ! It is none other than the house of God , the very gateway to heaven ! ”

ID:	980
INPUT:	Nidi Jánathan hazhé'é éí hóyée'go diné bá ha'doodzihgo yee haadzíi'ii t'áadoo dzidiizts'ą́ą' da , áko hagish hálák'ee sitánígíí bee tsés'ná bitł'izh biih dzíítsigo bił á<unk> doolchid . Áádóó nít'éé' hoł ch'ídi'nídláád .
PRED:	But Jonathan refused to listen to his father , and he refused to listen to his staff . But if he heard that he could n't listen to his staff .
GOLD:	But Jonathan had not heard his father 's command , and he dipped the end of his stick into a piece of honeycomb and ate the honey . After he had eaten it , he felt refreshed .

ID:	981
INPUT:	Jó , níłch'i nichxǫ́'íii t'áá íídą́ą́' ábizhdííniid , Diné bii'dę́ę́' haninááh . Háálá t'áá ahą́ą́h bik'i néilwo' lá , áko baa áháyą́ągo béésh da'ahólzha'í bee béé'átł'óóh áádóó akétsíín niná'niłí bąąh niná'nił , nidi béésh da'ahólzha'ígíí niyiiníísh áádóó honoojíígóó níłch'i bi'iiníziinii anábiniyo' lá .
PRED:	He said to the crowd , “ Get out of the crowd , for he has brought you out of the chains of the chains of the chains of death and chains . He has bound you in chains , but he has bound you in chains and chains . ”
GOLD:	For Jesus had already commanded the evil spirit to come out of him . This spirit had often taken control of the man . Even when he was placed under guard and put in chains and shackles , he simply broke them and rushed out into the wilderness , completely under the demon 's power .

ID:	982
INPUT:	Áádóó ábizhdííniid , Atsiniltł'ish ahootahígi át'éego yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Séítan adadzííłhaalgo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Then he said to Satan , “ The thunder of lightning is from heaven like lightning . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , ” he told them , “ I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning !

ID:	983
INPUT:	Doo t'áá ákogi át'éii bee t'áadoo á nihodiyí'aahí ; diné bahojoobá'íii t'áadoo a'ohgo nił nilíní , doodaii' diné ayóó át'éii t'áadoo a'ohgo nił nilíní , nidi t'áá ákogi át'éego bił kééhót'íinii bá nihodiyí'aah .
PRED:	Do n't worry about the humble , but do n't let the poor be poor and poor .
GOLD:	“ Do not twist justice in legal matters by favoring the poor or being partial to the rich and powerful . Always judge people fairly .

ID:	984
INPUT:	Áádóó hayáázh dínéesą́ągo ła'a jį́ bizhé'é éí da'ayizhii yił da'ayizhgo ákǫ́ǫ́ yich'į' ííyá .
PRED:	When they saw a young man who had been circumcised , he was born to his father 's son .
GOLD:	One day when her child was older , he went out to help his father , who was working with the harvesters .

ID:	985
INPUT:	Dóola yáázh áádóó deenásts'aa' éí Bóhólníihii baa didíí'ááł áádóó nááda'iiłniihii éí áshįįh yik'ídeidooniłgo deidiłidgo Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádeidiyoołnih .
PRED:	“ Take a young bull and a ram from the Lord and present it to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	You are to present them to the Lord , and the priests are to sprinkle salt on them and offer them as a burnt offering to the Lord .

ID:	986
INPUT:	Nidi doo oodlání nilíinii yoodeeshááł nízingo háni'dii yoodighááh , kwe'é haz'ą́ągi ak'is oodlání nilíinii , doodaii' alah oodlání nilíinii doo bóho'diistł'ǫ́ǫ da . Háálá Diyin God éí , Hózhǫ́ǫgo ahił dahinohná , nihidííniid .
PRED:	But if you do n't know where it is not right , let there be a believer in the church where it is not living in the church . For it is not a believer in the church . ”
GOLD:	( But if the husband or wife who is n't a believer insists on leaving , let them go . In such cases the believing husband or wife is no longer bound to the other , for God has called you to live in peace . )

ID:	987
INPUT:	Ákohgo , Háágóósh dadiikah ? daniłníigo kóbididííniił , Bóhólníihii kóní , Dadínóonéłígíí éí dadínóonééł . Diltłish bee nidadootsiłígíí diltłish bee nidadootsił . Dichin nidabidoołtsiłígíí éí dichin nidabidoołtsił , índa dadoolnéłígíí éí dadoolnééł .
PRED:	“ Tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The sword will die , ‘ The sword of war will die , and disease will die . ' ”
GOLD:	And if they say to you , ‘ But where can we go ? ' tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says : “ ‘ Those who are destined for death , to death ; those who are destined for war , to war ; those who are destined for famine , to famine ; those who are destined for captivity , to captivity . '

ID:	988
INPUT:	Ásaa' ííł'íní hashtł'ish yinaalnishgo bits'ą́ą́dóó na'nitinii
PRED:	Then he said to the potter
GOLD:	The Potter and the Clay

ID:	989
INPUT:	Asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii béeso ayíínil
PRED:	Parable of the Widow
GOLD:	The Widow 's Offering

ID:	990
INPUT:	Áko da'oodlání áłah nádleehii t'áá ałtso índa náádaała' t'áá ałtso díidí deidiizts'ą́ą'go , t'áá íiyisí yik'ee bił dahóóyéé' .
PRED:	When the church heard this , some of the church and the church heard what he was saying .
GOLD:	Great fear gripped the entire church and everyone else who heard what had happened .

ID:	991
INPUT:	Áko da'iisoohdląąd yę́ędóó dasidoots'ą́ą'ii t'áá áłahjį' bíni'dii nihii' dahólǫ́ǫgo ádeínóhsin . Bitł'áahdidą́ą́' dasidoots'ą́ą'ii t'áá áłahjį' nihii' dahólǫ́ǫgo aYe' índa aTaa' t'áá áłahjį' bii' dahonohłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Then you will believe in the power of the world , and you will always believe in him in the presence of the Father and the Son of the Father .
GOLD:	So you must remain faithful to what you have been taught from the beginning . If you do , you will remain in fellowship with the Son and with the Father .

ID:	992
INPUT:	Díí íhooł'aahii haa hwiinít'ínígíí hoł bééhózingo baa hojilne' , áádóó t'áá hó díidíígíí bee ak'e'jishchį́ , áko baa hojilne'ígíí éí t'áá aaníigo nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	He knew what he had happened to him , and he taught them everything he had said .
GOLD:	This disciple is the one who testifies to these events and has recorded them here . And we know that his account of these things is accurate .

ID:	993
INPUT:	T'áá háiida díí áłchínígi át'éego a'ohgo ádaa nitsídaakeesgo dashoodlánígíí ła'da bąąhági át'į́ ájiilaaígíí , t'áá hó tsé daashjéé' nitsaii hazéédéet'ą́ągo tónteel biih hodi'yoolghanjígo , há yá'át'éeh doo .
PRED:	“ If you want to be proud , you will become proud and become proud , and if you do n't want to be put into the sea , you will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ But if you cause one of these little ones who trusts in me to fall into sin , it would be better for you to be thrown into the sea with a large millstone hung around your neck .

ID:	994
INPUT:	Záíyan kin haal'áii éí dił bee dahołbį' índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áii éí doo ákwii é'ét'éii bee dahołbį' .
PRED:	I will build Jerusalem a city for the city of Jerusalem and to build a city for Jerusalem .
GOLD:	You are building Jerusalemon a foundation of murder and corruption .

ID:	995
INPUT:	áko áhodííniid , Asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh Váshtaishą' bee haz'áanii bik'ehgo haa dadiilnííł ? Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras bá nidaal'a'í binahjį' hach'į' haadzíi'ii doo yik'eh hóół'įįd da .
PRED:	“ What do you want ? ” the queen of Xerxes asked the king . “ It 's the law for the King Xerxes . ”
GOLD:	“ What must be done to Queen Vashti ? ” the king demanded . “ What penalty does the law provide for a queen who refuses to obey the king 's orders , properly sent through his eunuchs ? ”

ID:	996
INPUT:	Nihiya'iidleeh , daanínígíí ni t'áadoo ákódíníní , nidi yik'ee bił daayé'ígíí t'áadoo bik'ee nił yé'í , doodaii' t'áadoo náníldzidí .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” they said . “ Do n't be afraid of what you do . Do n't be afraid , or do n't be afraid .
GOLD:	“ Do n't call everything a conspiracy , like they do , and do n't live in dread of what frightens them .

ID:	997
INPUT:	áádóó hahastiin haa łe'niizį́į'go be'asdzą́ą́ jílį́įgo ázhdoolchxǫ'go , doodaii' doo ázhdoolchxǫ' da nidi haa łe'nízingo ,
PRED:	And if she is jealous of her husband , she is not jealous of her husband , she is defiled by her .
GOLD:	If her husband becomes jealous and is suspicious of his wife and needs to know whether or not she has defiled herself ,

ID:	998
INPUT:	Hastóí da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii yá'át'éehgo bídahólníihii ahą́ą́h nániiláago hoł danilį́į dooígíí yą́ą́h danilį́į doo ; hane' yá'át'éehii yaa dahalne'go índa nida'nitingo yindaalnishígíí íiyisí ákódajił'į́į doo .
PRED:	These are the names of the elders of the church , and they will be worthy of shame . They will say , ‘ He will teach them what is good and good . '
GOLD:	Elders who do their work well should be respected and paid well , especially those who work hard at both preaching and teaching .

ID:	999
INPUT:	Áádóó níłch'i danchxǫ́'ígíí nídahoołtséehgo hayaajį' anída'diilghą́ąhgo éí yéego háádadilwoshgo ádaaní , Diyin God biYe' nílíinii ánít'į́ .
PRED:	When the Spirit saw him , he shouted , “ Son of God , you are the Son of God ! ”
GOLD:	And whenever those possessed by evil spirits caught sight of him , the spirits would throw them to the ground in front of him shrieking , “ You are the Son of God ! ”

ID:	1000
INPUT:	<unk> tsoh Liiváíyathan wolyéii dabitsiits'iin dashíníłjizhgo honoojíidi naaldeehii dabich'iyą' biniyé baa dííní'ą́ .
PRED:	“ You have given me the names of the sea , but you have given them food in the wilderness .
GOLD:	You crushed the heads of Leviathanand let the desert animals eat him .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	Jó , diné doo áhályáanii hashké nídzinii bizéé' yit'įįhínda diné doo ak'idiitįįhii oołch'į́įdgo biiłhééh .
PRED:	For a fool is a fool of a fool ; a fool is jealous of a fool .
GOLD:	Surely resentment destroys the fool , and jealousy kills the simple .

ID:	1002
INPUT:	Jó , Éíhab bik'éí náás da'ahílchíihii t'áá ałtso ádoodįįł ; éí diné danilínígíí naalte' danilíinii índa doo naalte' danilíinii t'áá ałtso Ízrel kéyahgi dahojílónígíí áhodeeshdįįł :
PRED:	But Ahab , your family , will destroy all the people of Israel . I will destroy all the people of Israel . I will destroy all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	The entire family of Ahab must be wiped out . I will destroy every one of his male descendants , slave and free alike , anywhere in Israel .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii áháłní , Haa lá néelą́ą'di bee nich'į' háádeesdzih ? Shą́ą́' , t'áadoo ha'át'íhída bee shił hólne'í , nidi Bóhólníihii bízhi' t'éí bee t'áá aaníinii bee shił hólne' , nidishníi ni' .
PRED:	“ How can I answer ? ” the king asked . “ How can I tell you the truth ? ” But the Lord replied , “ I tell you the truth . ”
GOLD:	But the king replied sharply , “ How many times must I demand that you speak only the truth to me when you speak for the Lord ? ”

ID:	1004
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , háni'dii chánahgo sodiszinígíí nidáahjį' ahosiilts'įįh ; nizaad bik'ehgo ak'idi'yiishtįįhgo áshíínísin !
PRED:	O Lord , listen to my prayer ; listen to what I am saying .
GOLD:	O Lord , listen to my cry ; give me the discerning mind you promised .

ID:	1005
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Nik'éí díí yízhíhígíí doo ła' bee wójíi da .
PRED:	“ No , ” they said . “ We will not be the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	“ What ? ” they exclaimed . “ There is no one in all your family by that name . ”

ID:	1006
INPUT:	Háálá yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán ániidíii áshłééh , jó'akon , áádóó áłtséédą́ą́' yę́ę doo bééhániih da , doo nidi baa nitsáhákees da .
PRED:	For I am the one who made the heavens and the earth , and I do n't understand it .
GOLD:	“ Look ! I am creating new heavens and a new earth , and no one will even think about the old ones anymore .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	Jó , shibid éí wáin bizis doo bii'dę́ę́' háách'i daígíí nahalin , índa wáin bizis ániidíii k'adę́ę diilchxoshígíí nahalin .
PRED:	The wine of my wine is not my wine , for he is like a new wine .
GOLD:	I am like a cask of wine without a vent , like a new wineskin ready to burst !

ID:	1008
INPUT:	Danihighan yę́ędóó ch'ídanihineeskaadígíí biniinaa kéyah yóó'adasidiit'ánígíí biniinaa , Dooládó' nihi'doolchǫ' da ! Dooládó' t'óó nihaa yáhóósįįd da ! níigo Záíyandę́ę́' iinéé' ayóó íits'a'go yichago diits'a' .
PRED:	“ Oh , how your flocks have abandoned us ! The land of our land has become desolate , and no one can hear us ! Listen to us ! ”
GOLD:	Hear the people of Jerusalem crying in despair , ‘ We are ruined ! We are completely humiliated ! We must leave our land , because our homes have been torn down . ' ”

ID:	1009
INPUT:	níłtsą́ nahasdzáán yaa néidi'ááh , índa kédaayahgóó tó yaa néidi'ááh ,
PRED:	He brought the earth to the ends of the earth , and he delights in the land .
GOLD:	He gives rain for the earthand water for the fields .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii índa doo haada yit'éii ayóó'áyó'ní ; nahasdzáán éí Bóhólníihii bibee aa a'ááh hasinii bił si'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord loves the righteous and justice ; he has compassion on the earth .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	Doo ákwii ádaot'įįdígíí díí nihits'ádeideez'ą́ , áádóó ádił nida'ayoosíhígíí éí yá'ádaat'éehii nihits'ą́ąjį' áyósin .
PRED:	You have defiled the evil things you have done , and you hate what is good .
GOLD:	Your wickedness has deprived you of these wonderful blessings.Your sin has robbed you of all these good things .

ID:	1012
INPUT:	Mózes nihich'į' yee haadzíi'ii éí bee haz'áanii Jéíkab dine'é áłah nádleehii bíí' dooleełii át'é .
PRED:	Moses gave the instructions to the people of Israel , which is given to the assembly of Jacob .
GOLD:	Moses gave us the Lord 's instruction , the special possession of the people of Israel .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	Díí kin haal'áago ánályaago áádóó nida'aztł'inígíí ałtso hadiidzaago , díí aláahgo naat'áanii bił bééhózingo ádeiilnééh : éí díí tooh nílíní e'e'aahjígo doo bee nóhólníih da dooleełgo át'é .
PRED:	This is what happened to the fortified city and the kings of the Euphrates River . This is what the king says : “ We will not be able to rule over the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	We declare to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are completed , the province west of the Euphrates River will be lost to you . ”

ID:	1014
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí diné jííłta' ; Bóhólníihii saad yee haadzí'ígíí bi'jiilaa ; jó , t'áá ákózhdoolíiłgo hach'į' bee ha'oodzíí' .
PRED:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded him . He told them what he had commanded .
GOLD:	So Moses listed them , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso níká dadéez'į́į'go niba' ádaat'é , áko baa náhwiilzhíishgo bich'iyą' baa hidí'aah .
PRED:	All who look for you are looking for their work , and they will provide food for food .
GOLD:	The eyes of all look to you in hope ; you give them their food as they need it .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	Áko tsosts'id nídízííd binih tsosts'idts'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo <unk> gi dził naaznil bikáa'di tsinaa'eeł dah náz'éél .
PRED:	On March 7 of the fourteenth year of the lake , on the mountain of the boat .
GOLD:	exactly five months from the time the flood began , the boat came to rest on the mountains of Ararat .

ID:	1017
INPUT:	Diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii bá nidahosoo'ą́ áádóó dasoołhį́ , nidi t'áadoo nihich'į' deesdzil da .
PRED:	“ You have been handed over to death , but you have broken your hand .
GOLD:	You have condemned and killed innocent people , who do not resist you .

ID:	1018
INPUT:	t'ah doo dah nídiishdááhdą́ą́' háádeeshyįh ; áadi índa doo nídeeshdááłgóó kéyah chahałheeł bii'góó áádóó anoonééł chaha'oh bii'góó deeshłeeł .
PRED:	I will remain before the sun , and I will live in darkness . I will live in darkness .
GOLD:	before I leave — never to return — for the land of darkness and utter gloom .

ID:	1019
INPUT:	áádóó áshidííniid , Ízrel nílíinii , shá naal'a'í nílį́ ; ni nee shaa ha'niih doo .
PRED:	He said , “ O Israel , you are my servant ; praise me .
GOLD:	He said to me , “ You are my servant , Israel , and you will bring me glory . ”

ID:	1020
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus and the Prince of Demons

ID:	1021
INPUT:	Díí deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'óó dadéesxéél . Áádóó Diyin God yaa dahaniihgo ádaaní , Ákola' doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ałdó' łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdahidookosgo iináajį' yee anáhákáah dooleełii bá ashja'ósingo Diyin God beidiní'ą́ą́ lá .
PRED:	When they heard this , they said to God , “ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ He will turn away from God . '
GOLD:	When the others heard this , they stopped objecting and began praising God . They said , “ We can see that God has also given the Gentiles the privilege of repenting of their sins and receiving eternal life . ”

ID:	1022
INPUT:	Áko tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí hastą́ądi neeznádiingo atah haasdláa'go áádóó Ííjip kéyahdi tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí t'áá ałtso bee índa bik'ehgo nida'abaahígíí t'áá bił dashdiiná .
PRED:	And when the chariot commanders of Egypt , he mobilized his chariots and charioteers and all his chariots and charioteers .
GOLD:	He took with him 600 of Egypt 's best chariots , along with the rest of the chariots of Egypt , each with its commander .

ID:	1023
INPUT:	Éí daashíínéelą́ą'di mííl bíighahgo baa a'ááh nínízin , áádóó da'azhé'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii bik'é bikéédę́ę́' bada'áłchíní hanínáánoot'áanii k'éédadídlééh . Ayóó'át'éii , Diyin God Ayóó'ábóodziilii éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii wolyé .
PRED:	But I know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of my ancestors , and do n't forgive their sins .
GOLD:	You show unfailing love to thousands , but you also bring the consequences of one generation 's sin upon the next . You are the great and powerful God , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	1024
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God ábidííniid , Jéíkab éí nízhi' ; k'ad éí doo Jéíkab yinílyée da doo , nidi Ízrel yinílyée doo , áádóó Ízrel yee hóózhi' .
PRED:	Then God said to Jacob , “ Your name will be Jacob , Jacob , Jacob , and Jacob will be called the name of Jacob . ”
GOLD:	saying , “ Your name is Jacob , but you will not be called Jacob any longer . From now on your name will be Israel. ” So God renamed him Israel .

ID:	1025
INPUT:	Níłch'i Diyinii éí iiná eidii'aah , nidi ats'íís éí t'áadoo nídoodleełí da ; saad bee nihich'į' hahásdzí'ígíí éí Níłch'i Diyinii bits'ą́ą́dóó bee iináanii át'é .
PRED:	The Spirit gives life to life , but it is not right to give you the Holy Spirit . It is the Holy Spirit who gives life to the life of life .
GOLD:	The Spirit alone gives eternal life . Human effort accomplishes nothing . And the very words I have spoken to you are spirit and life .

ID:	1026
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naadiin táá' náhááh góne' siláo yinanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan éí Jew dine'é tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' anááyíí'eezh , áko t'áá át'é aheesht'eezhígíí dį́įdi mííldóó ba'aan hastą́ądi neeznádiin .
PRED:	In the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , the captain of the guard of the guard of the guard of the guard , and he put them in charge of the guard .
GOLD:	In Nebuchadnezzar 's twenty-third year he sent Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , who took 745 more — a total of 4,600 captives in all .

ID:	1027
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ bee hadadohne' , áádóó ts'ísee k'ehgo bidádahonooníinii t'áadoo bá nahosooł'ání .
PRED:	But if you follow the ways of the Lord Jesus Christ , do n't follow the evil things of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Instead , clothe yourself with the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ . And do n't let yourself think about ways to indulge your evil desires .

ID:	1028
INPUT:	Háálá baa hasti'go dah nool'į́įłii nidi bééhodoozįįłgo át'é , áko ha'át'íhída bik'é'ésti'ii hahgoda báádi'dooltsosgo bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	For the light of the earth will be covered , and it will be covered with a veil .
GOLD:	For all that is secret will eventually be brought into the open , and everything that is concealed will be brought to light and made known to all .

ID:	1029
INPUT:	áko náhookǫsjigo hoodzooígíí éí Hánathan kin haal'áajį' nááhodeesdzo , áádóó <unk> yel yíldzisíjį' nihoodzo ,
PRED:	From the boundary went to the boundary of the boundary and began to across the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The northern boundary of Zebulun passed Hannathon and ended at the valley of Iphtah-el .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Baasha Rules in Israel

ID:	1031
INPUT:	táá' yiłkaah góne' , jó , diné léi' Saul bisiláo yił dah yinééłdę́ę́' níyáago bi'éé' ák'iniyiis<unk> lá , índa łeezhígíí bitsiits'iin yik'íyiizhjaa' lá , áko David yaa níyáago tsé'yaa neeshjoolgo a'ohgo í'diilyaa .
PRED:	On the third day when Saul saw a man from Saul , he tore his clothes and threw it on the head of his head . Then David bowed low before the ground and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	On the third day a man arrived from Saul 's army camp . He had torn his clothes and put dirt on his head to show that he was in mourning . He fell to the ground before David in deep respect .

ID:	1032
INPUT:	Hada'ísídół'į́į́' áádóó sodadołzin , áko doo nihídahodínóotah da ; níłch'i ii' sizíinii éí lą́ nízin , nidi ats'íís éí doo bidziil da .
PRED:	Be careful to pray , and not to pray for those who do not know the spirits of the body .
GOLD:	Keep watch and pray , so that you will not give in to temptation . For the spirit is willing , but the body is weak ! ”

ID:	1033
INPUT:	Nihítł'ahgi nihitsii' doo dadoohshih da ; nihidághaa' bibąąhgóó doo dahidooshih da .
PRED:	You must not eat any of your hair , or you must not eat the beard .
GOLD:	“ Do not trim off the hair on your temples or trim your beards .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	áádóó Fílipaijį' niikai , éí Masedóniya kéyahdi aláahgo kin haal'á , Rome dine'é bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii át'é . Díí kin haal'áagi naháatą́ągo t'áá díkwíí danihiiską́ ,
PRED:	When we arrived in Macedonia , we went to Macedonia and began to capture the city of Asia . We were about to capture the city of Asia .
GOLD:	From there we reached Philippi , a major city of that district of Macedonia and a Roman colony . And we stayed there several days .

ID:	1035
INPUT:	nidi t'áadoo baa níjít'įįhí biyáázh yishchį́ , áádóó Jesus bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	But he gave birth to a son , and he named Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	But he did not have sexual relations with her until her son was born . And Joseph named him Jesus .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	Díí diné t'áá ałtso t'áá sáhí náás yish'ish dooígíí doo bíneesh'ą́ą da , háálá t'áá íiyisí shá nantł'a .
PRED:	All these people do n't belong to me , for they are too difficult for me .
GOLD:	I ca n't carry all these people by myself ! The load is far too heavy !

ID:	1037
INPUT:	índa Sabíyadóó dine'é bik'i dah yizhjée'go adeiniiskaad , áko , t'áá aaníí , nidaal'a'í ałtso diltłish bee nidabidiztseedgo t'áá shí t'éiyá yisdááshwodgo nił hashne' .
PRED:	When the men of Samaria saw that they had died , they attacked the sword of the town and killed everyone in the battle . I 'll tell you the truth . ”
GOLD:	when the Sabeans raided us . They stole all the animals and killed all the farmhands . I am the only one who escaped to tell you . ”

ID:	1038
INPUT:	Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah Bábilangi át'ée dooleełii yiyiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Then Isaiah son of Amoz saw that Isaiah son of Amoz had seen him .
GOLD:	Isaiah son of Amoz received this message concerning the destruction of Babylon :

ID:	1039
INPUT:	Áko kin bii' áłah ná'ádleehdóó táá'oosdee'go Jew dine'é índa Jew dine'é binahagha' yihidiikaii lą'í Paul índa Bárnabas yikéé' yíkai , áko Diyin God bibee ajooba' yéego yaa dadzólíi dooleełígíí baa nídzooskango bee bich'į' hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	As they were waiting for the Temple , Paul and Barnabas and the Jewish believers were waiting for preaching to God and the Good News . They wanted to trust God for him for preaching the Good News .
GOLD:	Many Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas , and the two men urged them to continue to rely on the grace of God .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bił hólne' , Bóhólníihii díí yee haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Aaron and his sons and all the tribes of Israel , saying ,
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron and his sons and all the people of Israel . This is what the Lord has commanded .

ID:	1041
INPUT:	Áko diné áłah nilínígíí ninaagóó ahénál'áa doo , áádóó wót'áahdi bá dah sínídáhídi dah nánídaah .
PRED:	Then you will sit on the main street and walk on the roof .
GOLD:	Gather the nations before you.Rule over them from on high .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	Nidine'é dadiyinii éí nihodiyingo haz'ánígíí t'óó kónígháníjį' daabí nít'éé' nidi , nihi'ana'í danilíinii yik'i naaskai .
PRED:	But the people of the holy sanctuary came to their enemies , but they fought against your enemies .
GOLD:	How briefly your holy people possessed your holy place , and now our enemies have destroyed it .

ID:	1043
INPUT:	Áko David t'áá íiyisí ádił niseedzá ; jó , diné hoł nidazdoołniiłgo yádaałti' , háálá diné t'áá ałtso dabiye'ké índa dabitsi'ké yąąh dabíni' . Nidi David éí Bóhólníihii haDiyin God binahjį' hadziil ízh'diilyaa .
PRED:	So David became very angry with them , for he had many sons and daughters were afraid of the Lord their God and his sons . But the Lord was very powerful .
GOLD:	David was now in great danger because all his men were very bitter about losing their sons and daughters , and they began to talk of stoning him . But David found strength in the Lord his God .

ID:	1044
INPUT:	Dabiinéé' yéego didoots'į́į́ł ; tónteeldę́ę́' ayóó íits'a'go hadadidoolwosh ; Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii yaa dahaniihgo dahataał doo .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord will hear his voice , and the mighty will sing praises to the Lord .
GOLD:	But all who are left shout and sing for joy.Those in the west praise the Lord 's majesty .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	Áko níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'gi Názarait nilíinii ats'á'ádeet'ánígíí bitsii' bee bééhózinígíí yidooshih , áádóó ats'á'ádeet'ą́ągo bitsii' néididoołjołgo nááhidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii nááhániihgo biyaa góne' tsídzaii doołjoł .
PRED:	Then he must sprinkle the blood of the Tabernacle and sprinkle it with the fat of the Tabernacle . Then he must bring the grain offering to the Lord . Then he must remove the fat of the sacred offerings and sacred offerings .
GOLD:	“ Then the Nazirites will shave their heads at the entrance of the Tabernacle . They will take the hair that had been dedicated and place it on the fire beneath the peace-offering sacrifice .

ID:	1046
INPUT:	Áádóó bich'į' bee handziihgo nááda'iiłniihii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii deí'aahígíí ábidiní , Jórdan tooh bibąąhjį' oohkaigo Jórdan tooh ałníi'gi hazhó'ó deidoosįįł .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the priests , the priests who were carrying the Ark of the Covenant of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Give this command to the priests who carry the Ark of the Covenant : ‘ When you reach the banks of the Jordan River , take a few steps into the river and stop there . ' ”

ID:	1047
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é bitahdóó Jiifáneh biye' Kéíleb .
PRED:	Caleb son of Jephunneh
GOLD:	JudahCaleb son of Jephunneh

ID:	1048
INPUT:	Gíírar kin shijaa'dę́ę́' Abímelek bik'is Ahó<unk> índa bisiláo binanit'a'í Fáíkal wolyéii yił haa yíkaigo
PRED:	Abimelech and his friends went out to Egypt to visit Pharaoh and his friends .
GOLD:	One day King Abimelech came from Gerar with his adviser , Ahuzzath , and also Phicol , his army commander .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	Nihi'ana'í bich'į' nihíká anánílwo' , háálá diné t'éiyá áká iilwo'go t'áadoo nádleehí da .
PRED:	Do n't help us , for you are not able to help us .
GOLD:	Oh , please help us against our enemies , for all human help is useless .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	Job hodísinígíí bóhoneestą́ą́'
PRED:	Job 's Second Speech : A Response to Eliphaz
GOLD:	Prologue

ID:	1051
INPUT:	Áko díí bee nanihinítą́'ígíí dasétsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' t'áá ooleełgi bik'ehgo nibéédahołníihgo nihá áshłééh nihósh'ní .
PRED:	So I am telling you these things that I am giving you today . I am sending you out of the dead .
GOLD:	so I will work hard to make sure you always remember these things after I am gone .

ID:	1052
INPUT:	Asíriya dine'é nilíinii doo yisdánihidoonił da ; łį́į́' doo bee náádadiibah da índa nihíla' bee bindashiilnishgo ádeiilyaii náásgóó doo bich'į' kónáádadidii'niił da , Nihidiyin danohłį́ . Niniit'aa áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii aa a'ááh hasin bee dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	We will not rescue us from Assyria , but we will not be able to attack us . We will say , ‘ We are our gods . ' But we will say , ‘ We are our ancestors . ' ”
GOLD:	Assyria can not save us , nor can our warhorses.Never again will we say to the idols we have made , ‘ You are our gods . 'No , in you alonedo the orphans find mercy . ”

ID:	1053
INPUT:	Jesus Christ tó áádóó dił yee níyá . Doo tó t'éiyá bee da , nidi tó áádóó dił bee jiníyá . Áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii oo'íinii nilį́įgo éí yee nihił halne' , háálá Níłch'i Diyinii t'áá aaníinii nilį́ .
PRED:	Jesus and the water of Christ Jesus Christ is no water , but he is the Holy Spirit . He is the Holy Spirit , and he is the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	And Jesus Christ was revealed as God 's Son by his baptism in water and by shedding his blood on the cross — not by water only , but by water and blood . And the Spirit , who is truth , confirms it with his testimony .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	Háálá Christ doo t'áá bí ádił hóshǫ́ǫ da nít'éé' ; jó , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání , Danéédzíi'ii yee danéédzíí' yę́ę shik'ijį' silį́į́' .
PRED:	For Christ did n't sin , for he said , “ The Scriptures say , ‘ You have sinned against me . '
GOLD:	For even Christ did n't live to please himself . As the Scriptures say , “ The insults of those who insult you , O God , have fallen on me . ”

ID:	1055
INPUT:	Áko Jííhu éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh , áádóó Samériya kin haal'áagi yóó'áho'diilyaa . Nít'éé' haye' Jiihó'ahaz hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	When Jehu died , he was buried in Samaria , and his son Ahaziah became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jehu died , he was buried in Samaria . Then his son Jehoahaz became the next king .

ID:	1056
INPUT:	Ákóyaa níjoodááł , nít'éé' há nidaal'a'í hadááh yíkaigo hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , Niye' náádiidzá .
PRED:	So they went to meet him and told him , “ We 're going to meet your son . ”
GOLD:	While the man was on his way , some of his servants met him with the news that his son was alive and well .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	Yádiłhił nílíinii , ąą ánínééh ; bíni'dii t'áá ákogi át'éii naałtin ; bíni'dii nahasdzáán ąą ánéehgo yisdá'iildééh bits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' haleeh áádóó bíni'dii t'áá ákogi át'éii yił hanisé . Bóhólníihii nishłíinii shí éí ádaashłaa .
PRED:	Let the heavens be open , O heavens , and let the earth learn what is right . Let the earth save them from the earth .
GOLD:	“ Open up , O heavens , and pour out your righteousness.Let the earth open wideso salvation and righteousness can sprout up together.I , the Lord , created them .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	Áko Áízak haye' Íísa bich'į' yájíłti'go Rebékah hodiizts'ą́ą́' . Áádóó Íísa halgaidę́ę́' bįįh nizhdooyééł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ ajoolzhee' .
PRED:	So Isaac said to Esau , “ Esau 's son Esau , Esau 's son Esau . He told his son Esau what he told him . ”
GOLD:	But Rebekah overheard what Isaac had said to his son Esau . So when Esau left to hunt for the wild game ,

ID:	1059
INPUT:	Áádóó índa nahjį' anídeesh'nii'go shine'dę́ę́' t'éí yidííłtsééł , nidi shinii' éí doo yidííłtséeł da .
PRED:	I will see you from the face of my face , but you will never see me .
GOLD:	Then I will remove my hand and let you see me from behind . But my face will not be seen . ”

ID:	1060
INPUT:	Áko azhdooyį́į́ł biniyé hayaa nizh'níką́ , nidi , Biniyé níyáhígíí baa hweeshne'go índa adeeshį́į́ł , jiní . Hágoónee' , hólne' , hozhdííniid .
PRED:	The next day he went to eat , but he said , “ Go and eat the meal , ” he said . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I 'll tell you what I have done . ”
GOLD:	Then food was served . But Abraham 's servant said , “ I do n't want to eat until I have told you why I have come. ” “ All right , ” Laban said , “ tell us . ”

ID:	1061
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Original Peoples of Edom

ID:	1062
INPUT:	Na'ák'íyáshti'ii índa baa ná'ooshkąąhii k'ad deísółts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Listen to my prayer ; listen to my plea .
GOLD:	Listen to my charge ; pay attention to my arguments .

ID:	1063
INPUT:	Jó , ná naal'a'í nishłíinii ádee haasdzíí' ; éí Gíísher kin haal'áadi Síriya kéyahgi naashá yę́ędą́ą́' ádíshní , Bóhólníihii t'áá aaníí Jerúsalem kin haal'áajį' shił nát'áazhgo índa Bóhólníihii bá naash'a' doo .
PRED:	“ Look , my servant , ” says the Lord , “ I have sworn this message to the Lord : I am going to rebuild the city of Naphtali .
GOLD:	For while your servant was at Geshur in Aram , I promised to sacrifice to the Lord in Hebron if he would bring me back to Jerusalem . ”

ID:	1064
INPUT:	Háálá dziil t'ahdii nihee ádindą́ą́' , ts'ídá Diyin God yee nihoní'ą́ąjį' ahoolzhiizhgo , doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádajít'éii há Christ daaztsą́ .
PRED:	For God died , just as he died , just as he died . And when God died , he died .
GOLD:	When we were utterly helpless , Christ came at just the right time and died for us sinners .

ID:	1065
INPUT:	Éí bąą doo yá'ádaashóonii nik'i hwiidooleeł , áko bee bił yóó'ahodííłáałii doo nił bééhózin da doo , áádóó báhádzidii nik'ijį' dooleełgo nahjį' kodíílíłígíí doo bíninil'ą́ą da doo índa atíndoolíiłii doo nił bééhózinii t'áadoo hooyání nik'i hwiidooleeł .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked go down to the wicked , and you will know what is wrong . Then you will be cursed , and you will be cursed .
GOLD:	So disaster will overtake you , and you wo n't be able to charm it away.Calamity will fall upon you , and you wo n't be able to buy your way out.A catastrophe will strike you suddenly , one for which you are not prepared .

ID:	1066
INPUT:	Kódíshní , Da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó tahoniiłkaad doo nít'éé' áádóó diné bitahgóó doo hwéédahaniihgóó áhooshłaa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then I said , “ I will scatter them among them , and I will thank them among them . ”
GOLD:	I would have annihilated them , wiping out even the memory of them .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílam ádííniidígíí bik'ehgo Béílak ádzaa ; éí dóola yázhí índa deenásts'aa' éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí t'áá ałtso yik'eh nítį́įgo nááyiyiisnii' .
PRED:	Balak did as King Balak commanded him . He built a young bull and a young bull and a young bull for all the altar .
GOLD:	So Balak did as Balaam ordered and offered a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	1068
INPUT:	Áko díí ał'ąą át'éii át'éhígíí baa nitsókees : badaa'ihígíí áádóó doo badaa'ihígíí índa naaldlooshii daadánígíí áádóó doo daadánígíí .
PRED:	“ These are the things you have said , ‘ We will eat the lampstand , the animals that scurry along the ground . '
GOLD:	By these instructions you will know what is unclean and clean , and which animals may be eaten and which may not be eaten . ”

ID:	1069
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Diné nidaaztseedgo bidił kin taazlį́įgo kin haal'áii doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Ákwii ałdó' bee dididooljah biniyé t'óó ahayóí yanáa'áago ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits the people of the city , and they will be filled with violence .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : What sorrow awaits Jerusalem , the city of murderers ! I myself will pile up the fuel beneath her .

ID:	1070
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí Jerobówam ni'iilzííh yaa naayáhígíí t'áá át'é bééjískaigo t'áadoo yóó'adazdeez'ą́ą da ;
PRED:	The people of Israel have deserted Jeroboam 's people ; they have no pity .
GOLD:	And the people of Israel persisted in all the evil ways of Jeroboam . They did not turn from these sins

ID:	1071
INPUT:	Sálaman éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin íílééh
PRED:	Solomon 's Temple
GOLD:	Solomon Builds the Temple

ID:	1072
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Bóhólníihii hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bik'eh ádziidzaa ; dah oonéłígíí t'áá ałtso binááł Dził Hor góde hadziskai .
PRED:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded . The three of them went up Mount Hor together as the whole community watched .

ID:	1073
INPUT:	Ła' ádeizniizį́į́' , Jesus éí Júdas béeso bizis nei'áhígíí biniinaa , Hodílzingo áłah adooleełgi chodeidoo'įįłígíí nahidííłnih , doodaii' , Badahojoobá'íígíí t'áadoo le'é bitaa díínih , yiłní dazniizį́į́' .
PRED:	Some of the money , Judas , tried to pay the money to pay for the Passover celebration , and do n't need to celebrate the Passover meal .
GOLD:	Since Judas was their treasurer , some thought Jesus was telling him to go and pay for the food or to give some money to the poor .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' awéé' ashkii éí <unk> bad bee jíízhi'go kózhdííniid , Ízrel dine'é bee ayóó ájít'éii hats'ą́ą́' dahodiile' ! Háálá Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii hats'ą́ą́' nídiit'ą́ áádóó asdzání yizháá'áád nilíinii daaztsą́ índa hahastiin ałdó' daaztsą́ .
PRED:	When he heard this , he said to the Levites , “ We have heard the Ark of God , ” he said , “ for the Ark of God has died . ”
GOLD:	She named the child Ichabod ( which means “ Where is the glory ? ” ) , for she said , “ Israel 's glory is gone. ” She named him this because the Ark of God had been captured and because her father-in-law and husband were dead .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bich'į' nidahwii'náanii t'áá át'é bik'éniná'nídléego háání'nííł .
PRED:	O Israel , O God of Israel , for you have redeemed your troubles .
GOLD:	O God , ransom Israelfrom all its troubles .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	Naat'á ch'ah éí Jéshuwa bik'i dí'aah , hodoo'niid
PRED:	Then the crown of Jeshua said to Jeshua ,
GOLD:	The Crowning of Jeshua

ID:	1077
INPUT:	Nihisodizin doo didoots'į́įł da biniyé k'os ách'ą́ą́h diniłkǫ' .
PRED:	Do n't listen to your prayer , for the cloud did not listen to you .
GOLD:	You have hidden yourself in a cloudso our prayers can not reach you .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' géeso neeznáá hasht'eelyaaígíí éí siláo miil yilt'éego yinanit'a'í nilíinii bich'į' dííjih . Áádóó nínaaíké haa lá daat'éé lá baa nidíníítaał , índa ha'át'íí lá yaa naakai lá bee nihił hodíílnih .
PRED:	“ Then I will tell you what I am about . Then you will sing to your brothers and sisters , for you will sing your joy .
GOLD:	And give these ten cuts of cheese to their captain . See how your brothers are getting along , and bring back a report on how they are doing . ”

ID:	1079
INPUT:	Háálá ni , díí t'áá ałtso nił bééhózingo , e'elyaii bich'į' nahadlá bá haz'ą́ą́ góne' ííníyą́ą'go diné ła'da bi'oodlą' t'ah doo yiłdziłígíí niiłtsą́ągo éí eda'alyaii bich'į' ch'iyáán náádahaaznii'ii yidooyį́įłgi bił t'áá áko ádíílííł .
PRED:	For you know that you have seen all these things you eat . You must never eat any food that has been defiled by eating , and you will eat it .
GOLD:	For if others see you — with your “ superior knowledge ” — eating in the temple of an idol , wo n't they be encouraged to violate their conscience by eating food that has been offered to an idol ?

ID:	1080
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes kót'éego yich'į' haadzíí' ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1081
INPUT:	éí ni ánít'į́ , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , ayóó ánít'é áádóó nidziil sínílį́į́' ; bee ayóó ánít'éii yádiłhiłjį' nininísą́ índa bee níhólníihii ni' nidahonees'ą́ąjį' silį́į́' .
PRED:	You are your King , O king , and you have become very powerful and powerful and powerful .
GOLD:	That tree , Your Majesty , is you . For you have grown strong and great ; your greatness reaches up to heaven , and your rule to the ends of the earth .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	Ákondi ánihwiish'aah ládą́ą́' , bee ánihwiish'aahii éí t'áá aaníí , háálá doo t'áá sáhí ánihwiish'aah da , nidi shí áádóó aTaa' shiníł'a'ii biłgo t'éiyá .
PRED:	But I tell you what I am saying , for I am going to teach you the truth .
GOLD:	And if I did , my judgment would be correct in every respect because I am not alone . The Father who sent me is with me .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	Éí bąą kódíníigo bich'į' handziih , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kónihiłní , Shoo , shidine'é nohłíinii , danihijishcháá' nihá ąą ádadeeshłííł ; áádę́ę́' nánihidideeshjahgo Ízrel dine'é bikéyah biih nánihideesh'nił .
PRED:	“ Therefore , tell us , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make you desolate , O people of Israel , and I will scatter you into the land of Israel .
GOLD:	Therefore , prophesy to them and say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : O my people , I will open your graves of exile and cause you to rise again . Then I will bring you back to the land of Israel .

ID:	1084
INPUT:	Áko ákwe'é kin haal'áhígi diné t'áá íiyisí bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	There was great joy in the city , and there was great joy .
GOLD:	So there was great joy in that city .

ID:	1085
INPUT:	Áko sozdilzingo ájíní , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shinanit'a'í Éíbraham biDiyin God nánooshkąąh ; díí jį́ shíká anilyeed ; Éíbraham shinanit'a'í baa jiiníbaah .
PRED:	Then he prayed to the Lord , “ O Lord my God , please let me go to my master . ”
GOLD:	“ O Lord , God of my master , Abraham , ” he prayed . “ Please give me success today , and show unfailing love to my master , Abraham .

ID:	1086
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel biye'ké ákódaadzaa ; Féro ádííniidígi át'éego Jóseph tsinaabąąs haa yiiznil , áádóó hast'e' bikiin níjookah dooleełígíí há hasht'éyiilaa .
PRED:	So the sons of Israel did as Joseph had commanded Pharaoh . So Joseph took Joseph to Joseph , and he stored them in a field .
GOLD:	So the sons of Jacob did as they were told . Joseph provided them with wagons , as Pharaoh had commanded , and he gave them supplies for the journey .

ID:	1087
INPUT:	Éíbram áádóó Néíhor t'áá ájíłah hwe'asdzą́ą́ hazlį́į́' : Éíbram hwe'asdzą́ą́ éí Sérai wolyé , áádóó Néíhor hwe'asdzą́ą́ éí Mílkah wolyé , éí Héíran yitsi' nilį́ ; Héíran éí Mílkah áádóó <unk> bizhé'é jílį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Abram 's wife , Abram 's wife , Abram , had become the wife of Abram . His mother was the father of Abram , Nahor , the daughter of Abram . He was the father of Abram .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Abram and Nahor both married . The name of Abram 's wife was Sarai , and the name of Nahor 's wife was Milcah . ( Milcah and her sister Iscah were daughters of Nahor 's brother Haran . )

ID:	1088
INPUT:	Abínígo ádadohníi doo , I'íí'ą́ laanaa nisin . E'e'áahgo ádadohníi doo , Abíní doo yę́ę nisin . Háálá bik'ee hóyée'ii bik'ee nihił daayée' doo índa bik'eda'íyée'ii baa ákódanohsin doo .
PRED:	You will say , ‘ I am afraid of you , 'you will fear the Lord , for you will fear him .
GOLD:	In the morning you will say , ‘ If only it were night ! ' And in the evening you will say , ‘ If only it were morning ! ' For you will be terrified by the awful horrors you see around you .

ID:	1089
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii díí ałdó' łahgo át'éego yąąh tsíńdeezkéezgo ání , Nich'į' yit' íní ályaii doo bik'ehgo ákóhodooníił da , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ I will never change this mind . We will never be able to understand what it means . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord relented from this plan , too . “ I will not do that either , ” said the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	1090
INPUT:	Samériya biyi' kin haal'áá léi'gi jiníyá , ákwii Sáíkar hoolyéé lá , Jéíkab biye' Jóseph kéyah yeidiní'ą́ yę́ędóó t'áá áyídígi .
PRED:	He went to the town of Samaria , where he gave Joseph son of Joseph to his son Joseph .
GOLD:	Eventually he came to the Samaritan village of Sychar , near the field that Jacob gave to his son Joseph .

ID:	1091
INPUT:	Áádóó Miirárai dine'é bada'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí t'áá ałtso dabizhé'é yę́ę ya'áłchíní danilį́įgo dabi'déélta' ;
PRED:	These were the clans of the clans of the tribe of Merari .
GOLD:	The Merarite division was also listed by its clans and families .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	Áko dine'é danilínígíí bitahdóó naat'áanii danilíinii t'ááłá'ígo éí kéyah hóó' dadooleełígíí hazhé'é deidoozoh biniyé nidíínił .
PRED:	“ You will divide the land among the tribes of the tribes of the land you gave them .
GOLD:	Enlist one leader from each tribe to help them with the task .

ID:	1093
INPUT:	Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi da'ílíinii bee ída'azįįdgo índa dówózhii biyi' hojílǫ́ǫ́ nít'ée'ii ach'oha'ní yee ak'ijidlíi doo . Bíni'dii bee ak'ihojidlíii Jóseph hatsiit'áajį' ahodooleeł , áádóó hatsiikáa'jį' ahodooleeł ; hak' isóó bits'ázdineesdlį́į'ii bitahgóó naat'áanii jílį́ .
PRED:	And if they were born in the earth , they will be a blessing for the people of the earth . May they be a blessing for Joseph 's head and his head and his head and his head .
GOLD:	with the best gifts of the earth and its bounty , and the favor of the one who appeared in the burning bush.May these blessings rest on Joseph 's head , crowning the brow of the prince among his brothers .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , shiye' baa jiiníbaah , háálá tsi'nídídááh , áko t'áá íiyisí ti'náhoo'nih ; jó , t'áá ahą́ą́h tsídza nágoh , áádóó t'áá ahą́ą́h taah nágoh .
PRED:	Have mercy on me , Lord , have mercy on us , for we will be thrown into into the furnace .
GOLD:	“ Lord , have mercy on my son . He has seizures and suffers terribly . He often falls into the fire or into the water .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' ts'ídá yá'át'éehgo nitsídaakeesii yá'át'éehgo bá ánít'į́ .
PRED:	O Lord , do what is right , O Lord , for they are good .
GOLD:	O Lord , do good to those who are good , whose hearts are in tune with you .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	Áko Júdas éí aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa Férisii danilíinii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' siláo índa bindanit'a'í ła' ba'í'nilgo ákwe'é yił yíkai , bee hool'iní nidaadlo'í áádóó honooyééł índa dadeeníinii dayíjáahgo .
PRED:	Then Judas , the leading priests , the leading priests , and some of the teachers of religious leaders arrived at the wilderness .
GOLD:	The leading priests and Pharisees had given Judas a contingent of Roman soldiers and Temple guards to accompany him . Now with blazing torches , lanterns , and weapons , they arrived at the olive grove .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	Áko asdzání danilíinii Neiyómii ádeidííniid , Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih , díí jį́ áhánígo nik'éí nilíinii t'áá ádingo doo ániilaa da ; Ízrel dine'é bitahgi ashkii bízhi' ts'ídá bee béého'dílzin doo .
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , ” the woman said , “ remember that the Lord has given you today . You must not be counted among the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then the women of the town said to Naomi , “ Praise the Lord , who has now provided a redeemer for your family ! May this child be famous in Israel .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	Hérad t'óó bił haada
PRED:	Herod Agrippa Agrippa Agrippa
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy

ID:	1099
INPUT:	Bízhi' hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo ; jį́honaa'éí has'ahgóó hólónígi át'éego házhi' has'ahgóó náás yit'ih doo . Hanahjį' diné bik'idahojidlíi doo ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso , Baa hózhóonii , dahałníi doo .
PRED:	Let the sun be filled with the sun , and the moon will be heard in the name of the world , and all the nations will be blessed .
GOLD:	May the king 's name endure forever ; may it continue as long as the sun shines.May all nations be blessed through himand bring him praise .

ID:	1100
INPUT:	nidi Jesus ábidííniid , Júdas , da' Diné Silį́į'iísh yiits'ǫsgo ninádiní'aah ?
PRED:	Jesus said to Judas , “ Who is a man who is a man of Man ? ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ Judas , would you betray the Son of Man with a kiss ? ”

ID:	1101
INPUT:	Áko haa nínáádzídzá , nít'éé' nááda'jiłhosh lá , háálá t'áá íiyisí bił ho'niighą́ą́' .
PRED:	But when they returned , they found him asleep , for he was filled with bitter .
GOLD:	When he returned to them again , he found them sleeping , for they could n't keep their eyes open .

ID:	1102
INPUT:	Áko díí bitsásk'ehjį' doo ła' anízhdoołteeł da ; yá'át'éehii áádóó doo yá'át'éehii doo bił ałgháázhdooltéeł da , índa doo yá'át'éehii áádóó yá'át'éehii doo bił ałgháázhdooltéeł da , ákódziidzaago naaldlooshii ałgháá'jíltį́įgo éí t'áá áłah dílzin dooleeł .
PRED:	But if it is not a virgin , it will be a virgin , and no one will be able to pay it back for the original amount of animal , and the animal will be given to the Lord .
GOLD:	You may not exchange or substitute it for another animal — neither a good animal for a bad one nor a bad animal for a good one . But if you do exchange one animal for another , then both the original animal and its substitute will be considered holy .

ID:	1103
INPUT:	Áko béésh łitsoii íí'áa dooígíí bílátah dah doo'niłígíí éí yah a'atiindę́ę'go hastą́ą́h ké silá áníłtsogo ch'ilátah hózhóón lílii wolyéii nahalin .
PRED:	The top of the bronze basin will be like a bronze basin called the Sea of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	The capitals on the columns inside the entry room were shaped like water lilies , and they were six feet tall .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	Éí bąą łahgo át'éego Diyin God bich'į' tsíńdahidohkeesgo beełt'éego nihits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' dahóle' , áádóó t'óó ádaa dadzíínóhdlíigo t'áá nihiyi'ídi , Éíbraham yę́ę éí nihizhé'é nilį́ , t'áadoo dadohníní , háálá ánihidishní , Diyin God díí tsé kǫ́ǫ́ naaznilígíí bee Éíbraham ba'áłchíní íidoolíiłgo yíneel'ą́ .
PRED:	So pray to God , and do n't let us enjoy your own fruit . Be careful to give you the fruit of your ancestors , for I am the God of Abraham , the God of Abraham .
GOLD:	Prove by the way you live that you have repented of your sins and turned to God . Do n't just say to each other , ‘ We 're safe , for we are descendants of Abraham . ' That means nothing , for I tell you , God can create children of Abraham from these very stones .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	T'óó baa'ihgo nitsíkeesii éí doo bił nilį́į da , nidi Bóhólníihii deidósinii bił nilį́ . Azhą́ bik'ee ti'hojooníih nidi , bee nihojii'aahígíí baa nijighá .
PRED:	The lips of the wicked are foolish , but the Lord hates those who fear him .
GOLD:	Those who despise flagrant sinners , and honor the faithful followers of the Lord , and keep their promises even when it hurts .

ID:	1106
INPUT:	Áko asdzání Jézebel éí shá nidaal'a'í áádóó shá dahalne'ii neistseedgo bidił dadeezna'ígíí t'áá ałtso bá k'éédideeshnííł biniyé ninanit'a'í Éíhab bik'éí danilíinii t'áá ałtso nidííłtsxił .
PRED:	“ Then I will slaughter my servants and the leaders of the town . I will slaughter the people of the town of Ahab and the other leaders of the town .
GOLD:	You are to destroy the family of Ahab , your master . In this way , I will avenge the murder of my prophets and all the Lord 's servants who were killed by Jezebel .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	K'ad nihich'į' nidahwiiłnánígíí biniinaa diné t'áá ájít'éhígi át'éego nijigháago há yá'át'ééh nisin .
PRED:	Now it is better to be better to be better than to be better than you .
GOLD:	Because of the present crisis , I think it is best to remain as you are .

ID:	1108
INPUT:	Éí níla' bik'ídeesdiz le' ; nijéíkáa'gi bee bik'ida'íłchi' .
PRED:	Write them on their hands , and seal them on them .
GOLD:	Tie them on your fingers as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	Sha'ákéí índa sha'áłchíní bideená ná nishishnish nít'é'ígíí shaa nínííł , áko shíni' dah diishnééh , háálá ná nishishnishígíí nił bééhózin .
PRED:	I am afraid of all my children , for I have given them my work . I know that I am afraid of my enemies .
GOLD:	Let me take my wives and children , for I have earned them by serving you , and let me be on my way . You certainly know how hard I have worked for you . ”

ID:	1110
INPUT:	Dį́į'go naanáz'áhídóó adee' hadaaz'áago t'áá ła' bizhi'ee áyiilaa , índa béésh łitsoii yik'íísti' .
PRED:	He made two bronze rings and attached them with two bronze rings and attached them to them .
GOLD:	He made horns for each of its four corners so that the horns and altar were all one piece . He overlaid the altar with bronze .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	Áko asdzání ná naal'a'í nishłíinii ádíshní , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii saad yee haadzí'ígíí bee ha'íídéeshniił , háálá diyingo naal'a'í Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó nahalingo bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nilíinii éí yá'át'éehii áádóó doo yá'át'éehii yaa ákonízin . Éí bąą Bóhólníihii niDiyin God nił hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Then I said to the king , “ I will tell you what the Lord says : I will say to the angel of the Lord your God , for I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Yes , my lord the king will give us peace of mind again . ' I know that you are like an angel of God in discerning good from evil . May the Lord your God be with you . ”

ID:	1112
INPUT:	Sálaman éí kin bii' sohodizin góne' tsits'aa' dílzinii niiní'ą́
PRED:	The Ark of the Temple
GOLD:	The Ark Brought to the Temple

ID:	1113
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go shaa hwííníle'go shijéí át'éegi háínísidgo nabínínítą́ą́' ; doo yá'ádaat'éehii doo ła' shii' hólǫ́ǫ́góó nił bééhózin ; doo t'áá k'ad bee haz'áanii heshtíihgo hahideesdzih da niizį́į́' .
PRED:	Do n't let me go out into the night , and you will not know what I am saying . I am going to say , ‘ You will not understand what I am going to do . '
GOLD:	You have tested my thoughts and examined my heart in the night.You have scrutinized me and found nothing wrong.I am determined not to sin in what I say .

ID:	1114
INPUT:	Átséédą́ą́' bee aha'deet'áanii t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahígóogo doo bee aha'náádeet'ą́ą da doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	But if the covenant was not covenant with the covenant of the covenant , it would not be circumcised .
GOLD:	If the first covenant had been faultless , there would have been no need for a second covenant to replace it .

ID:	1115
INPUT:	Jiihóíyakim éí naadiin ashdla' binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' , áádóó Jerúsalemgi nant'áago ła'ts'áadah nááhai áádóó biDiyin God Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa naayá .
PRED:	Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years before the Lord .
GOLD:	Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord his God .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	áádóó áyidííniid , Nílááh , Sailóom tó sikánígíí biyi' tá'ádígis ( Sailóom jiníigo éí <unk> 'a' jiníigo óolyé ) . Ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago tá'ázdeesgiz , áko áádę́ę́' ajoo'į́įgo nídzídzá .
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ Go and wash the water from the pool of water . ” So he went out and sat down to the pool of water .
GOLD:	He told him , “ Go wash yourself in the pool of Siloam ” ( Siloam means “ sent ” ) . So the man went and washed and came back seeing !

ID:	1117
INPUT:	Áko Líyah ání , Shá naal'a'í shahastiin baa níłtį́įgo bąą Diyin God shich'į' na'nílá , áko ashkii éí Ísakar bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	Leah said , “ My husband has taken my husband , for God has given me a son of Simeon .
GOLD:	She named him Issachar , for she said , “ God has rewarded me for giving my servant to my husband as a wife . ”

ID:	1118
INPUT:	Ak'ahígíí t'áá át'é yits'éidooniłgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' yididoołił .
PRED:	He will completely destroy the fat of the altar , and he will burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	Then the priest must remove all the animal 's fat and burn it on the altar ,

ID:	1119
INPUT:	Áko doo dasinooh<unk> góó , doodaii' doo dasinoohdohgóó , nidi t'óó dasoozílígo t'óó nihídideeshkoh .
PRED:	And if you ca n't grow up , you wo n't get up into your hands .
GOLD:	But since you are like lukewarm water , neither hot nor cold , I will spit you out of my mouth !

ID:	1120
INPUT:	Áádóó óola názbąsgo naaki ánáádayiidlaa , áko éí íífad bik'ijį' awostisdóó t'áá ałch'ijí háát'i'ígíí yaago ninít'i'gi bąąh dah sinilgo ádayiilaa ; t'áá sis íífad bąąh nít'i'ígíí baa nahodeesgį'go yistł'ónígíí béheeshcha'gi bąąh sinilgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	Then he made two gold rings and attached them to the ephod , and he made the ephod of the ephod with the ephod . He made the ephod of the ephod with the decorative sash .
GOLD:	Then they made two more gold rings and attached them to the front of the ephod , below the shoulder-pieces , just above the knot where the decorative sash was fastened to the ephod .

ID:	1121
INPUT:	Áko hazhé'é Azáíyah yę́ę áát'įįdígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł t'áá ákogi ájít'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	But Amaziah did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Jotham did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight . He did everything his father , Uzziah , had done .

ID:	1122
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bik'ee yínííł na'adáii shináhaazláá nít'éé' ; aniné biloh shiyah náhodiłhis nít'éé' .
PRED:	The grave wrapped me in death ; death wrapped me in death .
GOLD:	The grave wrapped its ropes around me ; death laid a trap in my path .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	Ani'įįhii dichin nilį́įgo , hwiih dooleeł biniyé aneez'į́į'go diné doo dabiił<unk> da ,
PRED:	The hungry are hungry , and those who are hungry will never see them .
GOLD:	Excuses might be found for a thiefwho steals because he is starving .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	Diné ła' Bóhólníihii yich'į' ádee hadoodzíi'go , doodaii' yee nihoní'áanii yee ádee hadoodzíi'go bii' sizíinii yá nihodiní'ą́ągo , yá nihodiní'ánígíí bizaad doo ałtah ánáyoodlíił da ; yee haadzí'ígíí t'áá át'é bik'ehgo ye'eł'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ No one will fulfill a vow to the Lord , whether a vow or pledge or pledge or a vow or a vow or pledge .
GOLD:	A man who makes a vow to the Lord or makes a pledge under oath must never break it . He must do exactly what he said he would do .

ID:	1125
INPUT:	Bíni'dii t'áá ałtsoní yá'át'éehgo índa hasht'ehodít'éego baa na'aldeeh le' .
PRED:	Let them be well of every kind of good deeds and good deeds .
GOLD:	But be sure that everything is done properly and in order .

ID:	1126
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh biniyé doo bááh nilíinii nihibéeso bik'é nidahohłé áádóó doo bee hwiih ídlíinii bik'é nidaołnish ? Haleebee dashíínółts'ą́ą'go yá'ádaat'éehii daohsą́ áádóó nihii' naazíinii áda'azįįd yee hwiih danilį́įgo bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Why do you want to share your money ? Why do you want your money to satisfy your money ?
GOLD:	Why spend your money on food that does not give you strength ? Why pay for food that does you no good ? Listen to me , and you will eat what is good.You will enjoy the finest food .

ID:	1127
INPUT:	séigi át'éego na'áłchíní t'óó ahayói doo nít'éé' , índa t'áá éí tsé yázhígi át'éego nits'ą́ą́dóó náás oochíłígíí hólǫ́ǫ doo nít'éé' ; shidáahgi nízhi' doo nahjį' kódoolníił da , doo nidi ádooldįįł da nít'éé' .
PRED:	Your children will be like a wall , and your children will never be like a wall . You will never be destroyed , but you will never be destroyed .
GOLD:	Your descendants would have been like the sands along the seashore — too many to count ! There would have been no need for your destruction , or for cutting off your family name . ”

ID:	1128
INPUT:	Áko k'adísh Bóhólníihii t'áágééd díí kéyahígíí ádeeshdįįł biniyé níyá ? Bóhólníihii áshíłní , Nílááh , díí kéyah bik'ijį' hasínáahgo áhółdįįh .
PRED:	And why did you drive me into the land of the Lord ? “ Go to this land , ” says the Lord . “ Go to this land . ”
GOLD:	What 's more , do you think we have invaded your land without the Lord 's direction ? The Lord himself told us , ‘ Attack this land and destroy it ! ' ”

ID:	1129
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Gedaliah Governs in Judah

ID:	1130
INPUT:	Áko doo da'oodlání k'ad t'áá íiyisí tsi'naaldeehgi doo éédadoohjahgóó yik'ee t'óó bił adahayóí , áádóó danihi'į́įgo yádaałti' .
PRED:	And now you will be cursed in the church , and you will be amazed .
GOLD:	Of course , your former friends are surprised when you no longer plunge into the flood of wild and destructive things they do . So they slander you .

ID:	1131
INPUT:	Aláahgo jidiyinígíí bik'ehgo Diyin God biYe' jílį́įgo bee adziilii bee aninéédę́ę́' náázdiidzáhígíí bee hwééhoozin .
PRED:	And he was speaking to the Son of God , the Son of God , who raised him from the Son of God .
GOLD:	and he was shown to be the Son of God when he was raised from the dead by the power of the Holy Spirit . He is Jesus Christ our Lord .

ID:	1132
INPUT:	Lk . 19 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Two Sons

ID:	1133
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kót'éego nidziizyeel , jó'akon , nahasdzáán bikáá'dóó haaz'éí yádiłhił biní'á ; éí bikáá'dóó Diyin God bidiyingo nidaal'a'í dego áádóó yaago ałnánákahgo jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Then he saw that the sun was coming , and the heavens saw the sun and the sun of God . Then he saw the sun and the sun .
GOLD:	As he slept , he dreamed of a stairway that reached from the earth up to heaven . And he saw the angels of God going up and down the stairway .

ID:	1134
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' , shoo , k'ad shá oo'íinii yá'ąąshdi hó<unk> dóó bee shaa hóóne'ígíí bił bééhózinii áadi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And now , you know that I am going to see the truth of heaven .
GOLD:	Even now my witness is in heaven.My advocate is there on high .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	Áádóó Jéíkab biye'ké dayíínii'go nida'niłkaadę́ę́' nináhaaskai , áko éí yik'ee bíni' dei'a' áádóó t'áá íiyisí doo bił dahaldin da , háálá Ízrel dine'é bitahgi bąąhági ádziidzaa . Jéíkab bitsi' bił jineezhtéézh lá . Ákót'éii doo ádoolníił da nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Jacob heard that Jacob had left his sons , he sent them out and sent them out , and they were afraid of Jacob 's sons , and they were not afraid of Jacob 's daughter .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jacob 's sons had come in from the field as soon as they heard what had happened . They were shocked and furious that their sister had been raped . Shechem had done a disgraceful thing against Jacob 's family , something that should never be done .

ID:	1136
INPUT:	T'áá nihí baa nitsídaahkees ; da' asdzáníísh bitsii' doo bik'é'ésti'góó Diyin God yich'į' sodilzingo beełt'é ?
PRED:	Do n't you think of your hair ? Do you think of God 's hair ?
GOLD:	Judge for yourselves . Is it right for a woman to pray to God in public without covering her head ?

ID:	1137
INPUT:	Jerúsalem kin haal'áii ayóó ánóolningo áńdoolnííł
PRED:	Jerusalem 's Message for Jerusalem
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	1138
INPUT:	Háálá diyingo áda'ale'ii áádóó diyingo ádabi'dilne'ii t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'íígíí yits'ą́ą́dóó danilį́ . Éí bąą doo baa yáznízingóó shik'isóó bijiní ,
PRED:	For they will be ashamed of all the angels who are ashamed of me , and they will be ashamed of my brothers .
GOLD:	So now Jesus and the ones he makes holy have the same Father . That is why Jesus is not ashamed to call them his brothers and sisters .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , dah daask'id bighą́ą'di ádaalyaaígóó diné t'ahdii nááda'iiłniihgo biDiyin God Bóhólníihii t'éiyá yich'į' nááda'iisnii' .
PRED:	But even though they were still in the hill country , the priests still still offered sacrifices to the Lord their God .
GOLD:	However , the people still sacrificed at the pagan shrines , though only to the Lord their God .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	Éí bąą ádííniid , T'áá aaníí , díí diné doo nidaneestą́ą' da , índa doo ádahalyą́ą da , háálá Bóhólníihii bik'ehgo áhoot'éii índa biDiyin God bibik'ehgo hoogáałii doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” they replied , “ for the Lord your God will do what is right , for they will do what is right . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ But what can we expect from the poor ? They are ignorant.They do n't know the ways of the Lord.They do n't understand God 's laws .

ID:	1141
INPUT:	Ahééh danohsingo yah ada'iiztiin góne' yah adahohkááh , áádóó baa dahohniihgo bikin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi nidahohkááh ! Bich'į' ahééh danohsin ; bízhi' baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Give thanks to the name of God , and praise him in his name . Give thanks to his name .
GOLD:	Enter his gates with thanksgiving ; go into his courts with praise.Give thanks to him and praise his name .

ID:	1142
INPUT:	Áko Abímelek ání , Díishą' haa nihííníł'įįd ? Diné ła'da ne'asdzą́ą́ yił neezhtéezhgo dashą' ; bąąhági át'éii yiih nihíínil doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ What have you done ? ” Abimelech demanded . “ How have you committed a man who has sex with us ? ”
GOLD:	“ How could you do this to us ? ” Abimelech exclaimed . “ One of my people might easily have taken your wife and slept with her , and you would have made us guilty of great sin . ”

ID:	1143
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso bídin danohłíinii Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bídeínóhkeedgo Hórebgi áłah nohłį́įgo yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' ádadooniid , Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God biinéé' doo náádideests'į́įł da , doodaii' díí kǫ' ayóó át'éii doo néideestséeł da , áko doo dadeestsaał da .
PRED:	You will ask the Lord your God , and you will never again see the days of the Lord your God . I will never again again again again again again again again again again again again again again .
GOLD:	For this is what you yourselves requested of the Lord your God when you were assembled at Mount Sinai . You said , ‘ Do n't let us hear the voice of the Lord our God anymore or see this blazing fire , for we will die . '

ID:	1144
INPUT:	Áko díí diné danół'ínígíí áádóó béédahonohsinígíí Jesus bízhi' bee adziilii bee bidziilgo ánábi'diilyaa , áko t'áá ánółtso nihinááł Jesus woodlą́ągo baa dzódlíhígíí bee díí diné doo bąąh tééhgóó ánábi'diilyaa .
PRED:	And when you see this , you will know that Jesus Christ is in the name of the church in the name of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	“ Through faith in the name of Jesus , this man was healed — and you know how crippled he was before . Faith in Jesus ' name has healed him before your very eyes .

ID:	1145
INPUT:	Éí kéyah hodiłhiłii ts'ídá hodiłhiłgo hazhóodii át'é , áádóó anoonééł chaha'oh bii' t'áá ałtsoní ił ałtaa nás'nil , índa áadi adinídíinii chahałheełígíigi át'é .
PRED:	This is the land of the heavens , the land of the Tabernacle , which is a permanent home , and the new home of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	It is a land as dark as midnight , a land of gloom and confusion , where even the light is dark as midnight . ' ”

ID:	1146
INPUT:	áko Hínam biye' bikéyah yíldzis bíighah góde éí Jííbas kin haal'áhígíí shádi'ááhjígo hodeesdzo ; t'áá éí Jerúsalem hoolyé , áádóó e'e'aahjígo Hínam yíldzis binaashii dziłígíí bighą́ą́' góde hodeesdzo , éí náhookǫsjí yé'iitsoh biyíldzis nineel'ánídi át'é ,
PRED:	Early the valley of Ben-Hinnom , the garbage dump in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , across the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom , which was left in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom .
GOLD:	The boundary then passed through the valley of Ben-Hinnom , along the southern slopes of the Jebusites , where the city of Jerusalem is located . Then it went west to the top of the mountain above the valley of Hinnom , and on up to the northern end of the valley of Rephaim .

ID:	1147
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ání , Shibee haz'áanii hadááhgóó ninínilii yóó'adazdeez'ą́ áádóó ádíshníinii t'áadoo bik'eh dahojííł'įįd da índa t'áadoo bik'ehgo dajíkai da ; díí lá biniinaa ni .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ I have abandoned my instructions and abandoned them . They have not abandoned them and followed their evil practices .
GOLD:	The Lord replies , “ This has happened because my people have abandoned my instructions ; they have refused to obey what I said .

ID:	1148
INPUT:	Łį́į́' áádóó łį́į́' nida'ayéhígíí deidoołchoshii nidahidoohééł dahodoo'niid yę́ęjį' t'ááłá'í jinítínígo tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz ákwii nidajiiyeeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	They said to horses and horses , “ We wanted to kill the wheat and wheat . ”
GOLD:	They also brought the necessary barley and straw for the royal horses in the stables .

ID:	1149
INPUT:	Dadi'doots'į́įłgoda diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo doo yá'át'éehii yaa nidaakaii yits'áhidookahgo da'át'é , áko doo yá'áshónígi ádajíít'įįdii biniinaa doo yá'áshónígi áhodeeshłííł , niizį́į'ii łahgo át'éego baa tsíńdeeskos .
PRED:	Listen to me and listen to all who do evil , and they will turn away from their evil ways . I will do what is good .
GOLD:	Perhaps they will listen and turn from their evil ways . Then I will change my mind about the disaster I am ready to pour out on them because of their sins .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	Laanaa hwiindzinígíí biláahgo t'áadoo le'é dadziił<unk> go yá'át'ééh . Díí ałdó' t'áadoo nánídlíní da áádóó níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalin .
PRED:	The people do n't know what they are saying , and they are like a wind . They are like chasing the wind .
GOLD:	Enjoy what you have rather than desiring what you do n't have . Just dreaming about nice things is meaningless — like chasing the wind .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	Áko biiskání Béílak éí Béílam yił dah dii'áazhgo Béíyal e'elyaii yich'į' ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaadóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá dah yinééł nít'éé' yizdoołtsééł biniyé ákóde hoł haazh'áázh , <unk> t'áadoo ałtso jiiłtsą́ą da .
PRED:	The next day Balaam led Balaam to Baal and led Israel to worship Baal . He did not see the idols of Baal to see the people of Israel , but they did n't see him .
GOLD:	The next morning Balak took Balaam up to Bamoth-baal . From there he could see some of the people of Israel spread out below him .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	Nánooshkąąh , nich'į' yáłti'go bee haz'áanii yínaniniłtinígíí nídiilé , áádóó bizaad nijéí bii' hasht'e'nihidí'nííł .
PRED:	Please listen to your instruction , and teach your instruction .
GOLD:	Listen to his instructions , and store them in your heart .

ID:	1153
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó dinééh ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ ayiis'a' ; éí didlidgo nááhániihii náádayiisnii' , índa náádahaaznii'ii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego béégashii éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádayiisnii' .
PRED:	Then one of the young men of Israel sacrificed burnt offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then he sent some of the young Israelite men to present burnt offerings and to sacrifice bulls as peace offerings to the Lord .

ID:	1154
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , Jesus yił naakaígíí ła' bidiltłish hayíítą́ągo aláahgo náá'iiłniihii binaalte' bijaa' na'iidiiłhaal .
PRED:	So Jesus told them , “ A sword has struck the king 's slave with the sword . ”
GOLD:	But one of the men with Jesus pulled out his sword and struck the high priest 's slave , slashing off his ear .

ID:	1155
INPUT:	Nidi tsosts'id náhááh góne' dá'ák'eh hanínályįh doo ; éí Bóhólníihii bá háá'áyį́į́h át'é . T'ááká k'ida'doohłééł lágo , t'ááká nihich'il na'atł'o'ii bílátah dahoohgéésh lágo .
PRED:	On the seventh year of your harvest , you must not eat the Sabbath days of the Lord . Do n't harvest your crops .
GOLD:	but during the seventh year the land must have a Sabbath year of complete rest . It is the Lord 's Sabbath . Do not plant your fields or prune your vineyards during that year .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	Áko David bi'éé' ák'iniyiis<unk> ; t'áá ákót'éego diné yił naakaígíí t'áá ałtso ák'inda'iis<unk> .
PRED:	So David took his robe and tore his clothes into his robe , and they tore their clothes in grief .
GOLD:	David and his men tore their clothes in sorrow when they heard the news .

ID:	1157
INPUT:	Ériyel áádóó bi'ana'í
PRED:	A Message about Edom
GOLD:	A Message about Jerusalem

ID:	1158
INPUT:	Bilą́ąjį' t'áá ákogi át'éii yigáałgo nihá atiin áhodoolííł .
PRED:	He will lead justice to the godly , and he will lead his way to the road .
GOLD:	Righteousness goes as a herald before him , preparing the way for his steps .

ID:	1159
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nihíká anilyeed , háálá Diyin God k'ehgo át'éii áádįįł , áádóó diné bada'ahódlíii diné bitahdóó ch'ééh hádahat'į́ .
PRED:	Save us , O Lord , for he is a reward for those who do evil .
GOLD:	Help , O Lord , for the godly are fast disappearing ! The faithful have vanished from the earth !

ID:	1160
INPUT:	<unk> yéítas , Bóhólníihii binahjį' ayóó'óósh'níinii , shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	Give my greetings to the Lord , for he has loved me .
GOLD:	Greet Ampliatus , my dear friend in the Lord .

ID:	1161
INPUT:	Áádóó ni , Pásher , índa nighan góne' nił kééhat'íinii t'áá ałtso nihidi'doolnéełgo Bábilangóó doohkah , áko áadi dadíítsaałgo ni lá áádóó nik'isóó t'áá ałtso wooch'ííd bee bił dahwíínílne'ii t'áá bił yóó'ándi'doolnííł .
PRED:	“ Son of Asher , go into exile , and you will die in exile . You will be killed in Babylon , and you will be killed . ”
GOLD:	As for you , Pashhur , you and all your household will go as captives to Babylon . There you will die and be buried , you and all your friends to whom you prophesied that everything would be all right . ' ”

ID:	1162
INPUT:	Áko éí dayiiłtsą́ągo bik'ee t'óó bił adahóóyóí ; bił yéé' dahazlį́į'go dah diijéé' .
PRED:	When they saw him , they were terrified and terrified him .
GOLD:	But when they saw it , they were stunned ; they were terrified and ran away .

ID:	1163
INPUT:	Josáíyah hasht'éénáhoodlaaígíí
PRED:	Josiah was the King of Josiah
GOLD:	Josiah 's Religious Reforms

ID:	1164
INPUT:	Naalye'é éí dé'éyóní baa dideesh'ááł ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá íiyisí doo yá'ádaashóonii éí daasnáanii baa dideesh'áałgo deidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	I will destroy the nations , and I will destroy the land I will destroy them .
GOLD:	I will give it as plunder to foreigners , to the most wicked of nations , and they will defile it .

ID:	1165
INPUT:	Gadtsoh bits'áoz'a' éí nihikin bá áah sitáán áádóó ch'ó éí bééhéeshjéé' nahalin .
PRED:	It is a garden that decorated with a garden , and a garden covered its walls .
GOLD:	fragrant cedar branches are the beams of our house , and pleasant smelling firs are the rafters .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	tó ádá náhálchįįhgo nihik'i ch'ídadziisxaal doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	He did not destroy us , but he did not abandon us .
GOLD:	Yes , the raging waters of their furywould have overwhelmed our very lives .

ID:	1167
INPUT:	Háálá díí kéyah bii' hodichingo k'ad naaki nááhai , áádóó ashdla' nináádoohah hadziih ; éí bii' doo nidahwiildlaad da doo , índa doo da'agizh da doo .
PRED:	For this is a very very very years , and there will be five years old and five years .
GOLD:	This famine that has ravaged the land for two years will last five more years , and there will be neither plowing nor harvesting .

ID:	1168
INPUT:	áko índa Bóhólníihii bee nił hózhǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó nihokáá' wódahdi nahaz'ą́ą́góó nahóle' doo , índa nizhé'é yę́ę Jéíkab baa deet'ánígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó ni' iisą́ą doo . Jó , Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	Then you will rejoice in the presence of the Lord , but you will rejoice in the heavens and all the kingdoms of Jacob . This is what the Lord says .
GOLD:	Then the Lord will be your delight.I will give you great honorand satisfy you with the inheritance I promised to your ancestor Jacob.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1169
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The Temple 's Interior

ID:	1170
INPUT:	áko nighangóó bił nídíít'ashgo áadi bitsii' yik'iidooshih áádóó bíláshgaan yidiyoogish .
PRED:	“ Then go home to his home , where it is left to live , and they will eat it .
GOLD:	If this happens , you may take her to your home , where she must shave her head , cut her nails ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ayóó át'éii nilį́ , áádóó nihiDiyin God bikin haal'áagi , bidził hodiyinígi ayóó át'éego baa ha'niih doogo yą́ą́h nilį́ .
PRED:	The glory of the Lord is our God , and the city of God is worthy of honor .
GOLD:	How great is the Lord , how deserving of praise , in the city of our God , which sits on his holy mountain !

ID:	1172
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii nizhónígo adinídínígíí nahalin , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii bee hool'iní neeztsizii nahalin .
PRED:	The godly are like a wicked person , but the wicked are like a cart .
GOLD:	The life of the godly is full of light and joy , but the light of the wicked will be snuffed out .

ID:	1173
INPUT:	Éí Jesus daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' néidiisáhígíí bee danihizhé'é baa deet'ánígíí ba'áłchíní daniidlínígíí k'ad nihá yi'iilaa ; t'áá sin naaki góne'ígíí bee bik'e'ashchínígi át'éego : ShiYe' nílį́ , díí jį́ nishchíinii sélį́į́' ,
PRED:	The death of Jesus was raised from the dead , and the children of our ancestors were born to the dead . And now I am the Son of Jesus , the Son of God .
GOLD:	and God has now fulfilled it for us , their descendants , by raising Jesus . This is what the second psalm says about Jesus : ‘ You are my Son.Today I have become your Father . '

ID:	1174
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' éí bijį́į́ góne' t'óó yówehda ałk'i jiijéé' , áko i'íí'ą́ąjį' Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí biyi'dóó Síriya dine'é yich'į'go de <unk> dólzin nít'éé' , áko jį́honaa'éí ííyáago índa dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	At that day , when the king of Israel arrived , the king of Israel saw that the Aramean army of Israel had grown up and saw that the sun was filled with the sun and the sun .
GOLD:	The battle raged all that day , and the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot facing the Arameans . In the evening , just as the sun was setting , he died .

ID:	1175
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Díí saadígíí éí t'ah nihił naashkai yę́ędą́ą́' bee nihich'į' haasdzíí' , éí bee haz'áanii Mózes baa deet'áanii áádóó Diyin God yá dahalne'ii índa sin biyi' shí shaa dahalne'go yee ak'eda'ashchínígíí bidahodoolníłígíí át'é .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ I have told you what I told you , and I have told you everything I told you . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ When I was with you before , I told you that everything written about me in the law of Moses and the prophets and in the Psalms must be fulfilled . ”

ID:	1176
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1177
INPUT:	Ánathathdi Jeremáíyah éí kéyah nayiisnii'
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Complaint
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Land Purchase

ID:	1178
INPUT:	áko nízhdiinilgo binááł jííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	So he ate and ate it before him .
GOLD:	and he ate it as they watched .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	Ni lą́ą shii' sizíinii ayóó'ánó'níinii , shił hólne' : Háadishą' nidibé nída'ałchosh ? Ałné'é'áahgo háadishą' hanínádaalyįh ? Ha'át'íísh biniyé nida'niłkaadii bił ałch'odani'níinii yikéé' asdzání binii' yik'íná'áłtihgo yóó'anádáhígi ásht'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ You are my soul , O Lord , where long will you spend the night ? Why are you looking for the night ? Why do you love me ?
GOLD:	Tell me , my love , where are you leading your flock today ? Where will you rest your sheep at noon ? For why should I wander like a prostituteamong your friends and their flocks ?

ID:	1180
INPUT:	Kéínan jiináago tsosts'idiin honááhaigo Mahéílalíyel há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	When Mahalalel was 30 years old , he became the father of Mahalalel .
GOLD:	When Kenan was 70 years old , he became the father of Mahalalel .

ID:	1181
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné doo yá'ádaashóonii deinízinii doo baa didíí'áał da ; doo yá'át'ééhgóó yinahazgizii doo bá náás kódíílíił da ! Áko doo ayóó át'éego ádadi'doolníił da . Síilah .
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let the wicked be wicked ; do n't let the wicked be disgraced . Interlude
GOLD:	Lord , do not let evil people have their way.Do not let their evil schemes succeed , or they will become proud.Interlude

ID:	1182
INPUT:	Dahazhé'é ádáát'įįdígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii baa nijiyá ; Nííbat biye' Jerobówam yee ni'iisí'ígíí éí bee Ízrel dine'é nida'iisíihgo áyiilaii éí t'áadoo yóó'iidíí'ą́ą da .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as he did evil in the sight of Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .
GOLD:	Zechariah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , as his ancestors had done . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1183
INPUT:	Áádóó dízdiingo béésh łigaii biih dahasdzą́ągo tsin neheeshjíí' naadiingo bitł'ááh naaznil doo biniyé áyiilaa ; tsin neheeshjíí' t'ááłá'ígo biyaadóó naaki bąąh ha'íí'áago áyiilaaígíí bá atł'ááh sinilii naakigo biih dahasdzánígíí t'áá ahedaałt'éego áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made fifty silver bases for forty bases — two bases under each frame . He made two bases under each frame .
GOLD:	He also made forty silver bases — two bases under each frame , with the pegs fitting securely into the bases .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	Ákohgo na'ízhdééłkidgo ázhdííniid , Díkwíigi oolkiłgoshą' t'ah nít'éé' yá'át'ééh nídzísdlį́į́' ? Áko ádahodííniid , Adą́ą́dą́ą́' yaa'adeez'ą́ągo hatah honeezgaii yę́ę hats'áldoh .
PRED:	Then he asked him , “ How long will you get ? ” So he asked him , “ Where is the way ? ”
GOLD:	He asked them when the boy had begun to get better , and they replied , “ Yesterday afternoon at one o'clock his fever suddenly disappeared ! ”

ID:	1185
INPUT:	T'áá bí dabijéí doo bił adahojoobá'ígóó ádaa dadzódlíigo yádaałti' .
PRED:	Their hearts are proud and haughty ; they speak with arrogance .
GOLD:	They are without pity.Listen to their boasting !

ID:	1186
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nihik'isóó danilíinii hasht'ehodít'é yeidiní'ą́ągo áádóó nihí ałdó' nihaidiní'ą́ągo áádóó Jórdan tooh wónaanídi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii kéyah haidiní'ánígíí hóó' ádajiilaago índa t'ááłá'í nootínígo kéyah nihaa diní'ánígíí nihíí' ádadooh<unk> góó nihéédahidoohkah .
PRED:	“ The Lord your God has given you all the land he has given you . He has given you the land the Lord your God has given you . He has given you , and you will return to the land you have given you .
GOLD:	When the Lord has given security to the rest of the Israelites , as he has to you , and when they occupy the land the Lord your God is giving them across the Jordan River , then you may all return here to the land I have given you . '

ID:	1187
INPUT:	K'ééhodidoo'níłígíí éí bee shóhólnííh ; shí k'éédideesh'nííł ; baa hoolzhiizhgo ałtádadidooghas ; bijį́ bich'į' hodiyoo'náłígíí koshídę́ę́' hadziih áádóó ábidoołdįįłii tsxį́įłgo bik'i hwiidooleeł .
PRED:	Do n't let them be disgraced , for I will bring disaster on the day of judgment on the day of judgment .
GOLD:	I will take revenge ; I will pay them back.In due time their feet will slip.Their day of disaster will arrive , and their destiny will overtake them . '

ID:	1188
INPUT:	Háishą' Bóhólníihii bintsíkees hoł bééhózin ? Háishą' Bóhólníihii kót'éego yiłníí nít'éé' ?
PRED:	Who knows what the Lord says ? Who knows what is going to do ?
GOLD:	For who can know the Lord 's thoughts ? Who knows enough to give him advice ?

ID:	1189
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí naaldeehii áádóó nidaat'a'ii t'áá ałtso ni' bits'ą́ą́dóó łeezh yee áyiilaa , áko haash yit'éego dabízhi' ádaazhdoolííł nízingo Ádam yaa yiizh'eezh , áko hináanii nináneel'ą́ąjį' t'áá bee dajíízhi'ígíí bízhi' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	So the Lord God made the covenant with all the people of the earth , and they brought them out of the ground to the Lord their God . Then they brought them out to the name of Edom .
GOLD:	So the Lord God formed from the ground all the wild animals and all the birds of the sky . He brought them to the man to see what he would call them , and the man chose a name for each one .

ID:	1190
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus ánáádí'ní , Diné doo bee hool'iní yidiiłtłi'go tsits'aa' yił yaa nií'aah da , doo nidi tsásk'eh yiyaa ii'aah da , da' bá ya'ii'áhígíísh doo yikáa'gi dah yidoo'áał da ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you understand the light of the light ? Do n't it keep it in the middle of the fire ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus asked them , “ Would anyone light a lamp and then put it under a basket or under a bed ? Of course not ! A lamp is placed on a stand , where its light will shine .

ID:	1191
INPUT:	Té'é'į́ danilíinii da'ayą́ą doo , áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii bił hasht'edahodít'éego náníjah doo ; nehétł'óól dichin bee diyeeshxééł , índa daohdzí'ígíí nanihideestsił .
PRED:	You will be afraid of the wild animals , and you will kill them . I will kill them and kill them . ”
GOLD:	I will feed the poor in my pasture ; the needy will lie down in peace.But as for you , I will wipe you out with famineand destroy the few who remain .

ID:	1192
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi hoolzhishígíí biyi' Júdah áádóó Jerúsalem dine'é yisnááh danilį́į́dóó nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo daabíí' yę́ę bíí' nídadoodleełgo ádeeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ In that day I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Judah , and I will bring them back to Judah .
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	1193
INPUT:	Áko diné dahoołtsą́ągo bidiyin yaa dahaniihgo ádaaní , Nihikéyahgi nihi'ana'í náhoo<unk> go lą'í niilt'éego nanihistseedígíí nihidiyin nihílák'ee hodíí'ą́ .
PRED:	When the crowd saw him , they said , “ We have done many things in our land . We have done many things for us . ”
GOLD:	When the people saw him , they praised their god , saying , “ Our god has delivered our enemy to us ! The one who killed so many of us is now in our power ! ”

ID:	1194
INPUT:	Háálá doo ats'ííd bijéí bii' dahólǫ́ǫgo yindaha'á , áádóó ádílááh yaa yádaałti' .
PRED:	For their hearts are filled with violence , and they ruin their hearts .
GOLD:	For their hearts plot violence , and their words always stir up trouble .

ID:	1195
INPUT:	Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áii naa adeidiyoołkałgo áádóó ákwii mą'ii ba'áán ádahodoolíiłgo ge' náhookǫsdi kéyahdę́ę́' ayóó íits'a'go nihich'į' oonéełgo hodiits'a' .
PRED:	“ The towns of Judah will cry out to their cities , and their weapons will cry out to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	Listen ! Hear the terrifying roar of great armiesas they roll down from the north.The towns of Judah will be destroyedand become a haunt for jackals .

ID:	1196
INPUT:	Diné t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii , T'áá aaníí dadíítsaał , bidííniidgo t'áadoo bee bi'ííníłnii'góó diné t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii bidoo yá'áshǫ' bits'ą́ą́dóó yisdádoogááł biniyé t'áadoo bee bił hwíínílne'góó t'áá éí diné doo yá'ájíshǫ́ǫ́góó ádił ni'dziisíi'ii éí t'áá bił dazdootsaał , áko ni bidił bee nihodiit'i' doo .
PRED:	The wicked say , “ You will die , and you will die because of their sins . You will die because of their sins , and you will die because of their sins , and you will die . ”
GOLD:	If I warn the wicked , saying , ‘ You are under the penalty of death , ' but you fail to deliver the warning , they will die in their sins . And I will hold you responsible for their deaths .

ID:	1197
INPUT:	Nidi Ízrel dine'é éí tónteel biyi' ni' yíłtseii yikáá' ha'naa niníná , jó , honish'náájí índa honishtł'ají ałts'ą́ą́hjí tó nihidii'á .
PRED:	But the people of Israel followed the middle of the sea , and the water flowed around the middle of the sea .
GOLD:	But the people of Israel had walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , as the water stood up like a wall on both sides .

ID:	1198
INPUT:	Ódziih bił ayóó áhoot'éé nít'éé' , áko nábi'dódziih ! Ła'da yik'iizhdoodliiłígíí doo yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ́góó doo ła'da hak'i <unk> doodliił da !
PRED:	Praise him , and he will never be able to be able to stand the news of his great joy .
GOLD:	He loved to curse others ; now you curse him.He never blessed others ; now do n't you bless him .

ID:	1199
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus halą́ąjį' yigáałgo Jerúsalem góde bikéé' jookahgo t'óó hoł adahóóyóí , índa bikéé' jookahígíí nídadzildzid . Áko naakits'áadahígíí bił ats'ádzískaigo áhodi'doolníłígíí bee bił ahozhniilne' ,
PRED:	Jesus went to Jerusalem and followed him . As they were walking along the way , they were afraid of him , and they were afraid of the twelve disciples .
GOLD:	They were now on the way up to Jerusalem , and Jesus was walking ahead of them . The disciples were filled with awe , and the people following behind were overwhelmed with fear . Taking the twelve disciples aside , Jesus once more began to describe everything that was about to happen to him .

ID:	1200
INPUT:	Hastą́ą́h nínáhahjį' k'ééda'dohdléeh doo , áádóó hastą́ą́h nínáhahjį' nihich'il na'atł'o'ii nídahohgish doo , índa nídant'į́įhii áłah áńdaał'įįh doo .
PRED:	“ You will harvest your crops for six days , and your harvest will harvest your crops .
GOLD:	For six years you may plant your fields and prune your vineyards and harvest your crops ,

ID:	1201
INPUT:	Hach'į' haadzíi'go ánááhodoo'niid , Dízdiin yik'íníyáagoshą' ? Áko áhodííniid , Dízdiin ázhnéelą́ą'go biniinaa doo áhodeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	“ Why do you have forty days ? ” he asked . “ How long will I destroy them ? ” So he replied , “ I will not destroy them . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham pressed his request further . “ Suppose there are only forty ? ” And the Lord replied , “ I will not destroy it for the sake of the forty . ”

ID:	1202
INPUT:	Ákohgo deidoodlį́įłii doo deinízingóó nílák'eedóó t'áadoo nídeidiiką́ą́góogo áadi ábididííniił , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Ts'ídá t'áá dadoohdlį́łí .
PRED:	They will never again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again unless the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	And if they refuse to accept the cup , tell them , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : You have no choice but to drink from it .

ID:	1203
INPUT:	Ákohgo nááda'iiłniihii aląąjį' naazíinii naakits'áadah yilt'éego éí Sheriibáíyah wolyéii áádóó Hashabáíyah wolyéii índa bik'isóó neeznált'éego ats'ánínil .
PRED:	So the priests who were sitting beside the line of the priests and Levites who were carrying a long distance .
GOLD:	I appointed twelve leaders of the priests — Sherebiah , Hashabiah , and ten other priests —

ID:	1204
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii ánáádoo'niid , Sádam kin haal'áii índa Gomárah kin haal'áii ayóó át'éego cha hahoyiinííh áádóó ádił da'ílzíihgo ts'ídá bąąh yínínígi ádaat'į́ ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Sodom , “ Sodom and Gomorrah will die in Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	So the Lord told Abraham , “ I have heard a great outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah , because their sin is so flagrant .

ID:	1205
INPUT:	Áko kót'éego ch'ikę́ę́h éí aláahgo naat'áanii yił yah iigháahgo ch'ikéí baa ádahayánídóó t'áá yinízinígíí éí yooléełgo aláahgo naat'áanii yił yah iighááh nít'éé' .
PRED:	So the young girl who had intercourse with her young women , and she gave birth to the king 's palace .
GOLD:	When it was time for her to go to the king 's palace , she was given her choice of whatever clothing or jewelry she wanted to take from the harem .

ID:	1206
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ągo dadzooltsánígíí índa awéé' dahałt'o'ígíí doo hasht'e'ígóó doo há hojooba' haz'ą́ą da doo !
PRED:	How terrible it will be for pregnant and for pregnant days and for her birth .
GOLD:	How terrible it will be for pregnant women and for nursing mothers in those days .

ID:	1207
INPUT:	Éí lą́ą , Diyin God yinahaz'áanii bik'ehgo bizaad ánínígíí t'áadoo ła' doodaí baa hodeeshnihgo nihá shaa yiszįįd .
PRED:	For I will give you the Kingdom of God , and I will give it everything I have said .
GOLD:	God has given me the responsibility of serving his church by proclaiming his entire message to you .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	Jéíbesh biye' Shálam honahaz'ą́ągo dine'é yinááł atíhoolaago hwiisxį́ áádóó hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	Shallum son of Jabesh , king of Jabesh , assassinated him in charge of his reign .
GOLD:	Then Shallum son of Jabesh conspired against Zechariah , assassinated him in public , and became the next king .

ID:	1209
INPUT:	Bee na'abaahii biláahgo hódzą́ yá'át'ééh , nidi diné t'ááłá'í ádił ni'iilzíhígíí t'óó ahayóí yá'ádaat'éehii áyoołdįįł .
PRED:	Wise words are better than good , but many are better to die .
GOLD:	Better to have wisdom than weapons of war , but one sinner can destroy much that is good .

ID:	1210
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Bénjamin dine'é bich'į' anaa' biniyé dah náádii'ná áádóó Gíbiyah kin haal'áagi Ízrel dine'é hach'į' ałkéé' niná'ahi'niłgo hak'i néijah nít'éé' .
PRED:	So the Israelites set up camp and camped at Gibeah of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Then they advanced toward Gibeah to attack the men of Benjamin .

ID:	1211
INPUT:	Áko Jánathan éí David áyidííniid , Ízrel biBóhólníihii Diyin God binááł ! Yiską́ągo , doodaii' naakiiską́ągo t'áá kwe'é nahalzhiishgo shizhé'é naa nitsíkeesígíí shił bééhodoozįįł ; ákohgo yá'át'éehgo naa nitsíkees ládą́ą́' doósh nił nínáhodeeshnih da ?
PRED:	Jonathan said to David , “ Do n't you realize that the Lord your God has given you today ? Do n't you want me to know what you have done ? ” So Jonathan asked .
GOLD:	Then Jonathan told David , “ I promise by the Lord , the God of Israel , that by this time tomorrow , or the next day at the latest , I will talk to my father and let you know at once how he feels about you . If he speaks favorably about you , I will let you know .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	Nihighan góne' bee ída'neel'ąąhí ał'ąą át'éii t'áadoo nisoołnilí ; éí nitsaaígíí índa áłts'íísígíí t'áadoo chodaoł'íní .
PRED:	Your house will not be plundered in your house , and you will not be the great owl .
GOLD:	and you must use full and honest measures .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ayóó'ádeínóh'ní ; éí yich'į' nihííł'aadii áádóó yee nihwiiz'áanii áádóó yee nihodii'aahii índa bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá áłahjį' bik'eh dahonoł'į́ .
PRED:	That is why the Lord your God says : Love your decrees and regulations and regulations .
GOLD:	“ You must love the Lord your God and always obey his requirements , decrees , regulations , and commands .

ID:	1214
INPUT:	Diné hóyáaniísh t'áadoo biniyéhígóó bił bééhoozinii yee yáłti' doo , áádóó ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyolígíísh yee nídínóochał ?
PRED:	Do n't you know the words of the wise , who gives you a wind to a distant wind ?
GOLD:	“ A wise man would n't answer with such empty talk ! You are nothing but a windbag .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	Ákohgo óola łeets'aa' índa béésh łigaii łeets'aa' éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin biyi'dę́ę́' ch'íheeshjaa'ígíí nidahaashjaa'go éí aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó naat'áanii danilíinii , hwe'asdzą́ą́ danilíinii áádóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ dajíł'ínída éí yee da'oodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then he brought gold gold from the Temple of God , silver , gold , gold , and all the towns of the Temple of God . He invited them out of the Temple of God and his wives , and they drank from their wives .
GOLD:	So they brought these gold cups taken from the Temple , the house of God in Jerusalem , and the king and his nobles , his wives , and his concubines drank from them .

ID:	1216
INPUT:	nít'éé' t'áá yá'át'ééh náádleełgo tł'óó'góó bigish yee nihéédiidzáago , éí náhodííłhaalígíí doo bee bihodiit'i' da doo , nidi hanaanish dooleeł nít'é'ígíí yik'é hach'į' niná'doodlééł , áádóó náázdiidzáajį' haa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	But if you do n't have a log in the house , you wo n't have a burden to others . But if you do n't want to do what is right , then you will be able to get back .
GOLD:	If he is later able to walk outside again , even with a crutch , the assailant will not be punished but must compensate his victim for lost wages and provide for his full recovery .

ID:	1217
INPUT:	nídíshdááhgóó díí bee bádahadzidii bitaa séyá , tooh danílíinii , aghada'ii'níiłii , t'áá shí shidine'é nilíinii , doo Jew dine'é danilíinii , kin hadaas'áii dabiyi'góó , dahonoojítahgóó áádóó tónteel bikáá'góó , áádóó ałk'isóó ádahodil'íinii bee bádahadzidii bitaa séyá ,
PRED:	I am sending them to the province of Asia , and I am sending them out of the province of the Euphrates River . I am sending them to the Mediterranean Sea and the Gentiles to the Mediterranean Sea , and I have put them into the sea .
GOLD:	I have traveled on many long journeys . I have faced danger from rivers and from robbers . I have faced danger from my own people , the Jews , as well as from the Gentiles . I have faced danger in the cities , in the deserts , and on the seas . And I have faced danger from men who claim to be believers but are not .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í jinítínígo Níłch'i Diyinii aidiyii'aahii oodlání danilíinii t'áá ałtso bá chodayooł'į́į doo biniyé haidiyii'aah .
PRED:	For we are the Holy Spirit , who gives us authority to be put to death .
GOLD:	A spiritual gift is given to each of us so we can help each other .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	Táadi shich'į'go dahodíínóhsingo áłah náhdleehgo nínáhah doo .
PRED:	“ When you present me to the Festival of Shelters , you must celebrate the Festival of Harvest .
GOLD:	“ Each year you must celebrate three festivals in my honor .

ID:	1220
INPUT:	Jiihóram éí Júdah kéyahgi nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Jehoram Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	1221
INPUT:	Nidi diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo baa nijigháii ádá hadazdoolził , áko yá'át'éehgo baa nijigháá ládą́ą́' éí baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫ doo . Diné náánáła' yaa naagháii éí t'áá bí bíni'dii yaa naaghá .
PRED:	But those who do good things will prosper ; let those who do good things for him . And if they do what is right .
GOLD:	Pay careful attention to your own work , for then you will get the satisfaction of a job well done , and you wo n't need to compare yourself to anyone else .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	and a male goat for a sin offering .
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	Jesus áhodííniid , T'óó kónízahíjį' nihił honishłǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó shiníł'a'ígíí bich'į' nídeeshdááł ;
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I will be with you , and I will be with you .
GOLD:	But Jesus told them , “ I will be with you only a little longer . Then I will return to the one who sent me .

ID:	1224
INPUT:	Yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí kót'é : diné léi' náánáła' kéyahgóó deeyáago bá nidaal'a'í hágo yidííniidgo , hanaalye'é há yaa ádahalyą́ą doo biniyé bitaazdeez'ą́ ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Kingdom of Heaven is the Kingdom of Heaven . He came to his servants and gave his property to his servants .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven can be illustrated by the story of a man going on a long trip . He called together his servants and entrusted his money to them while he was gone .

ID:	1225
INPUT:	Nít'éé' dahasiłgo nídahoneesxaalgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii t'áágééd anídahas'a' .
PRED:	So they grabbed him and sent him away , and they sent him away .
GOLD:	But the farmers grabbed the servant , beat him up , and sent him back empty-handed .

ID:	1226
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Kéyah bii' kéédahoht'į́į dooleełii nihaa dinish'aahígíí biih woonáago
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : When you enter the land I am giving you .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ When you finally settle in the land I am giving you ,

ID:	1227
INPUT:	Kót'éego ádaalyaa : bii' tá'ádígisí bá naaznil dooleełígíí dadeekį́į́góó nihidadii'áhígíí éí bita' gónaa dah naazkaadígíí biih daaz'á ,
PRED:	So each of the carts was cast out a large crop that had been set up from the cart .
GOLD:	They were constructed with side panels braced with crossbars .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	Áko Mózes áádóó Éran éí Bóhólníihii hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bi'jiilaa .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord had commanded them .

ID:	1229
INPUT:	Léímek ha'ákéí ábijiní : Éídah áádóó Zílah , shizaad yínółts'ą́ą́' ; Léímek ba'ákéí nohłínígíí , ádísh'nínígíí yínółts'ą́ą́' , Háálá diné shijizhgishígíí biniinaa hoséłhį́ , Índa diné ániid naagháii atíshijiilaaígíí biniinaa hoséłhį́ .
PRED:	Lamech 's wife said , “ I am afraid of my sister , my virgin . I am afraid of what I am saying , for I am going to kill my men . ”
GOLD:	One day Lamech said to his wives , “ Adah and Zillah , hear my voice ; listen to me , you wives of Lamech.I have killed a man who attacked me , a young man who wounded me .

ID:	1230
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii dajílíinii éí tsídiida , éí doodaii' naaldlooshiida t'áá bíni' daaztsą́ągo , éí doodaii' náánáła' naaldlooshiida biisxį́įgo éí doo dajilghał da doo .
PRED:	“ If any of the priests or the animals that scurry along the ground , it must not eat any animal .
GOLD:	The priests may not eat meat from any bird or animal that dies a natural death or that dies after being attacked by another animal .

ID:	1231
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Iiyehii t'ah yił naakaigo iigehgi neheeskaígíísh dahodísingo doo da'ayą́ą́góó ádadoohłííł ? Dooda lą́ą !
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You 're n't ready to wedding wedding feast ? What do you want to do ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Do wedding guests fast while celebrating with the groom ? Of course not .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	Ak'ah áádóó łikání dahalchinii ajéí yił nihooshǫǫh ; diné bik'is nizhónígo kót'é bidííniidii ałdó' t'áá ákót'é .
PRED:	“ Do n't be like a skilled incense maker , and you will wear a sacred oil for yourselves .
GOLD:	The heartfelt counsel of a friendis as sweet as perfume and incense .

ID:	1233
INPUT:	Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel áádóó Karíyah biye'ké Johéínan áádóó Jánathan áádóó <unk> biye' Siiréíyah áádóó Niitófa kin shijaa'dę́ę́' <unk> biye'ké áádóó Méíyakahdę́ę́' diné léi' biye' Jezanáíyah bí áádóó bidine'é yił Mízpah kin haal'áadi Gedaláíyah yaa yíkai .
PRED:	Johanan son of Kareah and Johanan son of Kareah and Johanan son of Kareah and the other sons of Mizpah . The descendants of Ishmael , who was from Mizpah , who was from Mizpah .
GOLD:	So they went to see Gedaliah at Mizpah . These included : Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth , the sons of Ephai the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	1234
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' yizhchíinii bá bee haz'áanii
PRED:	The Birth of Moses
GOLD:	Rights of the Firstborn

ID:	1235
INPUT:	Áádóó Christ bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' ił ééhósin yilááh neel'áanii nihił béédahodoozįįłgo Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní yee át'éii nihii' hadidoo<unk> łígíí bíká sodiszin .
PRED:	And I know that you love God 's law will be filled with knowledge of God 's law , and we will pray for you .
GOLD:	May you experience the love of Christ , though it is too great to understand fully . Then you will be made complete with all the fullness of life and power that comes from God .

ID:	1236
INPUT:	Áko hach'į' hadaasdzíi'go ánáádahodoo'niid , Da' niísh ałdó' Gáliliidę́ę́' naniná ? Diyin God bizaad naniłkaah , jó , Gáliliidóó Diyin God yá halne'ii doo hodooleełgóó nił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	“ Are you going to Galilee ? ” they asked . “ Are you the prophets of Galilee ? ” And he said , “ You will know that he will know that he will come from Galilee . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Are you from Galilee , too ? Search the Scriptures and see for yourself — no prophet ever comes from Galilee ! ” -- -- -- -- -- [ The most ancient Greek manuscripts do not include John 7:53–8:11 . ]

ID:	1237
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar éí Jiihóíyakim biye' Konáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í áyiilaii bitsásk'ehgi Josáíyah biye' Zedekáíyah nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , was king of Babylon , who was king of Judah . He reigned in the royal palace of Josiah son of Josiah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah son of Josiah succeeded Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim as the king of Judah . He was appointed by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .

ID:	1238
INPUT:	Ákondi t'áá danihiníghanígi aałk'ee áńdahooł'įįhgo da'ołghał , danohsinii éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'ijidlíigo nihaidii'aahígíí bik'ehgo doo bi'didéehii , doodaii' bi'didéehii danohłíinii éí jádí bitsį' , doodaii' bįįh bitsį' daohsą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ But if you eat it , you will eat it with the meat of the Lord your God , then you will eat the meat of the meat and eat it . You may eat the meat of the meat and eat it .
GOLD:	“ But you may butcher your animals and eat their meat in any town whenever you want . You may freely eat the animals with which the Lord your God blesses you . All of you , whether ceremonially clean or unclean , may eat that meat , just as you now eat gazelle and deer .

ID:	1239
INPUT:	Nidi ánihidííniid , Dabikéyah danihíí' dooleeł , nihaa dideesh'áałgo nihíí' ádadoohłííł ; éí kéyah bii' abe' áádóó tsésná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįd ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ ; éí ał'ąą dine'é bits'ánihinínilígíí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	But he said , “ I will give you land as your special possession , for I am giving you a land that I am the Lord your God . I am the God of the nations . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	But I have promised you , ‘ You will possess their land because I will give it to you as your possession — a land flowing with milk and honey . ' I am the Lord your God , who has set you apart from all other people .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	Jesus haadzíi'go ání , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kóní : Diné doo bááh t'éí yee hináa da doo , nidi saad t'áá ałtso Diyin God yee hahadziihii yee hináa doo .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ This is what the Scriptures say : Those who live in the Scriptures say , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	But Jesus told him , “ No ! The Scriptures say , ‘ People do not live by bread alone , but by every word that comes from the mouth of God . ' ”

ID:	1241
INPUT:	Éí bijį́į́dóó Saul éí David hajisíidgo hodeeshzhiizh .
PRED:	So Saul found Saul 's reply ,
GOLD:	So from that time on Saul kept a jealous eye on David .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihijéí bii' hazhó'ó hasht'e'nitsídanohkees , bee ák'ihadadidoohdzihii t'áá bítséedi t'áadoo nabik'ítsídaałkeesí ,
PRED:	Be careful to understand what you are doing . Do n't be afraid of what you do .
GOLD:	So do n't worry in advance about how to answer the charges against you ,

ID:	1243
INPUT:	Nahat'á baa hwiinít'į́įgo hazhó'ó hasht'edaalne' , áádóó kót'éego nidi'níigo anaa' áníł'į́ .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked fall into battle , and those who fear him .
GOLD:	Plans succeed through good counsel ; do n't go to war without wise advice .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	Azáíyah éí hastą́'áadah binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' ; Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nant'áago ashdladiindóó ba'aan naaki nááhai . Bimá éí Jekoláíyah wolyéego Jerúsalemdóó naaghá .
PRED:	Uzziah was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was Zibiah from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem .

ID:	1245
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus ábidííniid , Bíni' daneeznáanii t'áá bí łeeh da'ahii'nííł , nidi ni , dah diináahgo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii t'áá níłtéél nít'éé' baa nahólne' .
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Let 's go back to the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus told him , “ Let the spiritually dead bury their own dead ! Your duty is to go and preach about the Kingdom of God . ”

ID:	1246
INPUT:	Níłch'i deezt'i'dę́ę́' doo nił bééhózinígi át'éego áádóó asdzání yiltsą́ągo awéé' yééltsánígíí bits'in nooséełii doo nił bééhózinígíigi át'éego , t'áá éigi át'éego Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní áyoolíiłii binaanish nilíinii doo nił bééhózin da .
PRED:	You know the Spirit of the Spirit , and you know how many women are like women . You do n't know how many children of God 's children are like women .
GOLD:	Just as you can not understand the path of the wind or the mystery of a tiny baby growing in its mother 's womb , so you can not understand the activity of God , who does all things .

ID:	1247
INPUT:	Áádóó łį́į́' yee nídahastį́įgo Júdah kéyahgi kin haal'áagi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaagi yóó'ádahoolaa .
PRED:	He buried Judah in the land of Judah in the City of Judah .
GOLD:	They brought his body back on a horse , and he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David .

ID:	1248
INPUT:	Áko Manówah éí Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í ánéidoo'niid , T'áá shǫǫdí átsé t'áá kǫ́ǫ́ sínídáago tł'ízí yázhí ła' ná nídiil'ah .
PRED:	Then Manoah said to the angel of the Lord , “ Please let your servant marry a young goat as a young goat . ”
GOLD:	Then Manoah said to the angel of the Lord , “ Please stay here until we can prepare a young goat for you to eat . ”

ID:	1249
INPUT:	Nidi Jew dine'é [ doo da'oodlánígíí] da'oołch'į́įdgo , diné nichxǫ́'ógo nidaakaígíí ła' áłah ádayiilaago , kin haal'áagi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' hadahoneeshchaad , áádóó Jéísan bighan yaa tiih yíjée'go Paul áádóó Sáílas éí diné yíl'áhígíí bich'į' ch'ídahodiit'ish danízingo ch'ééh ádáát'įįd .
PRED:	But the people of Israel did n't say , “ You 're speaking to the city of Cyprus and Silas in the city of Cyprus . We were afraid of Cyprus and Silas . ”
GOLD:	But some of the Jews were jealous , so they gathered some troublemakers from the marketplace to form a mob and start a riot . They attacked the home of Jason , searching for Paul and Silas so they could drag them out to the crowd .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' yikahígíí , T'áadoo ádíníní , dahałníigo hach'adahashké , nidi t'ah yówehgo hanáázhdoolghaazhgo ájíní , David biYe' nílíinii , shaa jiiníbaah !
PRED:	But when he heard this , he said , “ Do n't bother me , but he screamed , “ Son of David ! ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the people in front yelled at him.But he only shouted louder , “ Son of David , have mercy on me ! ”

ID:	1251
INPUT:	Nidi shí éí áłahjį' shił chohoo'į́į doo áádóó t'ah yówehgo hózhǫ́ naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	But I will praise you , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	But I will keep on hoping for your help ; I will praise you more and more .

ID:	1252
INPUT:	Jó , yee łá'í daazlį́į'go nidahaz'ą́ ; nik'ijį' danilį́įgo ahada'deet'aah :
PRED:	He has given authority to each other , and we are witnesses of judgment .
GOLD:	Yes , this was their unanimous decision.They signed a treaty as allies against you —

ID:	1253
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jáshowa ha'éé' ák'inijooldláadgo Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii bidáahjį' tsé'yaa jishjoolgo hwee i'íí'ą́ ; hó áádóó Ízrel dine'é aląąjį' naazíinii bił łeezh dibahí ák'ídajiilkaad .
PRED:	Then Joshua tore his clothes and tore it on the ground before the Lord . Then the elders of Israel bowed down before the ground before the ground .
GOLD:	Joshua and the elders of Israel tore their clothing in dismay , threw dust on their heads , and bowed face down to the ground before the Ark of the Lord until evening .

ID:	1254
INPUT:	Ayóó'ánihósh'níinii , Níłch'i Diyinii shii' hólǫ́ , daanínígíí t'áadoo t'áá ałtso deinohdlání , nidi éí t'áá ałtso nidaałkaah , t'áá daats'í aaníí Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii bii' dahólǫ́ . Háálá t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii nihokáá'góó t'óó ahayóí deíkááh .
PRED:	Dear friends , dear friends , do n't be fooled by the Holy Spirit . For all who do n't know the truth of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Dear friends , do not believe everyone who claims to speak by the Spirit . You must test them to see if the spirit they have comes from God . For there are many false prophets in the world .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	Áádóó ábizhdííniid , Tį' , shikéé' woh'ash , áko łóó' hayiileehí nahalingo diné náhółbįįhgo ánihideeshłííł .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Come , my lord , and I will make you stagger like a fish . ”
GOLD:	Jesus called out to them , “ Come , follow me , and I will show you how to fish for people ! ”

ID:	1256
INPUT:	azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , ayóó át'éego baa a'ááh nínízingo honoojíidi t'áadoo yóó'ahodííní'ą́ą da : jį́įgo hakáa'di k'os níyizgo yildohgo bik'ehgo joonéłígíí t'áadoo hats'ą́ą́' yóó'eelzhóod da , índa tł'ée'go hakáa'di kǫ' níyizii bik'ehgo joonééłgóó bee hool'inii t'áadoo hats'ą́ą́' dahodiile' da .
PRED:	But if you do n't love him , you will not abandon them in the wilderness , but you will not go through the cloud . But you will never fail to go through the cloud .
GOLD:	“ But in your great mercy you did not abandon them to die in the wilderness . The pillar of cloud still led them forward by day , and the pillar of fire showed them the way through the night .

ID:	1257
INPUT:	Áko kéyah doo nihídidoołkoh da biniyé kót'éego doo dadoołchxǫǫł da ; shą́ą́' ał'ąą dine'é ákódaat'į́įgo nihilą́ąjį' kéyah bídeeskwi ni' .
PRED:	“ You will not defile the land , and you will not defile your land . I will destroy the land of the nations .
GOLD:	So do not defile the land and give it a reason to vomit you out , as it will vomit out the people who live there now .

ID:	1258
INPUT:	Éí haash yit'éego baa nitsídaahkees ? Nít'éé' , Hodiyoolyééł lą́ą , dadííniid .
PRED:	“ What are you doing ? ” they asked . “ How can he be put to death ? ”
GOLD:	What is your verdict ? ” “ Guilty ! ” they shouted . “ He deserves to die ! ”

ID:	1259
INPUT:	Nihoníyáajį' ahodoolzhish
PRED:	A Promise of the coming
GOLD:	The Time of the End

ID:	1260
INPUT:	Áko Ádam ádííniid , K'ad díí shits'inígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó ts'in áádóó shitsį'ígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó atsį' jílį́ , áko asdzání joolyée doo , háálá diné bits'ą́ą́dóó áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	Then Edom said , “ The meat of my bones will be my bones , and my bones will be cursed . ” And the woman said , “ The man has been defiled . ”
GOLD:	“ At last ! ” the man exclaimed. “ This one is bone from my bone , and flesh from my flesh ! She will be called ‘ woman , 'because she was taken from ‘ man . ' ”

ID:	1261
INPUT:	Ádííniid , Bóhólníihii , Bóhólníihii lą́ą , dahináanii bikéyahdi doo yideestséeł da ; nihokáá' kéédahat'ínígíí bitahgi diné doo ła' néideestséeł da .
PRED:	“ The Lord says , ‘ The Lord , I will never again see the land of the earth . I will never see the land of the earth . '
GOLD:	I said , “ Never again will I see the Lord Godwhile still in the land of the living.Never again will I see my friendsor be with those who live in this world .

ID:	1262
INPUT:	Áádóó Mólak diyin bidi'níinii biníbaal nidaah'áá nít'éé' , áádóó <unk> , diyin bidi'níinii bisǫ' nidaah'áá nít'éé' ; éí be'elyaii bich'į' nidahohłáa doogo ádaahłaa , áko shí t'éiyá Bábilan bilááhgóó anihidínéeshkał .
PRED:	Then King Balak said to him , “ You will be able to worship the Temple of God . You will worship the gods of the heavens , and I will worship you . ”
GOLD:	No , you carried your pagan gods — the shrine of Molech , the star of your god Rephan , and the images you made to worship them.So I will send you into exileas far away as Babylon . '

ID:	1263
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus áhodííniid , Łees'áánshą' díkwíí nidaahjaah ? Áko ádaaní , Tsosts'id lą́ą , áádóó łóó' ádaałts'íísígíí ałdó' t'áá díkwíí yee' .
PRED:	Jesus asked , “ Where do you have two loaves of bread ? ” And the disciples asked , “ How much bread you have two fish ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked , “ How much bread do you have ? ” They replied , “ Seven loaves , and a few small fish . ”

ID:	1264
INPUT:	doo Jew dine'é danilíinii éí adinídínígíí bá bee ééhózinii át'é , áádóó t'áá éí yee nidine'é Ízrel ayóó át'éii dadooleeł .
PRED:	And the Gentiles have performed miraculous signs for the Gentiles , and the miraculous signs of Israel will be performed for the Gentiles .
GOLD:	He is a light to reveal God to the nations , and he is the glory of your people Israel ! ”

ID:	1265
INPUT:	Saad t'áá ałtso bee hada'iidziihígíí ałdó' t'áadoo baa ná'áhodílt'íní , áko ná naal'a'í neinít'į́įgo doo didííts'į́įł da .
PRED:	Do n't listen to what I have done , and do n't listen to your servant .
GOLD:	Do n't eavesdrop on others — you may hear your servant curse you .

ID:	1266
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad tsxį́įłgo David bee bił dahołne'go kódabidohní , Díí tł'éé' éí honoojíidi dah nídzílgaigi doo danihiidoołkáał da ; tsxį́įłgo ha'naa ninohkááh ; éí doodago aláahgo naat'áanii índa diné yił naakaígíí t'áá ałtso nabidi'dootsił .
PRED:	Now tell David , ‘ This is what David says : Do n't be afraid of this night , but now you will die in the wilderness . You will die in the wilderness . '
GOLD:	“ Quick ! ” he told them . “ Find David and urge him not to stay at the shallows of the Jordan River tonight . He must go across at once into the wilderness beyond . Otherwise he will die and his entire army with him . ”

ID:	1267
INPUT:	Áko nihił dínínáá ládą́ą́' yá'ádaat'éehii Bóhólníihii nihá áyoolííł dooleełígíí t'áá ákót'éego nihí ałdó' nich'į' t'áá ákódeii'níił doo .
PRED:	And if you are doing what the Lord has done for us , we will do to us .
GOLD:	If you do , we 'll share with you all the blessings the Lord gives us . ”

ID:	1268
INPUT:	Háálá yá'át'éhígi ádeeshnííł nisinii éí doo ááshłíił da , nidi doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'éii doo nisinii , jó , éída ááshłíił łeh .
PRED:	For I do n't want to do good , but I do n't want to do what is right .
GOLD:	I want to do what is good , but I do n't . I do n't want to do what is wrong , but I do it anyway .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	Háálá ádanoht'ée dooleeł nihósh'níinii doo ákódanoht'éégóó nihaa deeshááł dó'óshłí nisin , índa hójí ájít'ée dooleeł dashíínóh'níinii doo ákónísht'éégóó nihaa deeshááł dó'óshłí nisin . Nihitahgóó daats'í ałgha'dit'ááh , ooch'į́į́d , áháchį' , ałch'ą́ą́h na'a'na' , nichǫ́'ógo aa yá'áti' , aseezį́ , áshohódli' índa hahóó'á dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł dó'óshłí nisin .
PRED:	For I am writing to you , dear friends , not let me be able to do what I am saying . I am planning to be angry with you , and I will punish you with anger .
GOLD:	For I am afraid that when I come I wo n't like what I find , and you wo n't like my response . I am afraid that I will find quarreling , jealousy , anger , selfishness , slander , gossip , arrogance , and disorderly behavior .

ID:	1270
INPUT:	áádóó ni' ąą ádzaago ha'áłchíní t'áá bił , Kórah yidiikaii yę́ę t'áá ałtso índa hwee dahólónígíí t'áá át'é ałdó' t'áá bił ni' abiisna' .
PRED:	And the open open open open open open open open open open open , all the children of Korah .
GOLD:	The earth opened its mouth and swallowed the men , along with their households and all their followers who were standing with them , and everything they owned .

ID:	1271
INPUT:	Ayóní bá sézį́į dooleeł níigo naaltsoos bikáá' bízhi' áyiilaii ííshją́ą́ bi'éétsoh nídidííłtsos , áádóó ałjiłnii bá ákódziidzaago bee nihozhní'ánígíí binahjį' hwíínítą' doo .
PRED:	“ Write this letter to your name , and put it in the name of your name in the name of the one who created it .
GOLD:	Get security from someone who guarantees a stranger 's debt.Get a deposit if he does it for foreigners .

ID:	1272
INPUT:	Ásher biye'ké éí Jímna áádóó <unk> wah áádóó <unk> wai áádóó Biiráíyah índa bilah <unk> daolyé . Biiráíyah biye'ké éí Hííber índa Málkiyel wolyé ;
PRED:	The sons of Asher were named after their ancestor Puah , named after their ancestor Pallu , named after their ancestor Areli .
GOLD:	The sons of Asher were Imnah , Ishvah , Ishvi , and Beriah . Their sister was Serah . Beriah 's sons were Heber and Malkiel .

ID:	1273
INPUT:	Áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii t'áá bí ałdó' kót'éego nihił halne' . Áłtsé ání :
PRED:	And the Spirit said to us , “ The first first Spirit is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	And the Holy Spirit also testifies that this is so . For he says ,

ID:	1274
INPUT:	Áko da'ííyą́ą'go hwiih daazlį́į́' , áádóó bi'oh da'oodą́'ígíí náádadziisdláa'go ts'iizis tsosts'id hadazdeesbįįd .
PRED:	The harvest was filled with fruit , and afterward he picked up twelve baskets of leftovers you picked up !
GOLD:	They ate as much as they wanted . Afterward , the disciples picked up seven large baskets of leftover food .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	k'ad dah doohnéehgo Ámor dine'é bikéyah deílk'idgóó áádóó k'ídahoneezláagi kéédahat'ínígíí bitahgóó , dadzígaigóó áádóó dah daask'idgóó áádóó dahoníts'aa'góó áádóó shádi'áahjigo áádóó tónteel bibąąhgóó Kéínan dine'é bikéyahjigo áádóó Lébanan kéyahgi dził daní'áágóó índa ayóó át'é Yufréítiiz wolyéego tooh nílínígíí bich'į'go dadohnééh .
PRED:	“ Now go out to the hill country of the Amorites , the land of the Amorites , the western foothills , the hill country , the western foothills of Lebanon , the Mediterranean Sea and the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	It is time to break camp and move on . Go to the hill country of the Amorites and to all the neighboring regions — the Jordan Valley , the hill country , the western foothills , the Negev , and the coastal plain . Go to the land of the Canaanites and to Lebanon , and all the way to the great Euphrates River .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	Áko áłah áda'diilyaago Mózes áádóó Éran yik'ijį' danilį́įgo ádeiłní , Nihí t'áá íiyisí ádíhwíínółnííh , háálá oonéłígíí t'áá ałtso dadiyin áádóó bitahgi Bóhólníihii hólǫ́ , ákoshą' ha'át'íí biniyé Bóhólníihii bidine'é dah yinéłígíí bilááh ánóht'éego í'doołyaa ?
PRED:	The whole community went to Moses and said to Aaron , “ You are very angry with all the people of Israel , for why are you going to judge the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	They united against Moses and Aaron and said , “ You have gone too far ! The whole community of Israel has been set apart by the Lord , and he is with all of us . What right do you have to act as though you are greater than the rest of the Lord 's people ? ”

ID:	1277
INPUT:	T'ááká t'áá nihí ádadoołchxǫǫh lágo , áádóó t'áadoo le'é be'elyaii biką'ii , doodaii' bi'áadii noolningo ádá ádaołnééh lágo .
PRED:	Do not defile yourselves by making any of these things , or you must not defile yourselves .
GOLD:	So do not corrupt yourselves by making an idol in any form — whether of a man or a woman ,

ID:	1278
INPUT:	Tsin nitł'izii níyizgo áyiilaa áádóó óola yik'íísti' ,
PRED:	He overlaid the poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	Then he made poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	Áko bik'isóó áádóó Samériya dine'é bisiláo dah yinéełii áyidííniid , Díí lá ha'át'íí Jew dine'é t'óó nidanil'eełii yaa naakai ? Bee ohoníłdzi<unk> ádá ádeiilééh ? Nááda'iiłniihiísh doo ? T'áá ła'a jį́įjį'ísh ałtso ła'deidoolíiłgo ádaat'į́ ? Da' tsé ts'iilzéí bił dadíílidgo yáádaa'áhígíí bitahdóósh tsé háádeidiyoo'nił ?
PRED:	Then he said to his brothers and Samaria , “ What should we do ? Why are we trying to do this ? Why should we be the one of the Jews ? Why should we do it ? ”
GOLD:	saying in front of his friends and the Samarian army officers , “ What does this bunch of poor , feeble Jews think they 're doing ? Do they think they can build the wall in a single day by just offering a few sacrifices ? Do they actually think they can make something of stones from a rubbish heap — and charred ones at that ? ”

ID:	1280
INPUT:	Áko diyingo naal'a'í bílák'eedóó naaltsoos áłts'íísígíí nídii'ą́ągo yíyą́ą́' , nít'éé' shizée'di tsés'ná bitł'izh nahalingo łikan , nidi ahéłna'go shibid bił dích'íí' silį́į́' .
PRED:	Then the angel took the scroll from the scroll and ate it . But when I ate it , it was covered with honey .
GOLD:	So I took the small scroll from the hand of the angel , and I ate it ! It was sweet in my mouth , but when I swallowed it , it turned sour in my stomach .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	Dził Záíyandi kéédahat'ínígíí bich'į' hane' yá'át'éehii baa hólne'ii nílíinii , dził aghánáhóó'áágóó hasínááh ; Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'ínígíí bich'į' hane' yá'át'éehii baa hólne'ii nílíinii , yéego hadílgháásh ; t'áadoo náníldzidí ; yéego hadílgháásh ; Júdahgi kin hadaas'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí , Shoo , nihiDiyin God danół'į́ ! bidiní .
PRED:	Sing to the people of Zion , O Zion , O Zion , you people of Jerusalem ! Listen to the distant mountain of Jerusalem , O Jerusalem ! Listen to what the Sovereign Lord says , O God !
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	1282
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso hayaajį' nitsidadidoogoh ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso há nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	All nations will fall into a trap , and all nations will stumble .
GOLD:	All kings will bow before him , and all nations will serve him .

ID:	1283
INPUT:	Na'niłkaadii doo ílíinii
PRED:	Parable of the Lost Sheep
GOLD:	The Good and Evil Shepherds

ID:	1284
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí kin bii' nooh nída'ołchíihii áádóó bindadoołnishígíí t'áá át'é yee nihik'ijidlíi doogo yee hahadziih doo índa Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah nihaidiní'ánígíí bikáa'gi nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	May the Lord your God be blessed in the Temple of the Lord your God , and he will bless you in the land he has given you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will guarantee a blessing on everything you do and will fill your storehouses with grain . The Lord your God will bless you in the land he is giving you .

ID:	1285
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God bízhi' bee bééhániihii éí Bóhólníihii wolyé .
PRED:	This is the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord is his name !

ID:	1286
INPUT:	Haa nízáagishą' shá bíighah shijéí yínííł nilį́įgo shii' sizíinii bi'diił'áa doo ? Haa nízáagishą' shi'ana'í shide át'ée doo ?
PRED:	How long will my heart be How long ? How long will my enemies fall ?
GOLD:	How long must I struggle with anguish in my soul , with sorrow in my heart every day ? How long will my enemy have the upper hand ?

ID:	1287
INPUT:	Áko dazneeznáanii , nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso baa nídahódóot'įįłígi át'éego haa dahwiiníst'įįd nidi , da'joosdląądgo t'áá Diyin God hinánígi át'éego dajiináa doo biniyé hane' yá'át'éehii bee hoł dahane' nít'éé' .
PRED:	So I preached the Good News and preached the Good News that God had done for us . He preached the Good News and preached the Good News .
GOLD:	That is why the Good News was preached to those who are now dead — so although they were destined to die like all people , they now live forever with God in the Spirit .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah nihíí' ádadoohłííł biniyé yiih nihíí'eezhgo , ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí nihinááł baa ch'éheezhjée'go , jó , éí Het dine'é , <unk> dine'é , Ámor dine'é , Kéínan dine'é , Píírez dine'é , Háíva dine'é índa Jííbas dine'é danilį́įgo tsosts'idgo ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii nihiláahgo ayóó ádaat'é índa ayóó ádabóodziil ;
PRED:	“ The Lord your God has brought you into the land of the Amorites in the land of the Amorites , along with the Canaanites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	“ When the Lord your God brings you into the land you are about to enter and occupy , he will clear away many nations ahead of you : the Hittites , Girgashites , Amorites , Canaanites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites . These seven nations are greater and more numerous than you .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	Záíyan béédeiilnii' yę́ędą́ą́' Bábilan hoolyéedi tooh danílínígíí bibąąhgóó dineebingo deiicha nít'éé' .
PRED:	We have heard that we were in Jerusalem , but we were filled with violence .
GOLD:	Beside the rivers of Babylon , we sat and weptas we thought of Jerusalem .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	T'áadoo nidaneestą́ą'ii éí nida'iisííh , nidi kót'éego daaníinii t'óó ahayóí hólǫ́ǫgi hasih haz'ą́ .
PRED:	“ Do n't envy a wicked nation , but many people have many things .
GOLD:	Without wise leadership , a nation falls ; there is safety in having many advisers .

ID:	1291
INPUT:	Táá' yiską́ągo Féro ch'éenidoołt'eełgo tsin yąąh dah nididooloh , áádóó nits'íís tsídii deidooyį́į́ł .
PRED:	He will prepare the wood for three days . He will eat the flesh of the wood and eat it .
GOLD:	Three days from now Pharaoh will lift you up and impale your body on a pole . Then birds will come and peck away at your flesh . ”

ID:	1292
INPUT:	T'óó kónígháníjį' náá'iideeshhosh , t'óó kónígháníjį' anáádínéeshyił , t'óó kónígháníjį' shijaat'ah díníshnii'go adínéeshyił , diníinii ,
PRED:	I will go down to a little place , but I will not sleep with a little distance .
GOLD:	A little extra sleep , a little more slumber , a little folding of the hands to rest —

ID:	1293
INPUT:	Paul éí Bárnabas yił ał<unk> t'áázh
PRED:	Paul 's First Missionary Journey
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Separate

ID:	1294
INPUT:	Hane' yá'át'éehii éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ałdó' bá át'é
PRED:	Good News for the Jews
GOLD:	Paul 's Reason for Writing

ID:	1295
INPUT:	Áko Jótham éí dahazhé'é yę́ę bitahjį' ajiiłhaazhgo hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi yóó'ádahojiilaa . Haye' Éíhaz éí hatsásk'ehgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Jotham died , he was buried among his ancestors in the City of Jotham , and his son Jotham became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jotham died , he was buried in the City of David . And his son Ahaz became the next king .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	Nidabi'diztseedii bidił índa ayóó ádaat'éii yę́ę bik'ah bits'ą́ą́dóóJánathan be'ełtį́į́' yee doo niseedáa da nít'éé'índa Saul bidiltłish yee ak'idiyaa nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	The sword of Saul and his mighty acts will never be killed by the sword of Saul .
GOLD:	The bow of Jonathan was powerful , and the sword of Saul did its mighty work.They shed the blood of their enemiesand pierced the bodies of mighty heroes .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	Díí k'ad t'ah doo áhánééhdą́ą́' bee nihił hashne' , ákódzaago , shí Christ ásht'į́įgo deidoohdląął .
PRED:	And now I am telling you about this while I am telling you about Christ .
GOLD:	I tell you this beforehand , so that when it happens you will believe that the Messiah .

ID:	1298
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ałtso t'áá bí diné nideideez'ánígíí nideistseed , áádóó Síriya dine'é adahineezhchą́ą'go Ízrel dine'é akéé' nídiijéé' nít'éé' ; Síriya dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii Ben-héídad éí siláo danilíinii łį́į́' yee nidaabaahígíí yił łį́į́' ayaa bił háájéé' .
PRED:	So all the men of Aram attacked and killed the Arameans , and the Arameans fled to the king of Aram .
GOLD:	Each Israelite soldier killed his Aramean opponent , and suddenly the entire Aramean army panicked and fled . The Israelites chased them , but King Ben-hadad and a few of his charioteers escaped on horses .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	T'áá ánółtso shijéí bee ayóó'ánihíínísh'níigo bąą kót'éego nihaa nitséskees dooígíí shá bohónéedzą́ , háálá awáalyaaí nishłį́įgo , doodaii' doo awáalyaaí nishłį́į da nidi , hane' yá'át'éehii bich'ą́ą́h yáshti'go índa bohoníłdzilgo áshłéhígíí shá ashja'ósingo , Diyin God yee shaa joozba'ígíí t'áá ánółtso shił ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz .
PRED:	Be sure that I am not ashamed of all my heart , for I am writing to you in prison . I am writing to you because I am not worthy to be a prisoner in prison .
GOLD:	So it is right that I should feel as I do about all of you , for you have a special place in my heart . You share with me the special favor of God , both in my imprisonment and in defending and confirming the truth of the Good News .

ID:	1300
INPUT:	Shinish'náajigo déé'į́į́' nít'éé' , áko t'áadoo ła' shaa ákoniizį́'í da . T'áadoo biniiłt'a nóshchéłí da ; nádį́'ídi doo shináhodidzin da .
PRED:	I looked at my right right hand , and no one could be able to see me . I will never be seen in the grave .
GOLD:	I look for someone to come and help me , but no one gives me a passing thought ! No one will help me ; no one cares a bit what happens to me .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	Háálá da'oodlání bá aląąjį' dzizíinii éí da'oodlání Diyin God bá dah joo'ishgo ts'ídá t'áadoo bee hak'íhót'ahí da doo , doo házhą́ ílį́į da doo , doo hání dzis'ą́ą da doo , wáin doo bee tsi'nijigháa da doo , doo ats'ííd ádąąh jit'į́į doo , índa na'adlo'go bee béeso ál'íinii doo bíchą́yízhdéelni' da doo .
PRED:	For the church must not have sexual relations with the church of God 's church . They will not be ashamed of wine , and they will not be ashamed of wine . They will have no wine or drink wine .
GOLD:	A church leader is a manager of God 's household , so he must live a blameless life . He must not be arrogant or quick-tempered ; he must not be a heavy drinker , violent , or dishonest with money .

ID:	1302
INPUT:	Áko Gálilii kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' yii' kéédahat'íinii kin yii' áłah nídaadleehgóó Diyin God baa nahojilne'go , índa diné biyi'dę́ę́' níłch'i bida'iiníziinii hahizhniłkaadgo tázhdííyá .
PRED:	As he arrived in Galilee , he gathered in Galilee and preached the Spirit of God . He went out to the demons and healed the demons .
GOLD:	So he traveled throughout the region of Galilee , preaching in the synagogues and casting out demons .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	Bąąhági át'éii nihii' ádin dadii'níigo ádinda'iidlo' , áko t'áá aaníinii doo nihii' dahólǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	We do n't have our sins , and we will never be truth .
GOLD:	If we claim we have no sin , we are only fooling ourselves and not living in the truth .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	Áńdahwii'aahii nii'nil
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Disciples
GOLD:	The Command to Leave Sinai

ID:	1305
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1306
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní , eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadláii bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ . [ T'áá ákót'ée doo . ]
PRED:	Be careful to your children . Be careful to follow what you are saying .
GOLD:	Dear children , keep away from anything that might take God 's place in your hearts .

ID:	1307
INPUT:	Álílee k'ehgo yáti' yee yádaałti'go bíni'dii nidilt'éegoda , doodaii' tált'éegoda ákódaat'į́į doo , biláahgo éí dooda , t'ááłá'í nítínígo bik'eh hoolzhishgo yádaałti' doo , áádóó bíni'dii ła'da bá ata' halne' doo .
PRED:	If you speak , let the tongues speak , let no one be able to speak , or if you do what is right , or if you do n't say , ‘ We will be able to tell you the truth . ' ”
GOLD:	No more than two or three should speak in tongues . They must speak one at a time , and someone must interpret what they say .

ID:	1308
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ábizhdííniid , Háájíshą' nihida'oodlą' daazlį́į́' ? Áko nídadzisdzíidgo t'óó hoł adahóóyóigo áda'ahizhdoo'niid , Ákoshą' díí háí át'į́įgo azhą́ níyol índa tó nidi yich'į' hahadziihgo bik'eh dahół'į́ ?
PRED:	“ What do you mean ? ” he asked . “ Who healed us ? ” And he asked them , “ Even if they obey the wind and the wind and the wind ? ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ Where is your faith ? ” The disciples were terrified and amazed . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ When he gives a command , even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	1309
INPUT:	Áko ákwii Mózes áádóó Éran índa biye'ké dabíla' áádóó dabikee' tánínádeigis doo ,
PRED:	Then Moses and Aaron 's sons will wash their feet and feet .
GOLD:	Moses and Aaron and Aaron 's sons used water from it to wash their hands and feet .

ID:	1310
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Nihitahdóó ła' Bóhólníihii bich'į' náázhdi'yoołnihgo éí béégashii áádóó dibé ła' nááhizhdoołnihgo éí jidoolóós .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel , ” the Lord said , “ and bring a sheep to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . When you present an animal as an offering to the Lord , you may take it from your herd of cattle or your flock of sheep and goats .

ID:	1311
INPUT:	Índa dį́į́' yiłkaah bijį́ dóola yázhí neeznáá , deenásts'aa' naaki índa dibé yázhí dį́į́'ts'áadahgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	On the fourth day you must sacrifice two young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs .
GOLD:	“ On the fourth day of the festival , sacrifice ten young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	Áko díí bee haasdzí'ígíí bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo áko lá índa díí aláahgo naat'áanii bighanígíí dáń'da'ditį́į́h góne' yah anáhookah doo , áádóó David bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah náhidinoobįįł índa bí áádóó bá nidaal'a'í lá índa bidine'é éí tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yee áádóó łį́į́' yee yah anáhookah dooleeł .
PRED:	And if you obey all these things , you will be careful to obey the king 's royal palace and the royal palace . Then you will sit on the throne of David and his chariots and charioteers . ”
GOLD:	If you obey me , there will always be a descendant of David sitting on the throne here in Jerusalem . The king will ride through the palace gates in chariots and on horses , with his parade of attendants and subjects .

ID:	1313
INPUT:	Hastą́ą́h jį́ díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii daohsą́ą doo ; tsosts'id yiską́ą́ góne' Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' hodílzingo áłah náhdleeh doo ; ákóne' t'áá ha'át'éegoda doo nidoołnish da .
PRED:	On the seventh day you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread . You must not deny the Lord your God . You must not observe an official day for holy assembly .
GOLD:	For the next six days you may not eat any bread made with yeast . On the seventh day proclaim another holy day in honor of the Lord your God , and no work may be done on that day .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	Áko Áízak éí Éíbraham hazhé'é yę́ę hináádą́ą́' tó hadahaas'nil yę́ęgi tó hahadleeh náádahodeesbįįd yę́ęgi tó háádayiisnil ; éí Éíbraham daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Filístiya dine'é háádahodeesbįįd nít'éé' , áko hazhé'é yę́ę tó hadahadleeh yee dayízhi'ígíí t'áá éí bee náádajíízhi' .
PRED:	Then Isaac brought the water into the water , and he dug wells in the spring of the water of the Philistines . Then he brought the water to the Philistines . Then he brought the water of the Philistines to the Philistines .
GOLD:	He reopened the wells his father had dug , which the Philistines had filled in after Abraham 's death . Isaac also restored the names Abraham had given them .

ID:	1315
INPUT:	Mózes deisoohdląądgo , shí ałdó' dashoohdlą́ą doo nít'éé' , háálá éí shaa halne'go ak'e'ashchį́ .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ You have already told me , for you have told me what I say . ”
GOLD:	If you really believed Moses , you would believe me , because he wrote about me .

ID:	1316
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii jílį́įgo tseebíí náhááh góne' , t'ah ániid nijigháago hazhé'é David yę́ę biDiyin God hájít'į́įgo hodideeshzhiizh , áádóó naakits'áadah yihah góne' Júdah kéyahgi índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígíí áádóó asdzání bida'alyaii índa hadahaashk'aazhgo eda'alyaii áádóó dadoolyį́į'go eda'alyaii ádaalyaaígíí nahjį' kódeile'go yaa nídiidzá .
PRED:	On the eighth day , during the fifth year of King David 's reign , he said to his father , David , “ I will make Jerusalem twenty years old or pagan shrines and Asherah poles . ”
GOLD:	During the eighth year of his reign , while he was still young , Josiah began to seek the God of his ancestor David . Then in the twelfth year he began to purify Judah and Jerusalem , destroying all the pagan shrines , the Asherah poles , and the carved idols and cast images .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	Áádóó éí beiníłką́ądi t'ááłá'í aláahgo naat'áanii hinánígíí bik'ehgo tsosts'idiin nááhaijį' Táir baa hoyoosnah doo ; tsosts'idiin nááhai bíighah azlį́į'jį' ałjiłnii bí'díl'a'ígi át'éego Táir hó'díl'a' doo .
PRED:	On the third day of the king 's reign will be about seventy years old when he learned about Tyre , he must pay for seventy years for seventy years .
GOLD:	For seventy years , the length of a king 's life , Tyre will be forgotten . But then the city will come back to life as in the song about the prostitute :

ID:	1318
INPUT:	Shį́įgo yi<unk> go doo beełt'ée daígi át'éego áádóó da'agizhgo nahałtingo doo beełt'ée daígi át'éego diné doo áhályáanii hoł danilį́į dooleełígíí ałdó' doo beełt'ée da .
PRED:	As you live , you will be like a fool , and you will be like a fool to a fool .
GOLD:	Honor is no more associated with foolsthan snow with summer or rain with harvest .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	Bił kéédahoht'íinii bich'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áhígi nidahisoohkaigo t'áá nihí danohsinígi ánéelt'e'go dadoohsį́įłgo t'áá áko , nidi nihe'ásaa' doo bii' hééł ádadoohłíił da .
PRED:	“ When you enter your vineyard , you must not eat the vineyards and eat it . You must not eat it in it until you eat it .
GOLD:	“ When you enter your neighbor 's vineyard , you may eat your fill of grapes , but you must not carry any away in a basket .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	óola łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo shékel wolyéii neeznáá dah hidiidloh bíighahgo éí bii' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadeezbingo ,
PRED:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .
GOLD:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .

ID:	1321
INPUT:	Diné nidahagizii éí Bóhólníihii doo hółdin da , nidi t'áá ákogi ádaat'éego dahináanii éí yaa bił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	The Lord detests the hearts of the wicked , but he delights in those who do right .
GOLD:	The Lord detests people with crooked hearts , but he delights in those with integrity .

ID:	1322
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí dadine'é t'óó ahayóí áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bidziilgo dah deíkáahii t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii hádaat'į́įgo áádóó Bóhólníihii yee ak'ijidlíii yídayókeed biniyé Jerúsalemjį' nidahidookah .
PRED:	And the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has given us many nations , and he will return to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord of Heaven 's Armies and to ask for his blessing .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ánínígi át'éego , Nihí nihiniinaa doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó Diyin God bízhi' t'óó baa'ihgo baa yáti' .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ You are the Scriptures say , ‘ We are the Holy One of our own people . '
GOLD:	No wonder the Scriptures say , “ The Gentiles blaspheme the name of God because of you . ”

ID:	1324
INPUT:	Áko Thomas , Naakií hodi'nínígíí , bił ídahojiił'aahii ábizhdííniid , Haa'íshą' nihí ałdó' Jesus bił dadíníi'nééł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ diikah .
PRED:	One day Thomas , Thomas , Thomas , Thomas , the disciples said , “ Let us go to meet Jesus . ”
GOLD:	Thomas , nicknamed the Twin , said to his fellow disciples , “ Let 's go , too — and die with Jesus . ”

ID:	1325
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel bibee adinídíinii kǫ' nilį́į dooleeł , áádóó biDiyinii kǫ' diltłi'ii nilį́įgo bich'il deeníní áádóó bich'il ahoshí adíídeezígi át'éego ła'a jį́ áhodoołdįįł ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The fire of Israel will be like fire , and the fire of the fire will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	1326
INPUT:	Índa Manáseh dine'é dah yinéłígíí éí Piidázer biye' Gaméíliyel á sizį́ .
PRED:	He led the troops of the tribe of Manasseh , leader of the tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Manasseh , led by Gamaliel son of Pedahzur ,

ID:	1327
INPUT:	áko nándeesxis áádóó nizéé' góne' béésh názhahígíí adeeshniłgo bee niyaats'iin deeshah áádóó łį́į́' índa łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii t'áá át'éé nít'éé' béésh éé' yii' naazhjée'go nisiláo t'áá dah yinééł nít'éé' ; t'áá bił ayóó ánéelą́ą́' oonéełgo áádóó béésh téél ách'ą́ą́h dah yit'áałii índa naagé deíjáahgo áádóó diltłish deíjáahgo éí t'áá bił ch'índeesłóós :
PRED:	I will bring you back to your mouth , your lips , iron , iron , iron , and charioteers , and charioteers , and charioteers , and charioteers .
GOLD:	I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws to lead you out with your whole army — your horses and charioteers in full armor and a great horde armed with shields and swords .

ID:	1328
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Ak'eh dazhdeesdlį́į'go bąą dazhdilwoshígíí doo la' ákwíits'a' da ; haa dahoneeznáago biniinaa hahojííł'áhígíí ałdó' dooda , nidi dahataałgo diists'a' .
PRED:	But they said , “ The cries of trouble is coming , for they have heard what they are saying , but they have heard their cries for joy . ”
GOLD:	But Moses replied , “ No , it 's not a shout of victory nor the wailing of defeat . I hear the sound of a celebration . ”

ID:	1329
INPUT:	Doo nidi nahjį' anída'ahilgoh da , t'áá ałtso t'áá bá haz'ą́ą́ góne' deíkááh índa bee na'abaahii yił ch'éhéjeeh , nidi doo ni' kódabiléeh da .
PRED:	They wo n't trap him into a trap , but they will not go into a trap of death .
GOLD:	They never jostle each other ; each moves in exactly the right position.They break through defenseswithout missing a step .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shi'ana'í danilíinii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshíłteeh ! Náshididííł'į́į́ł biniyé nich'į' nídiishwod !
PRED:	O Lord , rescue me from my enemies ; rescue me from your enemies .
GOLD:	Rescue me from my enemies , Lord ; I run to you to hide me .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	Tóojį' diné jiní'eezhgo Bóhólníihii éí Gídiyan áyidííniid , Łééchąą'í ałch'alígi át'éego da'ałch'alígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá sahdii bits'ádíínił , índa t'áá ałtso nitsidadéesgo'go da'oodlą́'ígíí ałdó' t'áá sahdii bits'ádíínił .
PRED:	The Lord said to Gideon , “ The sword of the Lord has cut off one of the young women , and cut off every bird .
GOLD:	When Gideon took his warriors down to the water , the Lord told him , “ Divide the men into two groups . In one group put all those who cup water in their hands and lap it up with their tongues like dogs . In the other group put all those who kneel down and drink with their mouths in the stream . ”

ID:	1332
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é ninínáádóó Diyin God yaa dookah biniyé ch'íiní'eezhgo dził tsį́įdi áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	So Moses took the mountain of the God of Israel up to the mountain of God .
GOLD:	Moses led them out from the camp to meet with God , and they stood at the foot of the mountain .

ID:	1333
INPUT:	háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí bił ííshją́ą́ ádajile'go , Jesus éí Christ nilį́ , jiníigo , dahasłą́ą́góó Jew dine'é bigha'hizdeest'ą́ .
PRED:	For Jesus told them , “ This is the Scriptures that Jesus Christ is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	He refuted the Jews with powerful arguments in public debate . Using the Scriptures , he explained to them that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	Shida'ana'í ałdó' shílák'ee dadííní'ą́ , áko dashijijoołá yę́ę ádahodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	My enemies hate me , and they hate me .
GOLD:	You placed my foot on their necks.I have destroyed all who hated me .

ID:	1335
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné áłah nilínígíí t'áá ałtso ádadííniidgo ayóó íits'a'go ádaaní , T'áá ádííníniidígi át'éego ts'ídá t'áá ákódadii'nííł .
PRED:	Then all the people gathered together and said , “ We want to hear the loud voice of the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	Then the whole assembly raised their voices and answered , “ Yes , you are right ; we must do as you say ! ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	Áko nináá' nish'náájí bąąhági ánít'į́ ánóhsingo hani'aahgo yóó'ahíłhan , háálá nits'íís łahgo ádinjí doo ná yá'át'éeh da , nidi nits'íís hadaałt'éego hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'ą́ąjį' andi'yoolghą́ą́łjí agháago doo ná yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	And if you sin causes you to sin , it 's better to be forgiven . It 's better to be better off than to be thrown into hell with the body of hell .
GOLD:	So if your eye — even your good eye — causes you to lust , gouge it out and throw it away . It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to be thrown into hell .

ID:	1337
INPUT:	Dé'éyóní danilíinii nihaa nídaakahígíí bich'į' nihá ádahwiinít'į́'ígo nihił danilį́į dooleełígíí béédaałniih , háálá ła' ákódaat'į́įgo diyingo nidaal'a'í ádaat'į́įgo doo bił béédahózingóó yaa dajoozba' .
PRED:	Remember how to those who oppress you , for they will know that they are like those who do what is right , for they will be faithful to God .
GOLD:	Do n't forget to show hospitality to strangers , for some who have done this have entertained angels without realizing it !

ID:	1338
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' hodílyingo áłah ná'ádleeh Bóhólníihii náhodidoo'áłígi nídaoł'aah doo , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'iizhdoodliiłgo łą́ągo nínádanołt'į́hígíí t'áá át'é áádóó nihindaanishígíí t'áá át'é nihá bilááh ánáyoodlíił doo ; éí bąą t'áá íiyisí nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	“ On the seventh day of the Lord your God will bless you for seven days , for you will be very large and your crops will provide for your crops . Then you will be filled with joy and your crops .
GOLD:	For seven days you must celebrate this festival to honor the Lord your God at the place he chooses , for it is he who blesses you with bountiful harvests and gives you success in all your work . This festival will be a time of great joy for all .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yinááł dahataał doo , háálá yíghááh ; nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ąjį' haa nídóot'įįł biniyé yíghááh . T'áá ákogi át'éii yee nahasdzáán yaa nídóot'įįł ; ba'ahódlíii bee nihokáá' dine'é yaa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	They will sing to the Lord , for he will sing his justice to the ends of the earth , for he will bring justice to the ends of the earth .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming ! He is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with his truth .

ID:	1340
INPUT:	Diné t'óó báádahadzidii áádóó bizaad nantł'ago doo nił bééhózinii índa ałt'adandzihgo yádaałti'go doo bik'idiitįįhígíí doo néidííltséeł da .
PRED:	You will understand what you say , and you will understand what you say .
GOLD:	You will no longer see these fierce , violent peoplewith their strange , unknown language .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii éí hojooba' ádeinízinii yidiits'a' áádóó bidine'é awáalyaaí nidahaleehii doo yi'į́į da .
PRED:	For the Lord hears the cries of the prisoners and the prisoners of the prisoners .
GOLD:	For the Lord hears the cries of the needy ; he does not despise his imprisoned people .

ID:	1342
INPUT:	Áádóó hazhé'é yę́ę David áát'įįdii bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł t' áá ákogi át'éego ádzaa .
PRED:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	Nidi náánáła' daal'aadii éí t'áadoo deiłtsą́ą da , t'áá hazhó'ó Bóhólníihii bitsilí James t'éiyá .
PRED:	But one of the disciples did n't believe the Lord 's brother , the brother of James .
GOLD:	The only other apostle I met at that time was James , the Lord 's brother .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	éí asdzání hane'dę́ę́' niníyáago ha'éé' bijánil yideelchid ; t'áá áko dił bighánílínígíí ásdįįd .
PRED:	When she reached her robe , she touched her robe and touched her robe . So she touched her blood .
GOLD:	Coming up behind Jesus , she touched the fringe of his robe . Immediately , the bleeding stopped .

ID:	1345
INPUT:	Nich'į' hózhǫ́ǫ le' . Kodóó nik'is danilíinii k'é daniłní . Aadi nihik'is danilíinii shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	May your brother be well , and let your brother be your brother .
GOLD:	Peace be with you.Your friends here send you their greetings . Please give my personal greetings to each of our friends there .

ID:	1346
INPUT:	áádóó kódaaníigo nidahódééłkid , Na'nitiní , Mózes yę́ę kót'éego nihá ak'e'ashchį́ , diné ła'da bił hajíí'áázh be'asdzą́ą́ hólǫ́ǫgo ba'áłchíní t'áadoo haleehí daaztsą́ągo , hak'is be'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí hwe'asdzą́ą dooleeł , áko hak'is yę́ę bá áłchíní hwee hodooleeł , níí nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then they asked him , “ Teacher , ” they said , “ we do n't have a brother to marry anyone who has sexual relations with the wife of Moses . ”
GOLD:	They posed this question : “ Teacher , Moses gave us a law that if a man dies , leaving a wife but no children , his brother should marry the widow and have a child who will carry on the brother 's name .

ID:	1347
INPUT:	Miithúzelah hwíídíiską́ą́dóó náhást'éidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan hastą́diindóó ba'aan náhást'éí honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	Adam lived 82 years old , and he died .
GOLD:	Methuselah lived 969 years , and then he died .

ID:	1348
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí łóó' yich'į' haadzíi'go ni' hóółtseijį' Jónah łóó' bídeeskwi .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Jonah , “ As surely as a fish . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord ordered the fish to spit Jonah out onto the beach .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	Háálá ana'al'į́į doogi adziil bee áká síszaazgo áshiinilaa ; shik'i néijah yę́ę shiyaajį' bik'eh dadínídlį́į́' .
PRED:	You have made me strong for battle ; you have crushed me under my feet .
GOLD:	You have armed me with strength for the battle ; you have subdued my enemies under my feet .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yił ahada'deest'ą́ągo ádííniid , Diyin dabidi'níinii t'áadoo dadíínóhsiní , áádóó t'áadoo bich'į' yaa áńdaoht'įįhí , áádóó t'áadoo bich'į' nidahohłáhí , índa t'áadoo bich'į' nááda'iyołniihí .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to the Israelites , “ Do n't be able to worship other gods , gods , and do not delay .
GOLD:	For the Lord had made a covenant with the descendants of Jacob and commanded them : “ Do not worship any other gods or bow before them or serve them or offer sacrifices to them .

ID:	1351
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehgi ya'díníilzhin íí'á nahalingo doo yádaałti'ii ałtso nidei<unk> go k'éhézdon adaaz'áa łeh . Doo nidaakaígíí biniinaa ts'ídá nidaajaahgo t'éiyá . Doo yá'át'éehii yaa nidadookahgo doo yídaneel'ą́ą da índa yá'át'éehii yaa nidadookahgo ałdó' doo yídaneel'ą́ą da ; éí bąą t'áadoo béédaałdzidí .
PRED:	Let us see what we say , and we will never see the difference between us . We will never see what we do . They will never see what they do . They will never see what they do . ”
GOLD:	Their gods are likehelpless scarecrows in a cucumber field ! They can not speak , and they need to be carried because they can not walk.Do not be afraid of such gods , for they can neither harm you nor do you any good . ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	Sáleiyai bits'ą́ą́dóó Káleiyai , Éímak bits'ą́ą́dóó Ííber ,
PRED:	From there were Gkkkkai was leader of the tribe of Athkkai was leader of the tribe of Asia .
GOLD:	Kallai was leader of the family of Sallu.Eber was leader of the family of Amok .

ID:	1353
INPUT:	Diné doo ádaa áhályáanii éí kin haal'áago atílyaadóó doo binaa ahééda'astł'in da nít'é'ígíí nahalin .
PRED:	A wise person is like a fortified city ; a city is like a fortified wall .
GOLD:	A person without self-controlis like a city with broken-down walls .

ID:	1354
INPUT:	Éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Ízrel dine'é bitahgi aláahgo naat'áanii doo hólǫ́ǫ da nít'ée'go Líívai diné léi' Dził Íífreiyimdę́ę́' níyáago Júdah kéyah nahós'a'gi Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó asdzání nilį́įgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ jíł'íní ájiilaa .
PRED:	In that day there was no king in Israel in the hill country of Ephraim , a man from the tribe of Judah , who lived in Bethlehem in Judah .
GOLD:	Now in those days Israel had no king . There was a man from the tribe of Levi living in a remote area of the hill country of Ephraim . One day he brought home a woman from Bethlehem in Judah to be his concubine .

ID:	1355
INPUT:	Áko tó abid bii' tó ásdįįdgo ashkii ch'il nitsaa léi' biyaagi nizhníłtį́ .
PRED:	So the boy covered the spring , and the boy covered it .
GOLD:	When the water was gone , she put the boy in the shade of a bush .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus áháłní , Nihí nihich'į'go yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bee na'nitinii doo bééhózin da yę́ę éí nihił béédahózin dooleełgo nihaa deet'ą́ , nidi bí , éí doo baa deet'ą́ą da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You know that the Kingdom of Heaven is near , but we do n't know that the Kingdom of Heaven is near . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	1357
INPUT:	Háálá díí dine'é bijéí daneelk'ah , áádóó jéé'ádahodeeskał , índa daniilch'iil ; doodago éí dabináá' yee da'iidoołtsééł , áádóó dabijaa' yee dadi'doots'į́į́ł , índa bijéí yee ak'idadi'dootį́į́ł , áko shich'į' ninádookahgo náádabidideeshłááł .
PRED:	For these people have ears to their hearts , olive oil , and their ears can not see their eyes . They will not see their ears , and their ears will not listen to me .
GOLD:	For the hearts of these people are hardened , and their ears can not hear , and they have closed their eyes — so their eyes can not see , and their ears can not hear , and their hearts can not understand , and they can not turn to meand let me heal them . '

ID:	1358
INPUT:	Áádóó anáá'niiltsąądgo ashkii ła' náánéíshchį́ ; éí Shíílah bee jíízhi' ; Júdah éí Kíízib hoolyéegi nijigháago há ashchį́ .
PRED:	Then she became pregnant again and gave birth to a son of Amminadab . His name was the father of Judah .
GOLD:	And when she gave birth to a third son , she named him Shelah . At the time of Shelah 's birth , they were living at Kezib .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	Áko Féro bijéí yítł'isgo t'áadoo Ízrel dine'é yéé'níłnii' da . Bóhólníihii t'áá Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígi áhoodzaa .
PRED:	So Pharaoh refused to listen to Pharaoh 's heart , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Because his heart was hard , Pharaoh refused to let the people leave , just as the Lord had predicted through Moses .

ID:	1360
INPUT:	Ha'át'íhígíida bida'alyaii doo ádá ádíílíił da ; ha'át'íhígíida yádiłhił biyi'di dahólóonii , doodaii' nahasdzáán bikáa'gi dahólóonii , doodaii' táyi' naaldeehii doo béé'díídlíił da ,
PRED:	Do not defile yourselves by worshiping idols , and do not make it holy . Instead , you will never be able to live in the land of the earth .
GOLD:	“ You must not make for yourself an idol of any kind or an image of anything in the heavens or on the earth or in the sea .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	Asdzání éí diné bi'éé' doo bee hazhdít'ée da doo , doodaii' diné nidi asdzání bi'éé' doo bii' dziztį́į da doo , háálá ákódajit'ínígíí t'áá ádzíłtso éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' t'óó badají'ih .
PRED:	“ You must not have sexual relations with a man or woman or woman , for everyone is defiled by the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ A woman must not put on men 's clothing , and a man must not wear women 's clothing . Anyone who does this is detestable in the sight of the Lord your God .

ID:	1362
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéíkab éí Bíyer-shííbadóó dashdiináago Ízrel biye'ké dabizhé'é Jéíkab áádóó bada'áłchíní índa bida'asdzą́ą́ yił Féro tsinaabąąs <unk> doonééł biniyé hach'į' áyiilaaígíí bee jiníná .
PRED:	So Jacob left Egypt and went to Beersheba with his sons , Jacob , his sons , Jacob , and his sons and his wives .
GOLD:	So Jacob left Beersheba , and his sons took him to Egypt . They carried him and their little ones and their wives in the wagons Pharaoh had provided for them .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	Jesus ánáábidoo'niid , Da' k'adísh da'iinohdlą́ ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Are you willing to believe ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked , “ Do you finally believe ?

ID:	1364
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Da'ootsxeełgo tsin <unk> <unk> łígíí Jerúsalem biná'ástł'inígíí bíilk'idgo ádaohłééh . Díí kin haal'áhígíí atídoolníiłii át'é ; ade áhólzinii t'éiyá ákwii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I will destroy the city of Jerusalem , and it will be a heap of wood . It is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ Cut down the trees for battering rams.Build siege ramps against the walls of Jerusalem.This is the city to be punished , for she is wicked through and through .

ID:	1365
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaago Héízor kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Jéíbin wolyéii díí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go éí Méídan kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Jóbab wolyéii áádóó Shímran kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii índa Ákshaf kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' i'dziis'a' ,
PRED:	When the king heard this , the king of Hazor heard that the king of Hazor had heard that the king of Hazor had sent this message to the king :
GOLD:	When King Jabin of Hazor heard what had happened , he sent messages to the following kings : King Jobab of Madon ; the king of Shimron ; the king of Acshaph ;

ID:	1366
INPUT:	Náádéésht'į́į́' nít'éé' , shoo , chérabim bíighahgóó bąąs dį́į́' naazį́ ; bąąs t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo chérabim yíighahgóó si'ą́ ; bąąs éí tsé béril wolyéii nahalingo bik'i nidazdiłtooł .
PRED:	I looked at the cherubim , and the fourth wheels looked like a cart . The cherubim looked like a cart , and the cherubim looked like a cherubim .
GOLD:	I looked , and each of the four cherubim had a wheel beside him , and the wheels sparkled like beryl .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	Kót'éego hadzoodzíi'go dashdiiyá , áko hadeezhí Mary , hágo bizhdííniidgo t'áá nahont'inee ábijiní , Na'nitiní níyá , áko hágo niłní .
PRED:	So Mary called for Mary and told her , “ Teacher , ” he told her . “ Teacher , ” he said .
GOLD:	Then she returned to Mary . She called Mary aside from the mourners and told her , “ The Teacher is here and wants to see you . ”

ID:	1368
INPUT:	Jó , danizhé'é yę́ę bił áłah ánándeeshdlííł , áádóó hózhǫ́ǫgo haz'ą́ągo yóó'ándi'doolnííł ; díí kéyah nahós'a'gi índa yikáá' kéédahat'ínígíí bik'ijį' doo yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é kódeeshłíłígíí éí doo yiidííłtséeł da . Kót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii hane' baa nídadziz'ą́ .
PRED:	I will bring you back to your ancestors , and there will be no peace in the land of your ancestors in the land of Israel . I will never see the good things you have done .
GOLD:	So I will not send the promised disaster until after you have died and been buried in peace . You yourself will not see the disaster I am going to bring on this city and its people . ' ” So they took her message back to the king .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	Áko Éíbram éí béégashii áádóó béésh łigaii índa óola t'áá íiyisí bee ajit'į́ .
PRED:	So Abram saw that Abram had gold , silver , gold , silver , and gold .
GOLD:	( Abram was very rich in livestock , silver , and gold . )

ID:	1370
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán daalkanii t'áadoo yishání , atsį' t'áadoo yishání áádóó wáin t'áadoo yishdlání índa t'áadoo adíshtłahí táadi damóo azlį́į́' .
PRED:	“ Do n't eat my food , ” says the Lord. “ Do n't be like a cup of wine or new wine .
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	1371
INPUT:	áádóó Kórah áádóó Géítam índa Ámalek daolyé . Díí t'áá ałtso naat'áanii danilį́įgo Íídam kéyahdi Élifaz ba'áłchíní náás da'ahideeshchíinii danilį́ ; díí t'áá ałtso Éídah binálíké ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	These are the names of Korah , the court secretary , and all the kings of Edom . These are the clans of Edom . These are the clans of Edom .
GOLD:	Korah , Gatam , and Amalek . These are the clan leaders in the land of Edom who descended from Eliphaz . All these were descendants of Esau 's wife Adah .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	Díí ákót'éego ałk'idą́ą́' bee haz'áanii ayóó át'éii yee inaashnishgo , jó'áko Níłch'i Diyinii t'ah aláhídi ayóó át'éii yee inaalnish .
PRED:	In this way , I was glorious in the place of honor , and the Spirit covered the glorious power of the Spirit .
GOLD:	Should n't we expect far greater glory under the new way , now that the Holy Spirit is giving life ?

ID:	1373
INPUT:	T'áá ákónéehee nihił dahoneeni índa nihił dahózhǫ́ , háálá díí nitsilí daaztsą́ą́ nít'éé' hinááh násdlį́į́' ; yóó'ííyáá nít'éé' bénáhoosdzin .
PRED:	We have been very glad , and we have died because we had died . We were buried with our brother 's brother , and he died .
GOLD:	We had to celebrate this happy day . For your brother was dead and has come back to life ! He was lost , but now he is found ! ' ”

ID:	1374
INPUT:	índa bik'isóó danilínígíí ła' , Shebanáíyah , Hodáíjah , Kiiláíta , Piiláíyah , Héínan ,
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Maaseiah , Maaseiah , Maaseiah , Maaseiah , Hanan ,
GOLD:	and their fellow Levites : Shebaniah , Hodiah , Kelita , Pelaiah , Hanan ,

ID:	1375
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jeremáíyah áháłní , Zedekáíyah kóbididoohniił ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah said , “ This is what Jeremiah says :
GOLD:	Jeremiah replied , “ Go back to King Zedekiah and tell him ,

ID:	1376
INPUT:	Shidine'é binahjį' yáá'iilt'e' yaa naaskai , áádóó ashkii éí ałjiłnii yił ałghááda'astį́ , índa wáin deidoodlį́į́ł biniyé at'ééd baa nidahaaz'nii' .
PRED:	And when my people came to me , she gave birth to a son , wine , wine , wine , wine , wine , wine , and wine .
GOLD:	They threw dice to decide which of my peoplewould be their slaves.They traded boys to obtain prostitutesand sold girls for enough wine to get drunk .

ID:	1377
INPUT:	Tsin yíl'áhígíí yaa yáłti'ii éí gad naazkaadii Lébanan kéyahgi deíl'áhígíí níléí hísap kódaníshéhígo ał'ąą ádaat'éii tsé yítł'in biták'izdę́ę́' hadaneesánígíí yaa yáłti'go hahaasdzíí' ; nidaaldlooshii ałdó' , nidaat'a'ii , nidaa'na'ii índa łóó' yaa yáłti'go hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	“ These are the words of Lebanon , the cedars of Lebanon , the top of the trees of Lebanon , including the trees , and the small animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	He could speak with authority about all kinds of plants , from the great cedar of Lebanon to the tiny hyssop that grows from cracks in a wall . He could also speak about animals , birds , small creatures , and fish .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	Diné hwiih silį́į'ii éí tsés'ná bitł'izh doo yinádízįįh da , nidi diné dichin nilíinii éí dadích'íi'ii t'áá ałtso bił łikan .
PRED:	Wise words have plenty of honey , but the hungry are hungry .
GOLD:	A person who is full refuses honey , but even bitter food tastes sweet to the hungry .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	Yínííł nishłínígíí doo nídoodzihígi ádzaa da ; shiyi'di shijéí doo bitah hóóts'íid da .
PRED:	My heart is dark , and I am deeply troubled by grief .
GOLD:	My grief is beyond healing ; my heart is broken .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	Áádóó Íísa hajííghal , nít'éé' asdzání índa áłchíní yiyiiłtsą́ągo ání , Eiishą' bił yíkahígíí háí ádaat'į́ ? Áko ájíní , Ná naal'a'í ba'áłchíní éí Diyin God jooba'ii beinínilígíí ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	When Esau saw this , he looked up and said to his children , “ Who is your servant ? ” So Esau said , “ We are the children of God . ”
GOLD:	Then Esau looked at the women and children and asked , “ Who are these people with you ? ” “ These are the children God has graciously given to me , your servant , ” Jacob replied .

ID:	1381
INPUT:	Shik'isóó danilíinii nízhi' bee bił dahodeeshnih ; áłah nádleehii bitahgi naa hashniih doo :
PRED:	I will praise you in my name , my dear brothers and sisters , I will praise you among the churches .
GOLD:	I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people .

ID:	1382
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Gálilii biyi' , Kéína hoolyéedi , tó wáin ájiilaa yę́ęgi náádzídzá . Nít'éé' Kapérniyamgi naat'áanii ła' biye' daatsaah lá .
PRED:	When he returned to Galilee , he returned to Galilee , he was there in Galilee . But there was no water in Capernaum . His son was sick .
GOLD:	As he traveled through Galilee , he came to Cana , where he had turned the water into wine . There was a government official in nearby Capernaum whose son was very sick .

ID:	1383
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' jooba' áádóó a'iinííł , índa ba'áłchíní bik'idahojidlí .
PRED:	May he bless the poor and needy , and blessed them .
GOLD:	The godly always give generous loans to others , and their children are a blessing .

ID:	1384
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' bikéyahgi dá'ák'eh łahjį' Bóhólníihii yá ats'éidee'aahgo ákwii álástsii' haa néelt'e'go anéíjihígíí bik'ehgo bą́ą́h aníłį́į doo ; tsits'aa' hómer wolyéii bii' tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í bináá' hadeezbingo éí béésh łigaii shékel wolyéii ashdladiin bą́ą́h aníłį́į doo .
PRED:	“ The man who is left in the land of the Lord will be cut off from the land of the field . It will be a grain offering for the Lord . It will be a field of silver , and two quarts of silver will be sold for silver .
GOLD:	“ If someone dedicates to the Lord a piece of his family property , its value will be assessed according to the amount of seed required to plant it — fifty shekels of silver for a field planted with five bushels of barley seed .

ID:	1385
INPUT:	Bidiyin dabidi'níinii t'ááká bich'į' yaa áńdaaht'įįh lágo , doodaii' doo bich'į' nidahohłáa da doo , doodaii' áyoolíiłii t'áadoo bééda'ohdle'í , nidi bi'eda'alyaii t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́' naa'adahidoołtł'iłgo ahiih nídahidoohtih .
PRED:	Do not worship idols or worship other gods , or you must not worship other gods or worship other gods .
GOLD:	You must not worship the gods of these nations or serve them in any way or imitate their evil practices . Instead , you must utterly destroy them and smash their sacred pillars .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	Áádóó kót'ée doo : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God baa deisoonah ládą́ą́' , áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii bik'ehgo dah dahidoohkaigo áádóó bá nidaał'a'go índa bich'į' nidahohłáago , díí jį́ bee nihik'ijį' hadeesdzihgo , T'áá aaníí ádadoohdįįł .
PRED:	“ But if you are not guilty of the Lord your God , do not obey the ways of the Lord your God and worship other gods and worship other gods and worship them today .
GOLD:	“ But I assure you of this : If you ever forget the Lord your God and follow other gods , worshiping and bowing down to them , you will certainly be destroyed .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ánááshidoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1388
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binaanish ayóó ádaat'é ; bił dahoneełninii t'áá ałtso hadeisíidgo nideiłkaah .
PRED:	The Lord is the foundation of his works ; he watches over all who fear him .
GOLD:	How amazing are the deeds of the Lord ! All who delight in him should ponder them .

ID:	1389
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God áháłní , Nílááh , ch'ínínáahgo Bóhólníihii binááł dził bikáá'dóó dah yiizįįh . Áko shoo , Bóhólníihii kǫ́ǫ́ ch'íníyá , nít'éé' ayóó át'éego bidziilgo deeyolgo daadził nidahastǫ' índa Bóhólníihii binááł tsé dadíízéí , nidi Bóhólníihii éí níyol doo yee honíle' da , áádóó ííyoldóó bik'ijį' ni' nahaasnáá' , nidi Bóhólníihii ni' hideesná'ígíí doo yee honíle' da ,
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ Go out and see the mountain of the Lord ! Go out and see the mighty mountain of the Lord , and you will see the mighty mountain of the Lord , but you will not be broken into the hills . ”
GOLD:	“ Go out and stand before me on the mountain , ” the Lord told him . And as Elijah stood there , the Lord passed by , and a mighty windstorm hit the mountain . It was such a terrible blast that the rocks were torn loose , but the Lord was not in the wind . After the wind there was an earthquake , but the Lord was not in the earthquake .

ID:	1390
INPUT:	jó , Bóhólníihii éí dahootsogóó danihilį́į́' yik'ijį' dah didoolnihgo łį́į́' áádóó télii áádóó ghą́ą́'ask'idii áádóó béégashii índa dibéda t'óó ayóó át'éego iiłtį́į́h łóód báhádzidii bąąh dahodooleeł .
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has become very sick , and the camels will be filled with white horses and donkeys . The horses will be as white as the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	the hand of the Lord will strike all your livestock — your horses , donkeys , camels , cattle , sheep , and goats — with a deadly plague .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	Áko Sákath hoolyéédóó dah náázhdii'náago Íítam hoolyéedi honoojí bibąąhgi nizhníná .
PRED:	So they left Succoth and camped beside the edge of the wilderness .
GOLD:	The Israelites left Succoth and camped at Etham on the edge of the wilderness .

ID:	1392
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You must also sacrifice one male goat as a sin offering , along with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	1393
INPUT:	Áko Mó'ab bik'ijį' kǫ' ádeeshłíiłgo Kíriyathgi bidziilgo bił nahaz'áanii ałtso adidook'ą́ą́ł áádóó hahóó'áago áádóó hahodidoodlałgo índa deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí ayóó íits'a'go áníigo Mó'ab dine'é nabízdįįd doo .
PRED:	I will send fire on the throne of Moab , and all its fortresses will be thrown into the valley of Moab , a great horn , a great ram , and a great horn will be thrown into battle .
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on the land of Moab , and all the fortresses in Kerioth will be destroyed.The people will fall in the noise of battle , as the warriors shout and the ram 's horn sounds .

ID:	1394
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago ghą́ą́'ask'idii ałtso da'oodlą́ą'go óola yoostsah índa óola látsíní naakigo da'ílíinii baazhnínil .
PRED:	Then he brought his camels to his camels , and he brought two gold gold gold and gold .
GOLD:	Then at last , when the camels had finished drinking , he took out a gold ring for her nose and two large gold bracelets for her wrists .

ID:	1395
INPUT:	Yóó'adóó'ááł lágo , áádóó hódzą́ áá nidoosįįł ; ayóó'ííní'níi doo , índa naa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	Do n't let me get away , and I will love you .
GOLD:	Do n't turn your back on wisdom , for she will protect you.Love her , and she will guard you .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	didlidgo nááhániihii biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí néidii'ą́ągo níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'gi niiní'ą́ągo bikáa'gi didlidgo nááhániihii índa ak'áán nááhániihii nááyiisnii' ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniidígíí yi'iilaa .
PRED:	Then he took the burnt offering and burned it at the entrance of the Tabernacle entrance of the Lord 's altar . Then Moses presented the grain offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	and he placed the altar of burnt offering near the Tabernacle entrance . On it he offered a burnt offering and a grain offering , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	1397
INPUT:	Díí éí Rúben dine'é bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ . Áko éí dízdiindóó ba'aan tádiindi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiingo ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 40,500
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	Áádóó tsinaa'eeł biyi'dę́ę́' hajííyáago kin haal'áádóó diné léi' níłch'i bida'iiníziinii biyi' hólǫ́ǫgo hadááh níyá , áko díí diné t'áá shiidą́ą'dii bi'éé' t'áágéedgo naagháá lá , hooghan doo yii' kééhat'į́į da lá , nidi tsé'áán góne' dajishcháa'go ákǫ́ǫ́ t'éí kééhat'į́į́ lá .
PRED:	As he returned from the boat , a man from the village of the crowd came to meet him . He did n't live in the middle of the lake , but he did n't live in his home .
GOLD:	As Jesus was climbing out of the boat , a man who was possessed by demons came out to meet him . For a long time he had been homeless and naked , living in the tombs outside the town .

ID:	1399
INPUT:	Mó'ab dine'é ándahałt'i' áádóó Áman dine'é da'ódziih ; shidine'é yá nidahałt'i'go t'áá bí ayóó át'éego ádaa daha'niihgo dahakéyah yik'ijį' ádá nidahalchįįhgo diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	“ But Moab and Moab will speak against me , and I will make a solemn oath that I am filled with arrogance .
GOLD:	“ I have heard the taunts of the Moabitesand the insults of the Ammonites , mocking my peopleand invading their borders .

ID:	1400
INPUT:	áádóó ak'ah hak'i yadeidiyííziłgo bee dahodíí<unk> go bizhé'é ak'ah bik'i yeiniziidígi át'éego ádíílííł . Áko shá nidaal'a'go náá'iiłniihii danilį́į doo ; jó , dazhdiyingo ádaho'diilyaaígíí hool'áágóó nááda'iiłniihii dajílį́įgo náás da'ahijílchíih doo .
PRED:	Then anoint the priests and Levites to anoint me as priests . Then you will serve me as priests as priests , and you will serve me as priests as priests .
GOLD:	Anoint them as you did their father , so they may also serve me as priests . With their anointing , Aaron 's descendants are set apart for the priesthood forever , from generation to generation . ”

ID:	1401
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ądi Ízrel daadzí'ígíí áádóó Jéíkab ba'áłchíní yisdáhineezhchą́'ígíí dine'é atídabiilaa yę́ę doo yaa nááda'íídóodliił da , nidi Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel biDiyin nilíinii t'áá aaníígóó yaa dadzólíi doo .
PRED:	The people of Israel have destroyed their families , but the people of Israel have abandoned their children . But the Lord your God will bless the people of Israel .
GOLD:	In that day the remnant left in Israel , the survivors in the house of Jacob , will no longer depend on allieswho seek to destroy them.But they will faithfully trust the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	1402
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii , Aizéíyah kóníigo saad yee haadzíi'ii bohodoolnííł biniyé ákódzaa ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , baa nidahwiilne'ígíishą' háí dayoosdląąd ? Háishą' Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii bich'į' yit'íní ályaa ?
PRED:	This message came to Isaiah from the prophet Isaiah the prophet Isaiah : “ Who did he believe in the Lord ? Who has believed in the power of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	This is exactly what Isaiah the prophet had predicted : “ Lord , who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ? ”

ID:	1403
INPUT:	Dah dohkááh , dah dohkááh , bits'ą́ąjigo dah dohkááh ; chin bąąh hólóonii bidadoołchííd ; biníí'dę́ę́' ch'ínóhkááh ; Bóhólníihii bileets'aa' deínóhjáahii , chin nihąąh ádaadin áda'dołnééh .
PRED:	Go back and get away from your ears , and go out to the place of purification . Do n't let them go out to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Get out ! Get out and leave your captivity , where everything you touch is unclean.Get out of there and purify yourselves , you who carry home the sacred objects of the Lord .

ID:	1404
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , shich'į' dah díníit'aahgo shíísíníłts'ą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díghaałgo díní'į́į́' áádóó Senákerib saad yee hahaasdzíi'ii diits'į́į́h ; éí yiyííł'aadgo Diyin God hináanii yá nahast'i' .
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , and listen to what I am saying , O Lord , and listen to what I am saying .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	1405
INPUT:	Dan , Náftalai , Géed índa Ásher daolyé .
PRED:	The names of the tribe of Naphtali , Gad , and Naphtali .
GOLD:	Dan , Naphtali , Gad , and Asher .

ID:	1406
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ááníiłii áádįįł , áádóó diné doo ła' bijéí biyi'di bi'diił'áa da , índa Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii éí nahjį' kódabi'dilne' áádóó t'áá ákogi ááníiłii doo yá'át'éehii bik'i hwiidooleełígíí bits'ąą nahjį' kódabi'dilne'ígíí doo ła'da yaa nitsékees da .
PRED:	The godly will be destroyed , but the godly will be destroyed by God 's justice and justice .
GOLD:	Good people pass away ; the godly often die before their time.But no one seems to care or wonder why.No one seems to understandthat God is protecting them from the evil to come .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	Áádóó deenásts'aa' ła'ígíí diyingo hats'ąą hasti'go há nááhániihii nínéidiilóóz ; éí bitsiit'áagi Éran áádóó biye'ké dah dadees'nii' .
PRED:	Then Aaron took the Ark of the Covenant and laid it on his head , and Aaron 's sons laid their hands on his head .
GOLD:	Then Moses presented the other ram , which was the ram of ordination . Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the ram 's head ,

ID:	1408
INPUT:	David éí Ámalek dine'é yik'eh deesdlį́į́'
PRED:	David Defeats the Amalekites
GOLD:	David Destroys the Amalekites

ID:	1409
INPUT:	Neeznáá náhásdzohgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'idoolyáhígíí éí ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' tseebíí yikááł bíighah doo ; bee í'neel'ąąhí ómer wolyéii bii' álástsii' hadeezbingo k'idoolyáago <unk> wolyéii neeznáá hadeezbingo bíighah nídoodleeł .
PRED:	On the third day of the grape harvest will be a crop of grapes , a crop that will be called the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies . It will be a crop for ten days .
GOLD:	Ten acres of vineyard will not produce even six gallons of wine.Ten baskets of seed will yield only one basket of grain . ”

ID:	1410
INPUT:	T'óó da'ahódziih , dabiyooch'ííd , t'óó nida'ałtseed , da'ni'įįh áádóó ahaa da'dilyéego t'óó tsé'édin áhooniił ; t'áá ałkéé' nida'ahiltseedgo bidił bits'ádaazlį́įgo ádaalne' .
PRED:	They say , “ They are trying to kill lies , but they have no lies . They are killed by a trap of murder .
GOLD:	You make vows and break them ; you kill and steal and commit adultery.There is violence everywhere — one murder after another .

ID:	1411
INPUT:	Háálá Christ Jesus bee Níłch'i Diyinii bits'ą́ą́dóó iiná bibee haz'áanii éí bąąhági át'éii áádóó anoonééł bibee haz'áanii bits'ą́ąjį' <unk> dííchid .
PRED:	For the Spirit of Christ Jesus gave birth to the law of God and through the law of God .
GOLD:	And because you belong to him , the power of the life-giving Spirit has freed you from the power of sin that leads to death .

ID:	1412
INPUT:	Áko hamá áháłní , Shiyáázh , hóyée'go ha'doodzihígíí shígo shik'ijį' dooleeł ; ándííniidígíí bik'eh honíł'įįhgo níláhdę́ę́' shá náníjááh .
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ you will be cursed . If you are my son , you will be thrown into the field . ”
GOLD:	But his mother replied , “ Then let the curse fall on me , my son ! Just do what I tell you . Go out and get the goats for me ! ”

ID:	1413
INPUT:	Nihił chodahoo'ínígíí bee doo nihąąh nidahwiikaad da , háálá Níłch'i Diyinii nihaa deet'ánígíí Diyin God bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' nihijéí yii' haidééłbįįd .
PRED:	We have no hope for us , for we have not abandoned us because we love God 's love .
GOLD:	And this hope will not lead to disappointment . For we know how dearly God loves us , because he has given us the Holy Spirit to fill our hearts with his love .

ID:	1414
INPUT:	Jew dine'é ánáádahodoo'niid , Yá'át'éehii baa nanináhígíí biniinaa doo nił nidazniilne' da , nidi Diyin God doo díínísingóó baa yáníłti'ígíí biniinaa , háálá t'áá diné nílį́įgo Diyin God í'díl'į́ .
PRED:	The Jewish leaders replied , “ We do n't want you to preach the Good News that you do n't know God 's Good News . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ We 're stoning you not for any good work , but for blasphemy ! You , a mere man , claim to be God . ”

ID:	1415
INPUT:	Áádóó Béíyalath índa kin hadaas'áago bii' nooh nída'achíihii Sálaman bee hólónígíí áádóó kin hadaas'áago bii' tsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí nideiłbąąsii hólónígíí índa bii' siláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii hólónígíí áádóó Sálaman éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi , T'áá hodeeshbįįł , nízinígi t'áá át'é áádóó Lébanan kéyahgi índa kéyah t'áá át'é bee bóhólníihgo nahaz'ánígóó dahasbį' .
PRED:	He built up the towns of Judah and constructed towns with great chariots and chariots , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and all the towns of Lebanon . And I will give them everything in the hill country of Lebanon .
GOLD:	He also rebuilt Baalath and other supply centers and constructed towns where his chariots and horses could be stationed . He built everything he desired in Jerusalem and Lebanon and throughout his entire realm .

ID:	1416
INPUT:	áádóó Kíriyathéíyim áádóó Síbmah índa yíldzisgi yanáalk'idígíí bighą́ą'gi <unk> har kin hadaas'áii
PRED:	Anathoth , Kiriathaim , Sibmah , and Sibmah .
GOLD:	Kiriathaim , Sibmah , Zereth-shahar on the hill above the valley ,

ID:	1417
INPUT:	Diyin God éí bine' ahiniichéehii áádóó bee danihidziilii nilį́ ; nihide áhoot'įįhgo t'áá áko nihíká iilwo'ii nilį́ .
PRED:	God is our fortress , and he is a refuge for us . He is a safe refuge for us .
GOLD:	God is our refuge and strength , always ready to help in times of trouble .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	nidi dahóyánígíí éí bee hool'iní dah deidiijaa' , índa ak'ah iih nídoodziłígíí tózis yee dah deidiijaa' .
PRED:	But the people said , “ The meat of the lampstand , the olive oil , and the olive oil of olive oil . ”
GOLD:	but the other five were wise enough to take along extra oil .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	Nidi nihí Níłch'i Diyinii nihik'i hoole'go bee adziilii nihee dahodooleeł , áko Jerúsalemgi , índa Judíyagi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áádóó Samériyagi , índa nahasdzáán nidanees'ą́ą́góó shá dahołne' dooleeł .
PRED:	But if you are coming to the Spirit of the Spirit , you will sit in Jerusalem and in Judea , and in Judea will prophesy against me .
GOLD:	But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you . And you will be my witnesses , telling people about me everywhere — in Jerusalem , throughout Judea , in Samaria , and to the ends of the earth . ”

ID:	1420
INPUT:	T'ahdii yáłti'go ła' náánálwodgo ání , Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó kǫ' yá biyi'dę́ę́' hadadíínáadgo dibé áádóó nidaal'a'í ałtso iidííłk'ą́ą'go t'áá shí t'éiyá yisdááshwodgo nił hashne' .
PRED:	While he was still speaking , another messenger came from the fire and told them , “ Leave the fire from the fire of God and the Lamb . ”
GOLD:	While he was still speaking , another messenger arrived with this news : “ The fire of God has fallen from heaven and burned up your sheep and all the shepherds . I am the only one who escaped to tell you . ”

ID:	1421
INPUT:	Doo yee yá'ádaashóonii t'áá ałtso Gílgal kin shijaa'gi hólǫ́ ; ákwii dahojooshłxáá nít'éé' . Doo yá'ádaashónígi ádaat'ínígíí biniinaa shighandóó ch'íhodínéeshkał , áko doo ayóó'ánááhwíínísh'níi da dooleeł ; binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso shik'ijį' danilį́ .
PRED:	I hate every kind of evil in Gilgal , and I will not be afraid of my master . I will not be afraid of my master , and I will not be afraid of all my enemies .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ All their wickedness began at Gilgal ; there I began to hate them.I will drive them from my landbecause of their evil actions.I will love them no morebecause all their leaders are rebels .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	Diné ła' bizhé'é bighangi hak'is yizdoołtsołgo ábizhdidooniił , Ni'éénééz nee hólóonii nihinanit'a'í dííleeł ; nidahaazhchǫ'go yáádaa'áhígíí bee níhólníih doo .
PRED:	“ If a man has taken his father 's home , he will say , ‘ We will have sex with you , ' and you will have sex with us .
GOLD:	In those days a man will say to his brother , “ Since you have a coat , you be our leader ! Take charge of this heap of ruins ! ”

ID:	1423
INPUT:	Dził Íífreiyimdóó diné ła' éí Máíkah wolyé .
PRED:	There were one of the tribe of Dan in the hill country of Ephraim .
GOLD:	There was a man named Micah , who lived in the hill country of Ephraim .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	T'áá áko ajoo'į́ nídzísdlį́į́' áádóó Diyin God baa hojiniihgo Jesus bikéé' dashdiiyá , áko diné t'áá ałtso dahoołtsą́ągo , Diyin God yaa dahaznih .
PRED:	When Jesus saw him , he followed him and followed him . When he saw him , he followed him .
GOLD:	Instantly the man could see , and he followed Jesus , praising God . And all who saw it praised God , too .

ID:	1425
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí níísísts'ą́ą'go bee háínídzíí'áádóó saad bee hahínídzí'ígíí diséts'ą́ą́' ; jó , ádíní ,
PRED:	I am telling you the truth , for I have heard your word .
GOLD:	“ You have spoken in my hearing , and I have heard your very words .

ID:	1426
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ayóó át'éego deeyolgo biniinaa tó náádadiidááh .
PRED:	Suddenly , the mighty storm ran out to meet him , and they ran out to meet him .
GOLD:	Soon a gale swept down upon them , and the sea grew very rough .

ID:	1427
INPUT:	Áádóó ant'į́įhgo iigéeshjį' ahalzhishgo , t'áá áko bee iigéshí bee aneest'ánígíí jiigéeshgo baa nízhdiidááh .
PRED:	When the crops of the harvest , it will be taken into the field and throw it into the field .
GOLD:	And as soon as the grain is ready , the farmer comes and harvests it with a sickle , for the harvest time has come . ”

ID:	1428
INPUT:	Nidi bee dah ní'diidlohí t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó bee ída'neel'ąąhí t'áá ákogi át'éii hazhó'ó nidasoołnil , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God kéyah nihaidiní'ánígíí bikáá' as'ahgóó anihídayiiłkaah doo .
PRED:	But you have made us right with justice and justice , and you will live in the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Yes , always use honest weights and measures , so that you may enjoy a long life in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	1429
INPUT:	Nidi Jerobówam bisiláo ła' hane'dę́ę'go haa héeshjée'go áyiilaa ; ła' éí Júdah dine'é bidááhdę́ę'go yaa héeshjéé' , áádóó ła' yine'dę́ę'go yaa héeshjéé' .
PRED:	But Jeroboam got up from the middle of the guard , and some of the men of Judah joined them in front of them .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jeroboam had secretly sent part of his army around behind the men of Judah to ambush them .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá' kǫ' dideeshtłił biniyé níyá , áko t'áá íídą́ą́' diiltłah le' nisin !
PRED:	I will make you a fire for the earth , and you have seen him in your presence .
GOLD:	“ I have come to set the world on fire , and I wish it were already burning !

ID:	1431
INPUT:	Hólan binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił , Dííber binaagóó dahootsooígíí t' áá bił ,
PRED:	Aijalon , and Debir .
GOLD:	Holon , Debir ,

ID:	1432
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo ; nihí áádóó nihiye'ké áádóó nihitsi'ké áádóó diné nihá nidaal'a'í áádóó asdzání nihá nidaal'a'í índa Líívai dine'é nihitahgi kééhat'ínígíí éí nihíí' dadooleełii doo bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz daígíí ałdó' bił nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	May the Lord your God be joyful in the presence of the Lord your God , your sons , daughters , and your sons and daughters live among you .
GOLD:	“ You must celebrate there in the presence of the Lord your God with your sons and daughters and all your servants . And remember to include the Levites who live in your towns , for they will receive no allotment of land among you .

ID:	1433
INPUT:	Nihishchíinii áádóó bił hadashoojée'ii áádóó danihik'éí índa danihik'isóó nidi ninádanihididoo'ááł , áko nihí ła' nidanihidoołtsił ;
PRED:	“ But if you have children and your relatives and sisters , you will be killed , and your relatives will be killed .
GOLD:	Even those closest to you — your parents , brothers , relatives , and friends — will betray you . They will even kill some of you .

ID:	1434
INPUT:	Jerúsalem bił yah ada'iiztiindę́ę́' Ízrel dine'é yik'ijį' nilíinii áádóó bi'ana'í nilíinii yah adahidoonéłígíí éí nihokáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii índa nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso ákóhodooníiłgo ts'ídá doo dayoodlą́ą da nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when the leaders of Israel came out to Jerusalem , the leaders of Israel , the kings of Israel , the earth , and all the world would believe that they would never eat .
GOLD:	Not a king in all the earth — no one in all the world — would have believed that an enemycould march through the gates of Jerusalem .

ID:	1435
INPUT:	Atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii
PRED:	The First Passover
GOLD:	The Second Passover

ID:	1436
INPUT:	Pérgamasgi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii bich'į' hane' ályaa
PRED:	The Message for the Church
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Pergamum

ID:	1437
INPUT:	áhodííniid , Nik'ídaha'áahii ałdó' yíkaigo índa , níídéests'įįł . Áko , Hérad nant'á bił haz'ą́ągi haa áháyą́ą doo , níigo yee hooł'a' .
PRED:	Then he said , “ I am sending you into the Kingdom of Herod , and he sent him to send him to Herod . ”
GOLD:	“ I will hear your case myself when your accusers arrive , ” the governor told him . Then the governor ordered him kept in the prison at Herod 's headquarters .

ID:	1438
INPUT:	Áádóó Jéíkab éí Diyin God hach'į' haadzí'ígi tsé ajíítsigo bik'ijį' yanáadzi'go nááhániihii yajiiziid , índa ak'ah ałdó' yajiiziid .
PRED:	So Jacob did as God commanded him . Then Jacob took off the stone tablets of the stone , and pouring out the olive oil into the fire .
GOLD:	Jacob set up a stone pillar to mark the place where God had spoken to him . Then he poured wine over it as an offering to God and anointed the pillar with olive oil .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , t'áá ałtsojį' shéédaałniih áádóó bee nanihinétą́'ígíí t'áá bee nihił hweeshne'ígi át'éego deínóhtą'ígíí bee nihaa hashniih .
PRED:	Remember , dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , I will praise you as you did .
GOLD:	I am so glad that you always keep me in your thoughts , and that you are following the teachings I passed on to you .

ID:	1440
INPUT:	nidi t'áá háiida tó baa níką́ągo yoodlą́'ígíí éí doo dibáá' náádoodleeł da , áko tó haa deeshkáłígíí éí hayi'di tó t'áá bíni'dii háálíinii dooleeł , áko háálį́įgo iiná doo ninít'i'ii biih yílį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	But if you drink the water from the water , you will not drink the water of water , and let it be the fountain of life . For the fountain of life will be brought into eternal life .
GOLD:	But those who drink the water I give will never be thirsty again . It becomes a fresh , bubbling spring within them , giving them eternal life . ”

ID:	1441
INPUT:	Bá'deeshxehii nílíinii , yáníłti'go nidaa' bąąhdę́ę́' tsés'ná bitł'izh nahidilch'ą́ą́ł nahalin . Tsés'ná bitł'izh índa abe' nitsoo' biyaagi hólǫ́ . Ni'éé' éí Dził Lébanandóó gad áhálchinígi áhálchin .
PRED:	My lover is like a fig tree , whose mother is like honey . Your lips are like honey , like the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Your lips are as sweet as nectar , my bride.Honey and milk are under your tongue.Your clothes are scentedlike the cedars of Lebanon .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haadzíí' . Sáanii t'óó ahayóí dahalne'go kódaaní ,
PRED:	A few days later the Lord gave this message :
GOLD:	The Lord gives the word , and a great army brings the good news .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	Diyin God biYe' Jesus Christ baa hane' yá'át'éehii bee deezt'i'ii .
PRED:	Good News in God 's Son Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	This is the Good News about Jesus the Messiah , the Son of God . It began

ID:	1444
INPUT:	Áko tsintahgi diné neheeskaigo , jó , tsés'ná bitł'izh nidahidilch'ą́ą́ł , nidi diné t'áadoo ła' yił ázadoolchid da , háálá hóyée'go áha'oodzíi'ii bik'ee hoł daayéé' .
PRED:	When the men of the forest arrived among the trees , they were afraid of their lips , but they were afraid of their lips .
GOLD:	They did n't dare touch the honey because they all feared the oath they had taken .

ID:	1445
INPUT:	Áádóó náánáła' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yee hoł nááhoolne' , Yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí asdzání ła' bááh bee niilyółí néidii'ą́ągo ak'áán táadi haaką́ągo yił tayooznii'go niilyółígíí éí nahalin .
PRED:	Then one of them told him , “ The Kingdom of Heaven is like a woman in the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	Jesus also used this illustration : “ The Kingdom of Heaven is like the yeast a woman used in making bread . Even though she put only a little yeast in three measures of flour , it permeated every part of the dough . ”

ID:	1446
INPUT:	Nihikin bii' sohodizin diyingo áádóó ayóó ánoolningo si'ą́ yę́ęgi danihizhé'é yę́ę naa dahaniih nít'éé' yę́ęgi ałtso dadíílid índa t'áadoo le'é nihił dahóshóonii ałtso t'áá ádzaaí daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	You have made us beautiful in the Temple of our ancestors , as your ancestors did , your ancestors did not mourn for you .
GOLD:	The holy and beautiful Templewhere our ancestors praised youhas been burned down , and all the things of beauty are destroyed .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	Nidi Ízrel nílíinii , Jéíkab nándiiltínígíí , Éíbraham shik'is nilíinii bits'ą́ą́dóó ni'dizhchíinii shinaal'a'í nílį́ .
PRED:	But now , O Jacob , you are my brother , Jacob , my brother , the servant of Abraham .
GOLD:	“ But as for you , Israel my servant , Jacob my chosen one , descended from Abraham my friend ,

ID:	1448
INPUT:	Bee ił nishłíinii t'áá áłahjį' ániidí náádleeł , áádóó she'ałtį́į́' ałdó' áłahjį' ániidí náádleeł .
PRED:	I , O my friends , and I will bow down to the bow of my bow .
GOLD:	New honors are constantly bestowed on me , and my strength is continually renewed . '

ID:	1449
INPUT:	Símiyan dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Ísakar dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	The territory of Simeon will then west of the tribe of Simeon , and the territory of Simeon will west .
GOLD:	Next is the territory of Issachar with the same eastern and western boundaries .

ID:	1450
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii díí baa hidit'aah doo : éí béégashii , doodaii' dibé náádayiiłniihígíí bigaan áádóó biyaats'iin índa bibid , éí náá'iiłniihii yaa dayiiníił doo .
PRED:	“ These are the instructions regarding the priests , the fat of the sacrifices , the fat of the sacrifices , the fat of the sacrifices , the priests , the priests , and the fat .
GOLD:	“ These are the parts the priests may claim as their share from the cattle , sheep , and goats that the people bring as offerings : the shoulder , the cheeks , and the stomach .

ID:	1451
INPUT:	Awééchí'í doo t'áá díkwíí biidoołkáał da índa diné haastihii są́ bidiyoołhéłígíí t'áá bich'į'dóó doo dadootsaał da , háálá neeznádiin binááhaígíí áłchínígo baa nitsáhákees doo índa bąąhági ááníiłii neeznádiin binááhaigo daaztsą́ągo hóyée'go bá ha'oodzíi'go baa nitsáhákees doo .
PRED:	If you have no future , you will die , and you will die because you have no children to die . For if you have no children to die , you will die for forty years .
GOLD:	“ No longer will babies die when only a few days old.No longer will adults die before they have lived a full life.No longer will people be considered old at one hundred ! Only the cursed will die that young !

ID:	1452
INPUT:	Jó , tsásk'eh áłts'ísígo diné yikáá' dínóotéłígíí bi'oh áníłtso áádóó bee antéhí áłts'ózígo ák'ízhdidoodisígíí doo bíighah da .
PRED:	Look , if you have a little bed , it 's like a little person 's bed , it 's n't cut it into a pit .
GOLD:	The bed you have made is too short to lie on.The blankets are too narrow to cover you .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	T'áá nináháhááh bik'eh aláahgo náá'iiłniihii éí hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' doo t'áá bí bidił néidiyoołnih biniyé yah anádáah da nít'éé' , nidi Christ éí doo łą́ądi náá'ádiisnii' da .
PRED:	In the third year of the priest 's reign , he refused to rule over the sanctuary of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	And he did not enter heaven to offer himself again and again , like the high priest here on earth who enters the Most Holy Place year after year with the blood of an animal .

ID:	1454
INPUT:	Áko díí hoł béédahózin doo : Bóhólníihii haDiyin God nishłį́įgo hatah kééhasht'į́į doo biniyé Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íhoní'eezhígíí ásht'į́ ni ; Bóhólníihii haDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	And this is what the Lord says : I am the God of Egypt . I am the one who brought you out of Egypt . I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	and they will know that I am the Lord their God . I am the one who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I could live among them . I am the Lord their God .

ID:	1455
INPUT:	Shíí' dooleełii atídaohłaaígíí danohłíinii , baa nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo áádóó baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫhgo biniinaa índa béégashii yáázh hootsogóó naalgeedígíí índa łį́į́'chogi áníinii nidahonohłingo biniinaa
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of my people , ” says the Lord. “ Do n't be like a tree in a field .
GOLD:	“ You rejoice and are glad , you who plundered my chosen people.You frisk about like a calf in a meadowand neigh like a stallion .

ID:	1456
INPUT:	Áko éí nínáánááhaigo baa náádziiskaigo ádabizhdííniid , Nihinanit'a'í , nihibéeso bik'é ida'diilnahgo ałtso ádasiildįįdígíí nihinanit'a'í doo bits'ąą nanóol'į́į́' át'ée da ; danihilį́į́' t'áá ałtso nihinanit'a'í bíí' silį́į́' ; nihinanit'a'í yoo'į́įgo t'áadoo yiila'í da ; t'áá hazhó'ó danihits'íís índa danihikédaayah t'éiyá daadziih .
PRED:	But when he returned to his master , he said , “ We have sold our money to our master , our master , and we are forced to leave everything he did . We have left us and left our bodies . We have seen everything he did to do . ”
GOLD:	But that year ended , and the next year they came again and said , “ We can not hide the truth from you , my lord . Our money is gone , and all our livestock and cattle are yours . We have nothing left to give but our bodies and our land .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	Nihidáda'ak'eh áádóó nihich'il na'atł'o'ii k'éédadilyéehjį' hadoh bił ních'igo áádóó dá'áchaan bik'ijį' áshłaa índa nahachagiitsoh éí nihitsin fig naazkaadii deíl'áá nít'éé' yę́ę índa áliv naazkaadii deíl'áá nít'éé' yę́ę ałtso nihits'ą́ą́' yaa nahodeeskai , ákondi t'áadoo shich'į' nináhisoohkai da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I have given you your fields and vineyards , vineyards , vineyards , vineyards , vineyards , trees , trees , trees , trees , trees , and vineyards , olive oil , and olive oil . But you have never abandoned me .
GOLD:	“ I struck your farms and vineyards with blight and mildew.Locusts devoured all your fig and olive trees.But still you would not return to me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	Nidi ał'ąą dine'é bitahdę́ę́' t'áá háiida hodísin áádóó t'áá ákogi ááníłígíí t'éiyá ádeidiit'aah .
PRED:	But everyone who comes from the world will follow the truth .
GOLD:	In every nation he accepts those who fear him and do what is right .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí Ámalek índa bidine'é ałdó' diltłish bee bik'eh jideesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	Joshua made the Amalekites and Amalekites , and he fought against them .
GOLD:	As a result , Joshua overwhelmed the army of Amalek in battle .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áadoo biniyéhígóó nihił ádaadzaii baa nidahosoołne' índa doo t'áá aaníinii nabídanooł<unk> go daołtsą́ ; éí bąą nihik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Do n't be afraid of what you have done for you , for I am the Lord your God . I am the enemy of you .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because what you say is false and your visions are a lie , I will stand against you , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	1461
INPUT:	Nidi hahojoobá'ígo bą́ą́h aníłínígíí bi<unk> neel'ą́ągo éí náá'iiłniihii baazhdoogáałgo hą́ą́h ílį́į́ góne' há niididoo'ááł ; éí bízhneel'ánígíí bik'ehgo bee ádee hadzoodzíi'ii nizh'doolééł .
PRED:	But if he finds the price of the poor , the priest will enter the house of the priest 's house and give it a vow to the priest .
GOLD:	If you desire to make such a vow but can not afford to pay the required amount , take the person to the priest . He will determine the amount for you to pay based on what you can afford .

ID:	1462
INPUT:	Ákóne' James bich'į' yit'íní ízh'diilyaa , náá'ákóne' daal'aadii t'áá ałtso bich'į' yit'íní ínáázh'diilyaa .
PRED:	Then James and his disciples appeared to him as he had said .
GOLD:	Then he was seen by James and later by all the apostles .

ID:	1463
INPUT:	Áko nidaal'a'í yah aakai , nít'éé' jó , e'elyaii léi' tsásk'eh yii' sitį́įgo tł'ízí bighaa' bitsii'áál lá .
PRED:	As they arrived at the entrance of the camp , they tore his clothes and wept .
GOLD:	But when they came to carry David out , they discovered that it was only an idol in the bed with a cushion of goat 's hair at its head .

ID:	1464
INPUT:	Áko Saul díí yaa ákonízin áádóó bił bééhózin : Bóhólníihii éí David yił hólǫ́ , áádóó Saul bitsi' Máíkal éí David ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	When Saul realized that Saul was doing this , he became the Lord , and he loved David .
GOLD:	When Saul realized that the Lord was with David and how much his daughter Michal loved him ,

ID:	1465
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bigaan nish'náájí yee ayóó át'éii í'dólzin ; Bóhólníihii bigaan nish'náájí yee doo nánílyéésgóó áánííł !
PRED:	The strong arm of the Lord is powerful ; his arm is as strong as strong as his arm .
GOLD:	The strong right arm of the Lord is raised in triumph.The strong right arm of the Lord has done glorious things !

ID:	1466
INPUT:	Áko Manówah nídii'na'go t'áá áko be'asdzą́ą́ yikéé' dah diiyáago diné yaa níyáago áyidííniid , Da' niísh díí asdzání bich'į' yáníłti' nít'éé' . Áko ání , Éí lá shí ásht'į́ ni .
PRED:	So Manoah got up and went to his wife , and he said to the man , “ Are you your wife ? ” And she replied , “ Yes , I am your name . ”
GOLD:	Manoah ran back with his wife and asked , “ Are you the man who spoke to my wife the other day ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied , “ I am . ”

ID:	1467
INPUT:	Ákohgo kéyah bikáá' aneest'ą' hááhinoot'į́įł doo , áko hwiih danohłį́įgo hasihgo kéédahoht'į́į doo .
PRED:	Then you will enjoy the fruit of your land , and you will enjoy your fruit .
GOLD:	Then the land will yield large crops , and you will eat your fill and live securely in it .

ID:	1468
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego , e'asdzą́ą́ danohłíinii , nihadahastiin bídahwíínółnííh . Ła' Diyin God bizaad doo yik'eh dahół'į́į da nidi be'asdzą́ą́ yá'át'éehgo dahinánígíí binahjį' da'iidoodląął . Azhą́ ts'ídá doo ha'át'íhída dabidohníi da nidi ,
PRED:	And this is what you say , dear wife , you women ! Do n't believe the word of God ? Even if you do n't believe God 's word , you do n't believe it .
GOLD:	In the same way , you wives must accept the authority of your husbands . Then , even if some refuse to obey the Good News , your godly lives will speak to them without any words . They will be won over

ID:	1469
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání nidilt'éego ałjiłnii nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii yaa ní'áazhgo yidááhdóó yiizį' .
PRED:	As she stood before the king , a prostitute stood before the king .
GOLD:	Some time later two prostitutes came to the king to have an argument settled .

ID:	1470
INPUT:	Índa łeezh yá'át'éehii biyi'jį' ahineezdee'ígíí , éí saad jidiits'a'go bik'izhdi'yiitįįhígíí ájít'į́ ; éí t'áá aaníí honeest'ą' haleehgo , ła' neeznádiindi , ła' hastą́diindi , ła' tádiindi bilááh ninádahadleeh .
PRED:	Then the seeds fell on the ground , and the seeds produced a crop that makes the soil represent the soil .
GOLD:	The seed that fell on good soil represents those who truly hear and understand God 's word and produce a harvest of thirty , sixty , or even a hundred times as much as had been planted ! ”

ID:	1471
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Sísera bił ałk'eh hólǫ́ǫgo áyiilaa ; bitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí índa bisiláo t'áá át'é t'óó bił dahóóląądgo Bérak éí diltłish ałtso yee áhásdįįd , áko Sísera bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yikáá'dę́ę́' hadah <unk> táalgo yóó'eelwod lá .
PRED:	So the Lord helped Sisera with his chariots and all his chariots , and all the chariots were killed by the sword of Sisera . Then he ran out to meet Sisera , and he ran out to meet Sisera .
GOLD:	When Barak attacked , the Lord threw Sisera and all his chariots and warriors into a panic . Sisera leaped down from his chariot and escaped on foot .

ID:	1472
INPUT:	Éí bąą tsin bee ída'dilzoołí dadiits'a' nahalingo Mó'ab dine'é bąą shijéí yicha ; tsin bee ída'dilzoołí dadiits'a' nahalingo <unk> dine'é bąą shijéí yicha , háálá jit'íinii nishójiyoost'e'ii ásdįįd .
PRED:	Therefore , the cry of Moab cries out like a sound of wood ! The sound of my heart is like a sound of wood , for I have heard the sound of my heart .
GOLD:	My heart moans like a flute for Moab and Kir-hareseth , for all their wealth has disappeared .

ID:	1473
INPUT:	Áádóó Néíthan éí aláahgo naat'áanii áyidííniid , Nílááh , baa nitsíníkeesígíí t'áá át'é ánílééh ; jó , Bóhólníihii nił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Then Nathan said to the king , “ Go and do everything you do . ”
GOLD:	Nathan replied to the king , “ Go ahead and do whatever you have in mind , for the Lord is with you . ”

ID:	1474
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph , hahastiin dooleełígíí , diné t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo , t'áá nahonit'inee nahjį' nihodideesh'áałgo doo haa yáhodoosįįł da niizį́į́' .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to his husband , “ I will give you justice to the righteous man . I will show you justice . ”
GOLD:	Joseph , to whom she was engaged , was a righteous man and did not want to disgrace her publicly , so he decided to break the engagement quietly .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	Táá' góne' tooh nílínígíí Hídikel woosye' ; éí Asíriya bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjígo ch'ínílį́ . Dį́į́' góne' tooh nílínígíí Yufréítiiz woosye' .
PRED:	Then he called out the Kidron Valley , and he reigned in the east of the Euphrates River on the east side of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	The third branch , called the Tigris , flowed east of the land of Asshur . The fourth branch is called the Euphrates .

ID:	1476
INPUT:	Ákódzaago diné bitahgóó Diyin God bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii índa bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóigo ádahooníiłii t'óó ahayóí daal'aadii yaa nidaaskai . Áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi Sálaman bichaha'oh hoolyéhígi aheełt'éego nitsídaakeesgo áłah nádleeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	The people were amazed at the Temple of God and performed many miraculous signs and wonders in the Temple of God . There were many in the Temple .
GOLD:	The apostles were performing many miraculous signs and wonders among the people . And all the believers were meeting regularly at the Temple in the area known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	Ákohgo náá'iiłniihii há yidínóoł'įįłgo , jó , hatsiits'iin béét'ódígi , doodaii' hatsiit'áád i'íít'ódígi bąąh hadzííyáhígíí dinilchíi'go binídzísgaigo éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii ąąh dahoyooł'aałígi át'éii át'é .
PRED:	When the priest finds that he is ceremonially clean , he must pronounce the sore on his head on a skin disease . It is a serious skin disease , a serious skin disease .
GOLD:	The priest must examine him , and if he finds swelling around the reddish white sore anywhere on the man 's head and it looks like a skin disease ,

ID:	1478
INPUT:	Dashíísółts'ą́ą́' , t'áá ákogi át'éii nihił béédahózinii , shibee haz'áanii nihijéí bii' dahólóonii , diné ándahodoołt'ihii t'áadoo bik'ee nihił daayé'í índa danihódziihii t'áadoo béédaałdzidí .
PRED:	Listen to me , listen to me , and do n't know what I am giving you the truth .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you who know right from wrong , you who cherish my law in your hearts.Do not be afraid of people 's scorn , nor fear their insults .

ID:	1479
INPUT:	Áádóó nízhdii'na'go ajííyą́ą́' áádóó tó joodlą́ą'go Diyin God biDził Hórebgóó dízdiin jį́ áádóó dízdiin tł'éé' éí ch'iyánígíí bee hadziilgo jiníyá .
PRED:	So Jacob got up and drank the water of the hills and drank the water of God for forty days .
GOLD:	So he got up and ate and drank , and the food gave him enough strength to travel forty days and forty nights to Mount Sinai , the mountain of God .

ID:	1480
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God ayóó ánóodziilgo yisdáshiyíłteehii nílíinii , anaa' náhádleehgo shitsiits'iin shá bik'íná'ííłtihgo shaa áhólyą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	O Lord my God , for he rescued me from my enemies ; he broke my heads in battle .
GOLD:	O Sovereign Lord , the strong one who rescued me , you protected me on the day of battle .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	nikin wódahdi ts'ídá aláahdi haz'ánígíí bitsé siláii táłkáá'dóó dah sínílá ; k'os deílzhoodii éí nitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí ádanile' ; níyol bit'a' bikáá' naniná .
PRED:	The mountains of the earth will be a foundation of the earth , for the sea stands beside the surface of the sea .
GOLD:	you lay out the rafters of your home in the rain clouds.You make the clouds your chariot ; you ride upon the wings of the wind .

ID:	1482
INPUT:	<unk> . 2 : 1-4
PRED:	Joab and Joab
GOLD:	's Future Reign

ID:	1483
INPUT:	Biiskání kin haal'áhígíí t'áá áyídídę́ę́' bich'į' jookahgo , k'adę́ę ałné'é'aahgo Peter sodidoolzįįł biniyé kin bighą́ą'jį' haayá .
PRED:	The next day when the next day , Peter went out to pray for Peter .
GOLD:	The next day as Cornelius 's messengers were nearing the town , Peter went up on the flat roof to pray . It was about noon ,

ID:	1484
INPUT:	Áko k'os bikáa'gi dah sidáhígíí habee iigéshí nahasdzáán bikáá'góó bee iijíígizhgo nahasdzáán bikáá'góó neest'áanii jiizhgizh .
PRED:	Then the cloud poured out his hand on the earth , and the earth laid the foundations of the earth .
GOLD:	So the one sitting on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth , and the whole earth was harvested .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	Áko nihijéí bił nidahoozhǫǫh , háálá bízhi' diyinii baa dadzííníidlí .
PRED:	What joy for your heart , for your name is written in your name .
GOLD:	In him our hearts rejoice , for we trust in his holy name .

ID:	1486
INPUT:	Ak'eezhdiniihgo nazhnił'inígíí éí biyooch'íidii jílį́ , áádóó t'áá ádzaagóó hojilne'ii éí doo áhojilyą́ą da .
PRED:	He is a witness who is a witness , and he is not a witness .
GOLD:	Hiding hatred makes you a liar ; slandering others makes you a fool .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ání , Ha'a'aahjigo tsésǫ' ąą ánílééh . Áko ąą ájiilaa . Nít'éé' Iiláísha ání , Adzíłt'óóh . Áko iijííłt'oh . Áádóó ání , Bóhólníihii bik'aa' bee hodínóonééł ; t'áá éí Síriya dine'é bee baa hodínóonééł ; jó , Éífekdi Síriya dine'é ałtso ásíníłdįįdjį' nidííłtsił .
PRED:	Then he said to the stars , “ Hurry ! ” So Elisha said , “ As surely as Elisha opened the road , Elisha said , “ You will die ! The Lord will die ! ” So the Arameans will be killed .
GOLD:	Then he commanded , “ Open that eastern window , ” and he opened it . Then he said , “ Shoot ! ” So he shot an arrow . Elisha proclaimed , “ This is the Lord 's arrow , an arrow of victory over Aram , for you will completely conquer the Arameans at Aphek . ”

ID:	1488
INPUT:	Akée'diígíí t'ah doo ákónílééhgóó éí t'áá díkwíí yee' bits'ádííłjołgo yaago ni'é'ígíí biyi'dę́ę'go bídííłtł'óół .
PRED:	This is the beginning to end , which is the one who formed it from a distance .
GOLD:	Keep just a bit of the hair and tie it up in your robe .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	Éí t'áá áłahjį' Bóhólníihii bidáahgi hólǫ́ǫ le' ! Áko nahasdzáán bikáá'dóó doo hwéédahaniih da doo biniyé doo hwéédahaniihgóó áyósin doo !
PRED:	May the Lord be with all the earth , and let the earth praise him .
GOLD:	May the Lord always remember these sins , and may his name disappear from human memory .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	Éíbram éí kéyah Kéínan hoolyéhígi kééhojit'į́ ; Lat éí honíteelgi kin hadaas'áágóó tázhdínééh , áádóó Sádam kin haal'áagi haníbaal nizhní'ą́ .
PRED:	Abram lived in the land of Canaan , where Abram lived in the Negev . He drove out the Canaanites living in the valley of Sodom and lived in the valley of Sodom .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	Jó nidi , atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániih baa náhwiil<unk> go t'áá nihi'é'él'į' bik'ehgo diné ła' nihá bééhidishchííd , áko daats'í Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í nilíinii nihich'į' béézhdidoochił dashíínóhní ?
PRED:	“ Remember that I am going to teach you the Passover meal with you . If you want to die , why should you go to the Jews ? ”
GOLD:	But you have a custom of asking me to release one prisoner each year at Passover . Would you like me to release this ‘ King of the Jews ' ? ”

ID:	1492
INPUT:	Áko óola jaatł'óół nízhdiinil áádóó jidííłhį́į'go nijik'ęęhgo béégashii yáázh béé'jiidlaa , áko ádadííniid , Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , díí nihidiyin át'éii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezh !
PRED:	Then he turned his gold and looked up , and he said to them , “ Oh , how you have brought us out of Egypt ! ” And the people of Israel said , “ O Egypt !
GOLD:	Then Aaron took the gold , melted it down , and molded it into the shape of a calf . When the people saw it , they exclaimed , “ O Israel , these are the gods who brought you out of the land of Egypt ! ”

ID:	1493
INPUT:	Mózes éí áłah ílínígíí yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Díí ádoolníiłgo Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the people , “ This is what the Lord has commanded . ”
GOLD:	Moses announced to them , “ This is what the Lord has commanded us to do ! ”

ID:	1494
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éego hináanii yiniyé ałhínéikah , índa diné doo ádihodiilt'i'ii dadootsaałgo bidił doonahjį' yá nídahwii'aah .
PRED:	The righteous will be condemned to die , and the innocent will die of death .
GOLD:	They gang up against the righteousand condemn the innocent to death .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	Háálá doo t'óó Christ deidoohdląął t'éí biniyé nihik'idahodzisdli' da , nidi Christ bá ti'dahwiidoohnih ałdó' biniyé nihik'idahodzisdli' .
PRED:	For you do n't believe in Christ , but you will believe in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	For you have been given not only the privilege of trusting in Christ but also the privilege of suffering for him .

ID:	1496
INPUT:	Azhą́ t'áadoo bee ádąąh dahosist'ání da nidi , ádíshnínígíí t'áá shí shik'éidoot'ih ; a<unk> t'áadoo bee shik'íhót'ahí da nidi , doo ákwii ánísht'éhígíí bee shééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	“ But I am innocent , ” says , “ I am innocent , but I do n't know what I am going to do . You will know that I am innocent .
GOLD:	Though I am innocent , my own mouth would pronounce me guilty.Though I am blameless , it would prove me wicked .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	Asdzání t'áá íiyisí hóyáanii éí hahastiin bił jílį́įgo ájósin , nidi asdzání baa yáhásinii áyoolíłígíí éí bahastiin bits'in biyi'di hodiłdzid nahalingo áyósin .
PRED:	A wise woman is like a woman , but a woman whose husband is like a woman whose husband is like a woman who lives in the grave .
GOLD:	A worthy wife is a crown for her husband , but a disgraceful woman is like cancer in his bones .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	Da' shizhé'é yę́ę ał'ąą dine'é bidiyin danilíinii ádeisdįįdígíí , éí Gózan áádóó Héíran índa Ríízef kin hadaas'áhígíí áádóó Ííden dine'é éí <unk> léísergi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'ée'ii bidiyin danilíiniísh yisdádahwiiznil ?
PRED:	The gods of my ancestors had defeated the gods of the nations , who had defeated the gods of Eden , who had lived in the land of Eden who had lived in the land of Eden .
GOLD:	Have the gods of other nations rescued them — such nations as Gozan , Haran , Rezeph , and the people of Eden who were in Tel-assar ? My predecessors destroyed them all !

ID:	1499
INPUT:	Biiskání t'ah ni' halzhingo nízhdii'na'go doo naagháhígóó ajííyá , ákwe'é sozdoolzin .
PRED:	Early the next day the next morning , the next day he prayed to his disciples .
GOLD:	Before daybreak the next morning , Jesus got up and went out to an isolated place to pray .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í nootínígo t'áá da'níł'ąą Diyin God nihaa jooba'go nihaidiní'áanii nizhónígo bá chodaoł'į́įgo bee ahíłká anídaahjah le' .
PRED:	“ Be careful to keep God 's law for you , and do whatever you need .
GOLD:	God has given each of you a gift from his great variety of spiritual gifts . Use them well to serve one another .

ID:	1501
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá íiyisí nídzooskango índa haghan góne' hoł yah íí'áázh , áko bá áda'jíísįįd índa díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaaígíí bá ájiilaago yiyííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	But they grabbed him and took him into the house and took him into the house of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	But Lot insisted , so at last they went home with him . Lot prepared a feast for them , complete with fresh bread made without yeast , and they ate .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	Asdzání naal'a'í nishłíinii doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįdígíí shá yóó'adí'aah , baa nánooshkąąh . Jó , Bóhólníihii éí shinanit'a'í ba'áłchíní ahii' háá'ahiyoołchíiłii t'áádóo nídí nidant'áa doogo íidoolííł , háálá bóhonishníihii éí Bóhólníihii bá ana'ał'į́ . Áko díí bee bééhózin : doo yá'áshóonii doo ła' nii' hólǫ́ǫ́góó níiníłką́ .
PRED:	“ Please forgive my servant , ” says the Lord . “ I am sending you out of my master 's servant , for I am the Lord . I will do nothing for you , for I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Please forgive me if I have offended you in any way . The Lord will surely reward you with a lasting dynasty , for you are fighting the Lord 's battles . And you have not done wrong throughout your entire life .

ID:	1503
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ałtsoní kót'éego ádooldįįłgo , k'ad haash yit'éego da'íínółdįįh ? Jó , diyin k'ehgo dahinohnáa doo , áádóó Diyin God dadíínóhsin .
PRED:	“ So why should you die ? ” he asked . “ So why should you live in God 's sight ? ”
GOLD:	Since everything around us is going to be destroyed like this , what holy and godly lives you should live ,

ID:	1504
INPUT:	Éí aníchį́į́dę́ę́' ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso t'áá bí danízinígi ádaat'į́į doogo ya'di'ní'ą́ ,
PRED:	On the day of the tribe of every tribe will be born to the tribe of every tribe .
GOLD:	In the past he permitted all the nations to go their own ways ,

ID:	1505
INPUT:	Ákohgo asdzání bizhé'é éí hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii áyididooniił , Díí shitsi' éí diné ye'asdzą́ą́ dooleeł biniyé baa níłtį́į́ nít'éé' , áko doo yiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	Then the woman said to his father , “ This man will say to me , ‘ This man 's wife , ' and she did n't have taken her away .
GOLD:	Her father must say to them , ‘ I gave my daughter to this man to be his wife , and now he has turned against her .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	Mt . 11 : <unk>
PRED:	Jesus the Messiah
GOLD:	Parable of the Good Samaritan

ID:	1507
INPUT:	Tsés'ná haanánísą́ nahalingo shináshzhiizh ; ch'il dadeeníinii kǫ' bi ł hadíínóodgo tsį́įłgo adíídeezígíí nahalingo , Bóhólníihii bízhi' baa jííníshłíigo áhodeeshdįįł !
PRED:	I am overwhelmed by the fig tree , and I am overwhelmed with smoke . I am the Lord !
GOLD:	They swarmed around me like bees ; they blazed against me like a crackling fire.But I destroyed them all with the authority of the Lord .

ID:	1508
INPUT:	Nidi díí dashijoołáhígíí , bá hweesh'áał dooleełgo doo deinízin daígíí , kwe'é nidahoh'éeshgo shinááł nidaałtseed .
PRED:	But if you do n't know what I am going to do , then you will be killed . ”
GOLD:	And as for these enemies of mine who did n't want me to be their king — bring them in and execute them right here in front of me . ' ”

ID:	1509
INPUT:	Nidi Féro ání , Háishą' Bóhólníihii nilį́įgo bizaak'eh honish'į́įgo Ízrel dine'é béé'deeshnih . Bóhólníihii bidinínígíí doo bééhasin da , índa doo t'áá k'ad Ízrel béé'níłnii' da .
PRED:	But Pharaoh replied , “ Who will listen to this message from the Lord ? Who will know that I am the Lord , the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Is that so ? ” retorted Pharaoh . “ And who is the Lord ? Why should I listen to him and let Israel go ? I do n't know the Lord , and I will not let Israel go . ”

ID:	1510
INPUT:	Ánas éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii , Kéíyafas wolyéii , bich'į' Jesus t'áá be'astł'ǫ́ǫgo aho'doodlóóz .
PRED:	Caiaphas was the high priest , who was the high priest , who was sitting beside him .
GOLD:	Then Annas bound Jesus and sent him to Caiaphas , the high priest .

ID:	1511
INPUT:	Áko Jótham yóó'ajoolwodgo yóó'azhnííchą́ą́' áádóó Bíyer haz'ánígi jiníyáago ákwii kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' , háálá hak'is Abímelek bik'ee hoł yéé' .
PRED:	When Jotham fled , he fled to his brother , he fled to Shechem , for he was afraid of Abimelech .
GOLD:	Then Jotham escaped and lived in Beer because he was afraid of his brother Abimelech .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Náhookǫs áádóó sǫ' dah naazhjaa'ígíí <unk> yan wol<unk> dóó Dilyéhé índa shádi'ááhjígo sǫ' eel'áhígíí áyiilaa .
PRED:	God made the heavens and the deer , along the coast of the Jordan .
GOLD:	He made all the stars — the Bear and Orion , the Pleiades and the constellations of the southern sky .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' ałk'idą́ą́' diné kódabidi'níí nít'ée'go dasidoots'ą́ą́' , T'áadoo t'óó ádíníigo ádee hahídziihí , nidi bee ádee hahídziihii éí Bóhólníihii binááł bi'díílííł .
PRED:	“ But if you have heard this , you will not swear by the Lord 's oath , but you will not take an oath in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ You have also heard that our ancestors were told , ‘ You must not break your vows ; you must carry out the vows you make to the . '

ID:	1514
INPUT:	Áko sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́dóó Jesus ch'ízhníyáago joogááł , nít'éé' hódahooł'aahii , Díí sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi kin naaznilígíí níníł'į́ , dahałníigo haa yíkai .
PRED:	When Jesus returned to the Temple , he went to the disciples and prayed , “ This is what he said . ”
GOLD:	As Jesus was leaving the Temple grounds , his disciples pointed out to him the various Temple buildings .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	Diné ła' honisą́ nízingo ádaa nitsíkeesígíísh yíní'į́ ? Hó haláahgo doo áhályáanii bá chohoo'į́ .
PRED:	Do you think you are wise ? Do you think you are a fool for a fool ?
GOLD:	There is more hope for foolsthan for people who think they are wise .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bá nidaał'a'ígi át'éego bídanohdlį́įgo nihinanit'a'í bá nidaałnish , diné bá na'anishígi át'éego éí dooda .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the Lord 's enemies , just as he has done .
GOLD:	Work with enthusiasm , as though you were working for the Lord rather than for people .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God t'áá átséedi bił bééhózingo náyiizláa'ii biYe' yidanóolnin dooleełgo yinahaz'ą́ , éí alą́ąjį' biYe' nilį́įgo bik'isóó danilíinii lą'í dooleeł biniyé .
PRED:	For the Son of God saw that he had been born in his own own own Son . He has been the Son of many brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	For God knew his people in advance , and he chose them to become like his Son , so that his Son would be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters .

ID:	1518
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díí baa nánooshkąąh : ná naal'a'í nishłíinii áádóó ná naal'a'í danilíinii , nízhi' baa nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dadíníilzinii hazhó'ó nihisodizin nihá diits'į́į́h áádóó índa ná naal'a'í nishłíinii díí jį́ díí hastiin shaa a'áhí dínóozįįłgo shá yá'át'éehgo ádíílíłígíí biniyé nich'į' sodeeszin . Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii bibee adlání bee baná'áshkááh nít'éé' .
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord : “ Listen to your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , and your servant .
GOLD:	O Lord , please hear my prayer ! Listen to the prayers of those of us who delight in honoring you . Please grant me success today by making the king favorable to me . Put it into his heart to be kind to me. ” In those days I was the king 's cup-bearer .

ID:	1519
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , díí ááhyiłnínígíí Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii yee haadzíi'ii nik'i hwiidooleeł , shinanit'a'í aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii :
PRED:	“ Son of King , tell me what the Most High has done .
GOLD:	“ ‘ This is what the dream means , Your Majesty , and what the Most High has declared will happen to my lord the king .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	Ákohgo David éí tsiidétáán áádóó tóshjeeh Saul bits'iiyah sinil yę́ę nízhdiinilgo dah nízhdiit'áázh . Diné t'áadoo ła' hoołtsą́ą da , t'áadoo ła' hóónii' da , índa t'áadoo ła' ch'énádzidí da , háálá Bóhólníihii bíniik'ehgo t'áá íiyisí da'jiiłhaazh lá .
PRED:	So David took the spear and cut it from Saul 's head , and he did n't let anyone be afraid of the man of the Lord .
GOLD:	So David took the spear and jug of water that were near Saul 's head . Then he and Abishai got away without anyone seeing them or even waking up , because the Lord had put Saul 's men into a deep sleep .

ID:	1521
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodííniid , Diné Silį́į'ii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ałdó' bee bóhólnííh .
PRED:	Then the Son of Man said , “ The Son of Man is working on the Sabbath day . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus added , “ The Son of Man is Lord , even over the Sabbath . ”

ID:	1522
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	1523
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áii t'óó yáádaa'áago índa mą'ii ba'áán áhodeeshłííł , áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó doo naagháhígóó t'óó dahodeeshzhahgo áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will make Jerusalem desolate , and I will go down to the towns of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	“ I will make Jerusalem into a heap of ruins , ” says the Lord. “ It will be a place haunted by jackals.The towns of Judah will be ghost towns , with no one living in them . ”

ID:	1524
INPUT:	Ana'í akée'di ádooldįįłii éí aniné .
PRED:	But when the time has come , you will be spared .
GOLD:	And the last enemy to be destroyed is death .

ID:	1525
INPUT:	Naal'a'í ła' Jííhu yaa níyáago yił hoolne'go ání , Aláahgo naat'áanii yę́ę biye'kéhę́ę dabitsiits'iin deizhjaa' lá . Áko ííłní , Hoos'įįdjį' yah a'atiingi naakigo ał'ąą ałk'i yanáa'áago ádaohłééh .
PRED:	So Jehu went back to the king and told him , “ I am giving you all the heads of the kings of the land of the earth . ”
GOLD:	A messenger went to Jehu and said , “ They have brought the heads of the king 's sons. ” So Jehu ordered , “ Pile them in two heaps at the entrance of the city gate , and leave them there until morning . ”

ID:	1526
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii hach'į' báhóóchįįdgo dah náhodiidle' .
PRED:	But the Lord was angry with him .
GOLD:	The Lord was very angry with them , and he departed .

ID:	1527
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii biinéé' éí kǫ' ałts'áidiyiił<unk> .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord lights up his voice .
GOLD:	The voice of the Lord strikeswith bolts of lightning .

ID:	1528
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní , Ayóó'áda'ííníi'ní , dadii'níigo t'áadoo t'óó ádadii'níní doo , nidi t'áá aaníinii bee ayóó'áda'ahííníi'níigo ałk'i nideiildzil doo .
PRED:	Dear children , we will not love our children , but we will not love our lives , but we will be filled with love .
GOLD:	Dear children , let 's not merely say that we love each other ; let us show the truth by our actions .

ID:	1529
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Zímrai éí kin haal'á yisnáago yaa ákoniizį́į'go aláahgo naat'áanii bighan náwóne'é níléí ałníi'di haz'ání góne' yah ajííyáago ádík'ijį' bohozhdíínilgo dadziztsą́ ,
PRED:	When Zimri saw that the king was taken into the palace of the town , he went to the palace of the palace .
GOLD:	When Zimri saw that the city had been taken , he went into the citadel of the palace and burned it down over himself and died in the flames .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	Manáseh biye' Jéíyer wolyéii Árgab kéyah t'áá át'é t'áá Gíísher dine'é índa Méíyakah dine'é bihoodzojį' nidi náhodii'ą́ , áádóó bik'ijį' t'áá bí bízhi' yee dayíízhi' . Díí jį́į́góó <unk> yer yee dayózhí .
PRED:	In that day the entire region of Manasseh son of Manasseh , all the nations of Asher , including the tribe of Manasseh , and all the descendants of Manasseh . This was the name of the tribe of Jair .
GOLD:	Jair , a leader from the tribe of Manasseh , conquered the whole Argob region in Bashan , all the way to the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites . Jair renamed this region after himself , calling it the Towns of Jair , as it is still known today . )

ID:	1531
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , chahałheeł nidi doo nits'ąą náshididooł'į́įł da . Tł'éé' éí jį́įgo hool'inígíí nahalin , háálá chahałheeł éí adinídíín t'áá bił aheełt'éego níníł'į́ .
PRED:	“ You will not hide me from light , but you will never see the light of darkness .
GOLD:	but even in darkness I can not hide from you.To you the night shines as bright as day.Darkness and light are the same to you .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii bá nidaal'a'í aláahgo naat'áanii ádeidííniid , Shoo , ná naal'a'í daniidlíinii , bídahwííníilníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , t'áá ánihidiníígóó ádeiit'į́į doogo hasht'e'ádadíníilzin .
PRED:	The king said to his servants , “ Look , we are our master ! We are our king , our lord , our king , and we want us to be our king . ”
GOLD:	“ We are with you , ” his advisers replied . “ Do what you think is best . ”

ID:	1533
INPUT:	Áádóó tsé dilkǫǫhgo ályaaígíí éí Diyin God binaanish át'é , áádóó bik'i na'ashk'aazhgo Diyin God t'áá bí ak'e'ashchį́įgo bikáá' .
PRED:	And the stone tablets of the stone , and the body of God 's body is written .
GOLD:	These tablets were God 's work ; the words on them were written by God himself .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	Damį́įgo azlį́į́' góne' bááh ninádahiitihgo biniyé áłah siidlį́į'go Paul yiską́ągo dah diigháahgo bił ałch'į' hadadzisdzíí' , áko t'áá yáłti'go tł'é'ííłníí' .
PRED:	On the first day of the month , early spring , early the next morning , Paul said to Paul , “ As soon as we pray for us . ”
GOLD:	On the first day of the week , we gathered with the local believers to share in the Lord 's Supper . Paul was preaching to them , and since he was leaving the next day , he kept talking until midnight .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́ Ízrel dine'é t'áá íiyisí niseekai , háálá Saul łahgo haz'ą́ yee hooł'a'go diné yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , T'áadoo e'e'aahí diné ajííyą́ą'ii éí hóyée'go há hadoodzih , áko shi'ana'í dajílínígíí ts'ídá t'áá k'éédahodideeshdlíłí . Áko diné t'áadoo da'ayání i'íí'ą́ .
PRED:	So Saul sent this message to Saul , for Saul had said to his disciples , “ Do n't be afraid of me ! Do n't be afraid of me ! ” And the men of Israel replied , “ I will certainly kill them ! ”
GOLD:	Now the men of Israel were pressed to exhaustion that day , because Saul had placed them under an oath , saying , “ Let a curse fall on anyone who eats before evening — before I have full revenge on my enemies. ” So no one ate anything all day ,

ID:	1536
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá shǫǫdí , k'ad nibee na'azheehí éí nik'aayééł índa ne'ełtį́į́' bił dah diijáahgo halgaigóó dínááh ; áádę́ę́' bįįh bitsį' shá niníyeeh ,
PRED:	Please , my sister , bow , and lead my bow down into the field .
GOLD:	Take your bow and a quiver full of arrows , and go out into the open country to hunt some wild game for me .

ID:	1537
INPUT:	Áádóó ahidiníłnáago ałch'į' ádaaníigo kódaaní , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii éí diyin , diyin , diyin nilį́ ; nihokáá'góó t'áá át'é yee ayóó át'éii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	They said to us , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies is a great nation . ”
GOLD:	They were calling out to each other , “ Holy , holy , holy is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ! The whole earth is filled with his glory ! ”

ID:	1538
INPUT:	Bikéyah hootsoígíí bik'ehgo hwiih daazlį́į́' áádóó bijéí yee ayóó át'éego ádaa dadzoosdli' ; éí bąą t'óó shaa dayooznah .
PRED:	They stripped the land , and they satisfied their hearts , for they have forgotten me .
GOLD:	But when you had eaten and were satisfied , you became proud and forgot me .

ID:	1539
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'é'étiingi dáádiníbaalígíí éí yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii biyi'jį' yistł'ǫ́ǫgo naashch'ąą'go áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the curtains of finely woven linen and embroidered with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Then he made another curtain for the entrance to the sacred tent . He made it of finely woven linen and embroidered it with exquisite designs using blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	1540
INPUT:	Áádóó diné bąąh háálínígíí t'áá háiida éí bíhizhdéé'náa'go éí ha'éé' jidoogis índa nizhdoobeełgo i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didéeh da doo .
PRED:	“ If you touch a man , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If you touch the man with the discharge , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	1541
INPUT:	Zófar éí doo yá'ádaashóonii ádabidi'doolníłígíí yaa halne'
PRED:	Bildad 's Third Response to Zophar
GOLD:	Zophar 's Second Response to Job

ID:	1542
INPUT:	Áko Hérad bizaad k'ehgo John bínaaí James diltłish bee seesyį́ .
PRED:	So Herod 's brother , was killed by the sword of John 's brother .
GOLD:	He had the apostle James ( John 's brother ) killed with a sword .

ID:	1543
INPUT:	Áko ná nidaal'a'í daniidlíinii ánihidííníniid , <unk> deestsééł biniyé bił shaa nohkááh .
PRED:	Then he said to his servants , “ I will see you . ”
GOLD:	“ And you said to us , ‘ Bring him here so I can see him with my own eyes . '

ID:	1544
INPUT:	Dawók'ą́ą́góó k'ídahoneezláágóó bee doo níldinii índa adilyé bee tsi'nisíníyáii áádóó łį́į́' ání nahalingo ádínínígíí t'óó baa yáhásinígi át'éego <unk> jił yę́ę yiiłtsą́ , áko Jerúsalem yinílyéii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Hahgoshą' índa doo yá'át'éehii nąąh ádingo ánándi'doolnííł ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who worship idols in the worship of idols , says the Lord : “ How long will you see how terrible you see ? How long will you see ? How long will you see ? How long will you see you ? How long will you see ? ”
GOLD:	I have seen your adultery and lust , and your disgusting idol worship out in the fields and on the hills.What sorrow awaits you , Jerusalem ! How long before you are pure ? ”

ID:	1545
INPUT:	áko áyidííniid , Nihizhé'é t'ah nahdę́ę́' shich'į' át'éé nít'éé' yę́ę doo shich'į' ákót'éégóó baa ákoniizį́į́' , nidi shizhé'é biDiyin God shił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Then he said to his father , “ I did n't know what I am going to do . But I know that I am the God of my father .
GOLD:	He said to them , “ I have noticed that your father 's attitude toward me has changed . But the God of my father has been with me .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	Nidi saad bee yáti'ii doo shił bééhózin dago , yáłti'ígíí bich'į' náánáła' dine'é nishłį́į doo , áádóó yáłti'ígíí shich'į' náánáła' dine'é nilį́į doo .
PRED:	But I know what I am saying , and one of my people will be like a prophet .
GOLD:	But if I do n't understand a language , I will be a foreigner to someone who speaks it , and the one who speaks it will be a foreigner to me .

ID:	1547
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é bits'ą́ą́' yóó'eekaii yídin nilį́
PRED:	God 's People
GOLD:	The

ID:	1548
INPUT:	Háni'dii Bóhólníihii deidísinii ádaaní , Aa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , O Lord ! His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Let all who fear the Lord repeat : “ His faithful love endures forever . ”

ID:	1549
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí danihizhé'é yę́ę kéyah daabí nít'éé' yę́ę yiih nánihidoo'ishgo danihíí' dooleeł , áádóó yá'át'éhígi ánihoolíił doo , índa danihizhé'é yę́ę biláahgo k'ee'ąą nooht'į́įł doo .
PRED:	Then you will take possession of the land the Lord your God , the God of our ancestors , and take possession of your ancestors .
GOLD:	The Lord your God will return you to the land that belonged to your ancestors , and you will possess that land again . Then he will make you even more prosperous and numerous than your ancestors !

ID:	1550
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́įdi ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí Bóhólníihii yidahididookah áádóó shidine'é danilį́ dadooleeł . Áko nihitahgóó kééhasht'į́į doo áádóó t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nihaa shiníł'a'go nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	In that day you will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the nations will live among you . Then you will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Many nations will join themselves to the Lord on that day , and they , too , will be my people . I will live among you , and you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me to you .

ID:	1551
INPUT:	náánáła' Diyin God bibee adziilii bee éédahózinii álílee k'ehgo ázhdoolíłígíí haidiyii'aah , náánáła' Diyin God bá hojilne' doogo haidiyii'aah , náánáła' éí níłch'i danilíinii nijiłkaah bízhneel'ą́ą doogo haidiyii'aah , náánáła' éí álílee k'ehgo saad bee yájíłti' doogo haidiyii'aah , náánáła' éí saadígíí bee ata' hojilne'go haidiyii'aah ,
PRED:	Then one of the miraculous signs , and one of the ability to give another another message to God . He said , “ He will give another another another message to another person , and he will give another another message to one another person . ”
GOLD:	He gives one person the power to perform miracles , and another the ability to prophesy . He gives someone else the ability to discern whether a message is from the Spirit of God or from another spirit . Still another person is given the ability to speak in unknown languages , while another is given the ability to interpret what is being said .

ID:	1552
INPUT:	Áko ádadííniid , Ííjip dine'é léi' éí nida'niłkaadii nihá yich'ą́ą́h naagháago tó nihá hayiiz'ą́ , áko dibé da'oodlą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then they said , “ A man who brought us out of Egypt , and he drank the flocks of sheep and goats . ”
GOLD:	“ An Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds , ” they answered . “ And then he drew water for us and watered our flocks . ”

ID:	1553
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooii ch'ééh naashzhee'go t'óó dichin bidiyoołhééłáádóó náshdóítsa'ii bitsiijį' ditł'ooii biyázhí t'óó taidoolwoł .
PRED:	A lion will run down ; a lion will run from its prey .
GOLD:	The fierce lion will starve for lack of prey , and the cubs of the lioness will be scattered .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	Haash yit'éego Paul éí Jesus yá naal'a'í silį́į́'
PRED:	One day Paul 's servant
GOLD:	Paul 's Message Comes from Christ

ID:	1555
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii daazgan ; tsin fig naazkaadii daniiłna' . Tsin pámgrenit wolyéii áádóó tsin páam wolyéii índa bilasáana bitsiin daazgan ; tsin t'áá ałtso dá'ák'ehgóó yíl'áii daazgan . Éí bąą diné biye'ké danilíinii yaa bił dahózhóonii ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	The fig trees of the grapevines were grapevines , palm trees , palm trees , palm trees , and all the trees of the trees were filled with olive trees .
GOLD:	The grapevines have dried up , and the fig trees have withered.The pomegranate trees , palm trees , and apple trees — all the fruit trees — have dried up.And the people 's joy has dried up with them .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	Áko baadaaní jílíní , éí ch'ikę́ę́h bizhé'é t'áá ákwii dzizdáa doo hó'níigo bił dzizkéego táá' hwiiską́ ; t'óó ajiyą́ągo áádóó doodlį́įłii jidlą́ągo bighangi hwiiłkááh nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ My father loved her , ” she said . “ She was a woman who had been at night and night . She was waiting for three days . ”
GOLD:	Her father urged him to stay awhile , so he stayed three days , eating , drinking , and sleeping there .

ID:	1557
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Ízrel dine'é yóó'íínánígíí bee hoł hóone' , áko Féro índa há nidaal'a'í dabijéí yee diné yik'ijį' daazlį́į'go tsídadeezkéezgo ádadííniid , Díishą' haa deiit'įįd ; Ízrel dine'é nihá nidaal'a' yę́ę bééda'siilnii' lá .
PRED:	So the king of Egypt sent this message to Pharaoh and his officials , and they said to Pharaoh , “ We have done this to us . We have done nothing for us . ”
GOLD:	When word reached the king of Egypt that the Israelites had fled , Pharaoh and his officials changed their minds . “ What have we done , letting all those Israelite slaves get away ? ” they asked .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání : Asdzání , na'áłchíní t'áadoo hazlį́į'ii , nił hózhǫ́ǫ le' , doo i'niiltsąąhii awéé' doo bídii'néehii , nił hózhǫ́ǫgo dílwosh , háálá asdzání doo ałchíi daígíí asdzání bahastiin yee ba'áłchíní hólóonii biláahgo ha'áłchíní hodooleeł .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say : If your children are born , do n't be married to a woman 's children , for she is not born to her husband 's wife , for she will be born to the woman . ”
GOLD:	As Isaiah said , “ Rejoice , O childless woman , you who have never given birth ! Break into a joyful shout , you who have never been in labor ! For the desolate woman now has more childrenthan the woman who lives with her husband ! ”

ID:	1559
INPUT:	Háíram éí kin bii' sohodizin góne' binaanish
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in the Temple
GOLD:	Furnishings for the Temple

ID:	1560
INPUT:	Jesus aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ayóó át'éii nilį́
PRED:	Jesus , the High Priest in the Kingdom of Jesus
GOLD:	Promised Rest for God 's People

ID:	1561
INPUT:	Nidi t'óó kónígháníjį' ti'dahwiisoonii'dóó bik'ijį' Diyin God , t'áá ałtsojį' jooba'ii , hool'áágóó yee ayóó át'éii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz doo biniyé Christ Jesus yee nihíká ádííniid , t'áá bí t'áá ákogi ádanoht'éego , áádóó danołdzilgo , áádóó danihidziilgo índa nihee dahółdzilgo ánihidoolííł .
PRED:	But if you are suffering in heaven , you will share the joy of God 's grace and peace with you , and you will live in Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ . And he will give you his mercy , and he will give you his mercy .
GOLD:	In his kindness God called you to share in his eternal glory by means of Christ Jesus . So after you have suffered a little while , he will restore , support , and strengthen you , and he will place you on a firm foundation .

ID:	1562
INPUT:	Áko bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso bíighah ch'ídahaazná . Áádóó Kéreth dine'é t'áá ałtso , Pííleth dine'é t'áá ał tso índa Gathdóó dine'é t'áá ałtso éí diné hastą́ądi neeznádiingo Gath kin haal'áádóó hakéé' naakaígíí aláahgo naat'áanii yilą́ąjį' niníná .
PRED:	So all the men of Gath , and all the men of Gath were afraid of them . So they followed the king of Gath and all the men of Gath .
GOLD:	to let all the king 's men move past to lead the way . There were 600 men from Gath who had come with David , along with the king 's bodyguard .

ID:	1563
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God , ałk'idą́ą́' nihokáá' dine'é doo dabidísingóó biniinaa doo yaa hą́ą́h niizį́į́'góó tó yee íísdįįd . Nidi Nóah éí ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é yaa halne'ii áádóó t'áá tsosts'id jilt'éhégo bił yisdájookai .
PRED:	Then God began to destroy the world , and he began to destroy the world . But when he died , he began to save them from the flood .
GOLD:	And God did not spare the ancient world — except for Noah and the seven others in his family . Noah warned the world of God 's righteous judgment . So God protected Noah when he destroyed the world of ungodly people with a vast flood .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	Éí diné doo ła' shighaidoolyéeł da , nidi t'áá shíniik'eh ninádinish'aah . Bee óhólnííh shee hólǫ́ǫgo ninádinish'aah , áádóó bee óhólnííh shee hólǫ́ǫgo náádideeshdlééł ; díí bi'deeshłíiłgo shiTaa' bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii át'é .
PRED:	And if someone has left me , I will lose my life , but I will teach you everything I do . And I will teach you the Father 's commands , and I will give you everything I do .
GOLD:	No one can take my life from me . I sacrifice it voluntarily . For I have the authority to lay it down when I want to and also to take it up again . For this is what my Father has commanded . ”

ID:	1565
INPUT:	kót'éego doo ákwii áhóót'įįdígíí ałdó' át'éego ándahwii'aahii yaa nídadóot'įįłgo atídeidoolííł nít'éé' ; kósdzaago éí , Diyin God yót'áahdi hólóonii doo shídéét'i' da , dííniid doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	And if you were guilty , you will be guilty of judgment , who will be committed by worshiping God , who would not be able to stand before me .
GOLD:	If so , I should be punished by the judges , for it would mean I had denied the God of heaven .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	Abínídóó níléí e'e'áahjį' áho'dooldįįł ; ła'da doo haa ákonízingóó hool'áágóó ájoodįįł .
PRED:	He will disappear from the evening , and he will destroy them forever .
GOLD:	They are alive in the morning but dead by evening , gone forever without a trace .

ID:	1567
INPUT:	Áko ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígi nááda'iiłniihii niinínilgo <unk> i bida'iiníziinii áádóó béégashii yáázh be'elyaii áyiilaii yaa yisįįd .
PRED:	He rebuilt the pagan shrines at the pagan shrines and placed it on the horns of the priests and the calf he had made .
GOLD:	Jeroboam appointed his own priests to serve at the pagan shrines , where they worshiped the goat and calf idols he had made .

ID:	1568
INPUT:	Diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo índa asdzání bił naazhtéezhii t'ááłá'í nítínígo ałtso nidadoołtsił .
PRED:	All who are men and women will be killed , and those who are women will kill them .
GOLD:	“ This is what you are to do , ” they said . “ Completely destroy all the males and every woman who is not a virgin . ”

ID:	1569
INPUT:	Áko náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí shijé'ígíí bit'áahjį' nizhníyáago Daniel bich' į' yéego chayi' hazhdoolghaazhgo ájíní , Daniel , Diyin God Hináanii yá naal'a'í nílíinii , niDiyin God t'áá áłahjį' bá nanil'a'ígíísh náshdóítsoh bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánííłtį́įgo yínéés'ąąd ?
PRED:	Then a lion approached me and cried out to Daniel , “ Have you seen the voice of God ? ” He cried out , “ O God , the lion of the living God ! ”
GOLD:	When he got there , he called out in anguish , “ Daniel , servant of the living God ! Was your God , whom you serve so faithfully , able to rescue you from the lions ? ”

ID:	1570
INPUT:	Háálá ánihidishní , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii índa aláahgo nidant'áii lą'í yilt'éego daah'ínígíí k'adę́ę dayiiłtsééh , nidi t'áadoo dayiiłtsą́ą da , áádóó dadoohts'a'ígíí k'adę́ę deidiits'į́į́h , nidi t'áadoo deidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	For I tell you the prophets , the prophets and the prophets have never heard what you say . But you do n't listen to what you have seen .
GOLD:	I tell you , many prophets and kings longed to see what you see , but they did n't see it . And they longed to hear what you hear , but they did n't hear it . ”

ID:	1571
INPUT:	áádóó David ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bee óhólníihii bighadinisht'ą́ągo naa diní'ą́ , nidi shá naal'a'í David yę́ę shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yik'eh hół'į́į́ nít'éé' áádóó bijéí t'áá át'é yee shikéé' yigááł nít'éé' , índa t'áá ákwii ádaat'éii shinááł áyoolííł nít'éé' , nidi ni éí t'áadoo ákwíinidzaa da ,
PRED:	David refused to obey the commands of David and his servant David , but he refused to obey my commands . He did not follow my commands and commands .
GOLD:	I ripped the kingdom away from the family of David and gave it to you . But you have not been like my servant David , who obeyed my commands and followed me with all his heart and always did whatever I wanted .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	Hilkáíyah bits'ą́ą́dóó Hashabáíyah , Jedéíyah bits'ą́ą́dóó Niithániyel .
PRED:	From the family of Hilkiah , Jedaiah , leader of the family of Jedaiah .
GOLD:	Hashabiah was leader of the family of Hilkiah.Nethanel was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	nidi ákódadooníiłgi doo bá ashja da'aléeh da , háálá diné t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí dahwíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the people could n't get him into the crowd because they could n't find him .
GOLD:	But they could think of nothing , because all the people hung on every word he said .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	Nidi Hérad daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' , jó'akon , Ííjipgi Jóseph nayiiyeełgo Bóhólníhii bidiyingo naal'a'í bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago
PRED:	But when Herod 's death arrived in Egypt , the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in Egypt ,
GOLD:	When Herod died , an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt .

ID:	1575
INPUT:	Bináá' éí wáin biláahgo dinilzhin doo , Índa biwoo' éí abe' biláahgo łigai doo .
PRED:	His eyes is more sweet than the wine of wine , and the wine of the wine of the Almighty .
GOLD:	His eyes are darker than wine , and his teeth are whiter than milk .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá k'é hólǫ́ǫ doo , nízingo yee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii yee bidziilígíí t'áá át'é yił doonééł ; éí ákódoonííł . Ííjip dine'é binanit'a'í yił náhodooshǫǫł biniyé bitsi' ła' yeidoołtééł , nidi doo háká adoolwoł da , doo nidi hadziilgo áhodoolíił da .
PRED:	He will give his greetings to his master , but he will not let the king of Egypt . He will not be afraid of his master , but he will not be afraid of his daughter .
GOLD:	He will make plans to come with the might of his entire kingdom and will form an alliance with the king of the south . He will give him a daughter in marriage in order to overthrow the kingdom from within , but his plan will fail .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' nijigháhígíí éí hayáázh jishchį́ , áko bízhi' Mó'ab bee jíízhi' ; t'áá éí Mó'ab dine'é díí jį́į́góó dahinánígíí bizhé'é jílį́ .
PRED:	So he gave birth to a son named Moab , and he named the name of Moab . And this is the name of Moab .
GOLD:	When the older daughter gave birth to a son , she named him Moab . He became the ancestor of the nation now known as the Moabites .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	Áko nídzídzáago Dził Íífreiyimdi deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí bee ázhdííniidgo Ízrel dine'é dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hoł adah deíjeehgo bilą́ąjį' joolwołgo
PRED:	When the men of Ephraim returned to the hill country of Ephraim , the people of Israel cried out to the mountain ,
GOLD:	When he arrived in the hill country of Ephraim , Ehud sounded a call to arms . Then he led a band of Israelites down from the hills .

ID:	1579
INPUT:	Nidi nááda'iiłniihii t'óó ahayóí áádóó Líívai dine'é índa azhé'é danilíinii bindanit'a'í t'áá éí bizhé'é yę́ę danilíinii éí áłtséedi kin yę́ę yéédaalniihgo díí atł'ááh nástł'inii ałtso ályaago dayiiłtsą́ągo ayóó íits'a'go dadilwoshgo daachxa , nidi t'óó ahayóí éí bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo ayóó íits'a'go dadilwosh .
PRED:	But when the priests and Levites saw this , they praised the Temple of the priests and Levites who were standing in awe of their ancestors , shouting , “ Amen ! ”
GOLD:	But many of the older priests , Levites , and other leaders who had seen the first Temple wept aloud when they saw the new Temple 's foundation . The others , however , were shouting for joy .

ID:	1580
INPUT:	índa éí jį́ áádóó tł'éé' yee bóhólníih doo ; adinídínígíí chahałheeł yił ałts'ánéí'nił doo ałdó' biniyé . Áko Diyin God éí yinééł'į́į'go bił yá'íít'ééh .
PRED:	That night the night the night and night the night , and the night they could see the night . And God saw that he would have done for them .
GOLD:	to govern the day and night , and to separate the light from the darkness . And God saw that it was good .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	Áádóó nihí hodínóotahjį' nihi'óółnííh lágo , nidi bąąhági át'éii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánihiyínííł . [ Háálá ahóyéel'áágóó ni t'éí nóhólnííh áádóó t'áadoo bee nóodziilí da , índa ayóó ánít'é . T'áá ákót'ée doo . ]
PRED:	Do n't let us be afraid of you , but you will save us from your power and power . ”
GOLD:	And do n't let us yield to temptation , but rescue us from the evil one .

ID:	1582
INPUT:	Áko éí nínéidii'ą́ągo dabik'isóó índa yił kéédahat'íinii áyididooniił , Shaa hohkááh , shił nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' . Jó , béésh łigaii yóó'ííłne'ígíí náádii'ą́ .
PRED:	Then he will say to his brothers and sisters , ‘ I have given you a gift of silver and silver . '
GOLD:	And when she finds it , she will call in her friends and neighbors and say , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost coin . '

ID:	1583
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehígíí bitahgi ła' niinínil , átséhé góne' daal'aadii , naakií góne' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii , táá' góne' nida'nitinii , áádóó Diyin God bibee adziilii bee éédahózinii álílee k'ehgo yaa nidaakaii , índa hadaałt'é ánída'oodlíiłii , áádóó áká anídaajahii , áádóó ándaha'áii , índa álílee k'ehgo yáti' yee yádaałti'ii .
PRED:	Then some of the church who were in the church in the church in the church . One of the group of prophets who were speaking in the church , and two prophets .
GOLD:	Here are some of the parts God has appointed for the church : first are apostles , second are prophets , third are teachers , then those who do miracles , those who have the gift of healing , those who can help others , those who have the gift of leadership , those who speak in unknown languages .

ID:	1584
INPUT:	Nidi náá'iiłniihii éí łóód hak'i niníkę́zígíí yiníł'į́įgo doo t'áá íiyisí haní'íígháázhgóogo áádóó tsiighá doo ła' łizhingóó náá'iiłniihii éí t'áá sahdii tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' hadádi'doołkał .
PRED:	But if the priest finds the sore of the affected area , the priest must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If the priest examines the scabby sore and finds that it is only skin-deep but there is no black hair on it , he must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	1585
INPUT:	Tsin tł'óół neeznáá bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii áádóó tsin tł'óół naakits'áadah bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii índa béésh dilní bee í'dílzoołí yee nidaanéego Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizinjį' nákai .
PRED:	The harp and the music of the music of the Lord 's Temple , the lyre and harp .
GOLD:	They marched into Jerusalem to the music of harps , lyres , and trumpets , and they proceeded to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é shits'áhaaskai yę́ędą́ą́' Líívai dine'é nízaadgóó shits'ákaígíí éí ha'eda'alyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáago doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdii biniinaa atídaho'dil'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ When the Levites returned to me , they will worship my idols in worshiping idols . They will be defiled because of their sins .
GOLD:	And the men of the tribe of Levi who abandoned me when Israel strayed away from me to worship idols must bear the consequences of their unfaithfulness .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí adahwiis'a'go aa nihizhdookahgóó ajookai ; éí Béthel kin shijaa'ígíí áádóó Éí'ai kin haal'áhígíí bita'gi Éí'ai e'e'aahjígo aa nijiyeekai . Nidi t'áá éí bitł'éé' Jáshowa éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdi biiską́ .
PRED:	So Joshua sent messengers to the town of Bethel , and the town of Bethel ( which means “ The town of Ai , ” Joshua told the Israelites .
GOLD:	So they left and went to the place of ambush between Bethel and the west side of Ai . But Joshua remained among the people in the camp that night .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	1589
INPUT:	Ámon dine'é bit'áahjį' oonáago bich'į' dahodiyółnááł lágo , áádóó t'áadoo bił na'ahíyádaałti'í ; jó , Ámon dine'é bikéyah doo t'áá k'ad nihíí' íishłaa da , háálá éí Lat ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bíí' dadooleełgo baa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	When the Ammonites attacked the camp , the men of the Ammonites attacked them , I gave them victory over the land of the Ammonites , for I have given them victory over the land of the Ammonites .
GOLD:	and enter the land of the Ammonites , the descendants of Lot . But do not bother them or start a war with them . I have given the land of Ammon to them as their property , and I will not give you any of their land . ' ”

ID:	1590
INPUT:	Nidi ábijiní , Diyin God bizaad deidiits'a' áádóó yik'eh dahół'íinii éí shimá índa shik'isóó danilį́ .
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Listen to my own brothers and sisters . They are my brothers and sisters . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My mother and my brothers are all those who hear God 's word and obey it . ”

ID:	1591
INPUT:	Diyin God bíká dibáá' jílíinii
PRED:	thirst for God
GOLD:	Book Two

ID:	1592
INPUT:	Nidashinitinii t'áá ałtso biláahgo shił ééhózin , háálá bee hahíínídzíi'ii éí nabik'ítséskeesii ádaat'é .
PRED:	I know your laws , for your laws are my laws .
GOLD:	Yes , I have more insight than my teachers , for I am always thinking of your laws .

ID:	1593
INPUT:	Éí néidiiką́ągo kintahgóó anáádzá ; nihizdeesnilígíí bizháá'áád jílį́į́ nít'é'ígíí bich'į' ííshją́ą́ ájiilaa áádóó ch'iyáán bi'oh ajííyą́'ígíí baazhnínil .
PRED:	On the third day he took his mother-in-law from the town and gave it to his daughter-in-law . He gave them food and food to eat .
GOLD:	She carried it back into town and showed it to her mother-in-law . Ruth also gave her the roasted grain that was left over from her meal .

ID:	1594
INPUT:	Ákohgo Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah éí áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii Hananáíyah áyidííniid , Ge' , Hananáíyah yinílyéii , Bóhólníihii doo nííł'aad da , áko diné nííní'aa'ígíí éí yaa dadzólíigo íinilaa .
PRED:	Then the prophet said to Jeremiah , “ Listen to what the Lord has done to me , and I will do n't want to understand what the Lord has done . ”
GOLD:	Then Jeremiah the prophet said to Hananiah , “ Listen , Hananiah ! The Lord has not sent you , but the people believe your lies .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	<unk> dánii éí ayęęzhii yik'i sidáago t'áadoo hayiyííłjé'ígi át'éego diné na'adlo' bee yit'íinii nishóiyoołt'eehii ákót'é ; éí hastóí dooleełígíí bich'į' bíídíiską́ągo yit'íinii bits'ą́ą́' háájí shį́į́ silį́į'go doo áhojilyą́ą́góó dazdootsaał .
PRED:	“ Do n't be like a man who has been cut off from the mouth of a man who has been cut off , for he has become wise . He will die , and he will die .
GOLD:	Like a partridge that hatches eggs she has not laid , so are those who get their wealth by unjust means.At midlife they will lose their riches ; in the end , they will become poor old fools .

ID:	1596
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' doo nąąh hólónígóó ándeesh łííł , índa nikin hadaas'áágóó doo nidaagháhí da doo , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will make you an object of ridicule , and your towns will be desolate , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will make you desolate forever . Your cities will never be rebuilt . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1597
INPUT:	Ándahwii'aahii nidahaas'nil
PRED:	Josiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jethro 's Wise Advice

ID:	1598
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é doo bada'ahódlíii bił ííshją́ą́ ádahóle'
PRED:	Blessings for Israel 's Punishment
GOLD:	Blessings Promised for Obedience

ID:	1599
INPUT:	Eihazáíyah éí Júdah dine'é yinant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah

ID:	1600
INPUT:	Béégashii naatseedjį' béégashii eedlózígíí nahalingo , éí doodaléi' diné doo áhályáanii akétsíín niná'niłí biih bi'doodlózígi ádziidzaa ;
PRED:	a oxen for a cart , a cows have been like a cart , and a one-year-old male lamb for a cart .
GOLD:	He followed her at once , like an ox going to the slaughter.He was like a stag caught in a trap ,

ID:	1601
INPUT:	Ákohgo honoojíígóó ch'íkaigo Íídam kéyah áádóó Mó'ab kéyah yik'ee'ąą ahéná'ná . Áádóó Mó'ab kéyah ha'a'aahjígo Árnan tooh nílíní wónaaníjígo niníná , nidi Mó'ab kéyah t'áadoo biih jíínáa da , háálá Árnan tooh nílíní éí Mó'ab kéyah bee ałts'áhoodzo .
PRED:	So they left the wilderness of Moab and went out to the land of Moab and conquered the Arnon River . They said , “ The land of Moab will live in the land of Moab , for Moab is left by the Arnon River . ”
GOLD:	“ Finally , they went around Edom and Moab through the wilderness . They traveled along Moab 's eastern border and camped on the other side of the Arnon River . But they never once crossed the Arnon River into Moab , for the Arnon was the border of Moab .

ID:	1602
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shisodizin shá diits'į́į́h ; chánahgo nánooshkąąhígíí baa ákonínízin .
PRED:	Listen to my prayer , O Lord ; listen to my plea .
GOLD:	Listen closely to my prayer , O Lord ; hear my urgent cry .

ID:	1603
INPUT:	Diné kódaolyéhígíí éí kéyah hadeidoosił biniyé Mózes abiis'a' . Áko Mózes éí Nan biye' Hoshíya wolyéii Jáshowa bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	The next day Moses sent the men to explore the land of Israel . Joshua son of Nun , which means “ Joshua son of Nun . ”
GOLD:	These are the names of the men Moses sent out to explore the land . ( Moses called Hoshea son of Nun by the name Joshua . )

ID:	1604
INPUT:	nidi t'áá bí bindahagha' bídadéét'i'ii biniinaa , índa Paul éí ła' Jesus yolyéii daaztsą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí t'ahdii hiná níigo ałdó' biniinaa hoł ałgha'da'dit'ááh lá .
PRED:	But they did n't believe that Paul was dead because of his body , and he was dead . ( This was the one who had died . )
GOLD:	Instead , it was something about their religion and a dead man named Jesus , who Paul insists is alive .

ID:	1605
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Ádam yi'iiłhaazh , áko ajiiłhaazhgo hátsą́ą́' ła' hayíítą́ągo hatsį' ałch'į' ánáyiidlaa .
PRED:	When the Lord God saw Adam , he wrapped it in his hand and found it in his hand .
GOLD:	So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep . While the man slept , the Lord God took out one of the man 's ribs and closed up the opening .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	Háálá kin bitł'ááh nída'astł'ingo haal'áii t'áá éí Diyin God yinahaz'ą́ągo áyiilaii nijólíí nít'éé' .
PRED:	For God created the walls of the city , who made the temple of God .
GOLD:	Abraham was confidently looking forward to a city with eternal foundations , a city designed and built by God .

ID:	1607
INPUT:	Béégashii , doodaii' dóola bikee' áádóó bidee' hólóonii nááhániihii biláahgo Bóhólníihii díí yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	“ If a young ox or a ram , it will be joyful , and the Lord will rejoice .
GOLD:	For this will please the Lord more than sacrificing cattle , more than presenting a bull with its horns and hooves .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	Diyin God éí eda'alyaii yich'į' nidahałáhígíí yich'į' báhóóchįįd
PRED:	A Plot against God
GOLD:	Judah 's Persistent Idolatry

ID:	1609
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Átséédą́ą́' tsé dilkǫǫhgo naaki naa nínil yę́ęgi át'éego ła' hasht'e'nibí'dííłniił , áádóó tsé dilkǫǫhii síníłts'ilígíí saad bikáá' sinil nít'éé' yę́ęgi át'éego bikáa'gi bee ak'enáá'deeshchííł .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ If you were carrying the stone tablets inscribed with two stone tablets inscribed with the tablets of the tablets of the tablets of the tablets of the Lord , I will pour out the tablets of the tablets of the body . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told Moses , “ Chisel out two stone tablets like the first ones . I will write on them the same words that were on the tablets you smashed .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , k'ad shéénílniih , nánooshkąąh , ninááł t'áá aaníígóó áádóó t'áá ákogi ánísht'éego níyá , áádóó ninááł yá'ádaat'éehii baa niséyá . Áko Heziikáíyah t'áá íiyisí jíícha .
PRED:	O Lord , thank me , and I will thank you for doing what is right in the Lord 's sight . Then I will weep and wept before Hezekiah .
GOLD:	“ Remember , O Lord , how I have always been faithful to you and have served you single-mindedly , always doing what pleases you. ” Then he broke down and wept bitterly .

ID:	1611
INPUT:	Doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii ba'áłchíní doo dahodooleeł da , áádóó bee nahodi'yoonihii hoł yá'ádaat'éhígíí dahaníbaal adadidook'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	They will not be ashamed of their children , and their children will be consumed by evil spirits .
GOLD:	For the godless are barren.Their homes , enriched through bribery , will burn .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	Bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yee hahaasdzíi'ii t'áadoo bits'áníyáa da ; t'áá ákónéehee shich'i<unk> 'ígíí biláahgo saad yee shich'į' haadzí'ígíí t'áá íiyisí ílį́įgo ádííníshtą' nít'éé' .
PRED:	They refused to obey my commands and refused to obey my commands .
GOLD:	I have not departed from his commands , but have treasured his words more than daily food .

ID:	1613
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é béésh łigaii áádóó óola deíjáahgo ch'íiní'eezh ; hatahdóó t'áá ałtso dabidziilgo ch'íníná .
PRED:	So the people of Israel led their silver and gold , and they brought them out of the land .
GOLD:	The Lord brought his people out of Egypt , loaded with silver and gold ; and not one among the tribes of Israel even stumbled .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehgo ájooníłígíí bąą ti'hodi'yoolnííh
PRED:	Judgment on False Prophets
GOLD:	Husbands

ID:	1615
INPUT:	Shizaad t'áá ałtso éí kéyah bik'ijį' haasdzíi'ii bohodoolnííł . Jeremáíyah éí ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso yee yik'ijį' haadzíi'ii díí naaltsoos biyi' bik'inídaháasdzooígíí bohodoolnííł .
PRED:	The rest of my messages are recorded in The Book of Jeremiah . All the nations are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of the nations .
GOLD:	I will bring upon them all the terrors I have promised in this book — all the penalties announced by Jeremiah against the nations .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	Ch'il t'óó bik'i nisoohkaii shidibé deiłchozh , áádóó tó tááchxąą'go ádaohłaii shidibé deidlą́ .
PRED:	“ You are my darling , my darling , my shepherd , and you are my shepherd .
GOLD:	Why must my flock eat what you have trampled down and drink water you have fouled ?

ID:	1617
INPUT:	Áko jį́į́dą́ą́' tó hahadleehgi níyá , áádóó ádíshní , Éíbraham shinanit'a'í biDiyin God Bóhólníihii nílíinii , biniyé yisháłígíí bee shíká anilyeed .
PRED:	That day I went to the place where I said , “ O Lord , the God of Abraham , has come to help me . ”
GOLD:	“ So today when I came to the spring , I prayed this prayer : ‘ O Lord , God of my master , Abraham , please give me success on this mission .

ID:	1618
INPUT:	Éí bąą bił áda'azįįdgo bee dahazlį́'ígíí áádóó hasht'edayósinii ałtso <unk> Tó Ch'ínílíní hoolyéégóó ha'naa yił ahineezdaa' .
PRED:	So you see what you say , ‘ You are going to drink from the desert , the desert desert desert desert is the source of water . '
GOLD:	The people grab their possessionsand carry them across the Ravine of Willows .

ID:	1619
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Líívai dine'é nohłíinii , dashíínółts'ą́ą́' , ádadołdéehgo danihizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hodiyingo haz'ą́ągo áńdaahdlééh áádóó t'óó badaa'ihii hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'ídahohjááh .
PRED:	Then he said , “ Listen to me , O Levites , and do n't want to rebuild the Temple of the Lord your God and to rebuild the Temple of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	He said to them , “ Listen to me , you Levites ! Purify yourselves , and purify the Temple of the Lord , the God of your ancestors . Remove all the defiled things from the sanctuary .

ID:	1620
INPUT:	shí bii' honishłǫ́ índa ni shii' honílǫ́ , áko ts'ídá t'ááłá'í danilį́į dooleeł , áko shííníł'a'ígíí índa ayóó'áshííní'nínígi át'éego ayóó'ííní'nínígíí nihokáá' dine'é bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I am with you , and you are my followers . Then you will know that I am the one you have loved me .
GOLD:	I am in them and you are in me . May they experience such perfect unity that the world will know that you sent me and that you love them as much as you love me .

ID:	1621
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Clears the Temple

ID:	1622
INPUT:	Díí dabizhé'é yę́ę dabighandóó alą́ąjį' nidaakaii : Ízrel bá alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí Rúben wolyéii biye'ké éí Héínak áádóó Pállu áádóó Hézran índa <unk> daolyé . Díí Rúben ba'áłchíní ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the oldest sons of Reuben , Gad , and the oldest sons of Reuben . These were the sons of Reuben . These were the sons of Reuben .
GOLD:	These are the ancestors of some of the clans of Israel : The sons of Reuben , Israel 's oldest son , were Hanoch , Pallu , Hezron , and Carmi . Their descendants became the clans of Reuben .

ID:	1623
INPUT:	Bįįh , jádítsoh , bįįh łitsoii , tł'ízí ałchinii , tsétah tł'ízí , jádí índa tsétah dibé daahsą́ .
PRED:	“ You are the wild animals , wild animals , goats , and goats , and Canaan .
GOLD:	the deer , the gazelle , the roe deer , the wild goat , the addax , the antelope , and the mountain sheep .

ID:	1624
INPUT:	Binaalye'é índa yódí éí bighan góne' hólǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó bit'áá ákogi é'ét'éii ahóyéel'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	His wealth is written in his palace , and his wealth will be forever .
GOLD:	They themselves will be wealthy , and their good deeds will last forever .

ID:	1625
INPUT:	Naaltsoos ałch'į' yisdisii yit'ahgo ił ádzaa
PRED:	A Vision of the Covenant
GOLD:	A Flying Scroll

ID:	1626
INPUT:	Áko diné da<unk> ts'ą́'ígíí ałtso bich'į' niyázh'níłti'go Kapérniyamgi jiníyá .
PRED:	When the people heard what he had happened , he went to Capernaum to Capernaum .
GOLD:	When Jesus had finished saying all this to the people , he returned to Capernaum .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	Iiláísha éí Damáskas kin haal'áajį' níyá , áko Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Ben-héídad daatsaah lá , áko , Diyin God yá naal'a'í kwe'é níyá , ha'níigo bił hóóne' .
PRED:	Elisha went to Damascus and told him , “ A man of Aram is our master , ” Ben-hadad told him . “ He is here , ” he told him .
GOLD:	Elisha went to Damascus , the capital of Aram , where King Ben-hadad lay sick . When someone told the king that the man of God had come ,

ID:	1628
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné éí Mózes nayíyádaałti'go kódaaní , Tó dadiidlį́łígíí nihaa diní'aah . Áko Mózes áhodííniid , Ha'át'íí biniinaa nashíyádaałti' ? Ha'át'íí biniyé Bóhólníihii nibídanohtaah ?
PRED:	So Moses said to the people , “ Tell us , why should we do ? ” So Moses asked the Lord , “ Why are you talking about me ? Why are you the test of the water ? ”
GOLD:	So once more the people complained against Moses . “ Give us water to drink ! ” they demanded. “ Quiet ! ” Moses replied . “ Why are you complaining against me ? And why are you testing the Lord ? ”

ID:	1629
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bich'į' ádił ni'iidzííh éí aniné niyiilé , nidi Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii bee Diyin God éí iiná doo ninít'i'ii t'áá jíík'e nihainílá .
PRED:	For God has given you a sin offering to the Lord Jesus Christ , but he has given us life .
GOLD:	For the wages of sin is death , but the free gift of God is eternal life through Christ Jesus our Lord .

ID:	1630
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádzaagóó ni<unk> nitinígíí éí t'óó ádahozhdil'į́įgo daal'aadii dajílį́ , naalnishí binda'adlo'ii dajílį́ , éí Christ yá daal'aadii t'óó béé'ádahozhdil'į́ .
PRED:	For if the Scriptures say , “ The apostles are not guilty of the apostles who do n't know the truth of Christ . ”
GOLD:	These people are false apostles . They are deceitful workers who disguise themselves as apostles of Christ .

ID:	1631
INPUT:	1Chr . 1 : <unk>
PRED:	The Birth of Esau
GOLD:	Rulers of Edom

ID:	1632
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego ałdó' diné éí asdzání bá ádabi'diilyaii yóó'adeideez'ą́ągo , jó , t'áá bída ahaa nináldeehgo adáhonooní bi'niighą́ą́' , diné t'óó baa yáhásinígi át'éego ahaa nináldeeh , áko t'áá bí nida'iisíhígíí yee até'él'į́ yą́ą́h danilį́įgo ádá dayókeed .
PRED:	And he said , “ If a man has committed a pagan shrine prostitutes in the field , he has committed many sins for those who do evil . He has been put to death , and he has put to death . ”
GOLD:	And the men , instead of having normal sexual relations with women , burned with lust for each other . Men did shameful things with other men , and as a result of this sin , they suffered within themselves the penalty they deserved .

ID:	1633
INPUT:	Nich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádzaa ládą́ą́' , éí doodaléi' bąąh háínítsi ládą́ą́' éí shígo shik'ijį' naaltsoos bik'i díízoh .
PRED:	“ Do n't you remember what you have done to me , and you tore my yoke on my side .
GOLD:	If he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything , charge it to me .

ID:	1634
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí dadzitsaah nít'éé' , áádóó k'asdą́ą́' dadziztsą́ , nidi Diyin God haa joozba' , nidi doo t'áá hó t'éiyá da , shí ałdó' doo yínííł shide ádooníił da biniyé shaa joozba' .
PRED:	Yes , we have seen God and died , but we have no mercy . But God has n't been willing to help me , but we have no mercy .
GOLD:	And he certainly was ill ; in fact , he almost died . But God had mercy on him — and also on me , so that I would not have one sorrow after another .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	Jó , shí ałdó' shizhé'é biye' nishłį́įgo , t'ah dinisht'ódígo t'áá shí t'éí shimá ayóó'áshó'níí nít'ée'go ,
PRED:	I am my father , my father , and my mother is my mother .
GOLD:	For I , too , was once my father 's son , tenderly loved as my mother 's only child .

ID:	1636
INPUT:	Áko badahojoobá'íii éí béésh łigaii bee nidahidiilnih áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii éí ké bee nidahidiilnih índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' bizhool nihaa nidahidoonih .
PRED:	The poor will be handed over to the poor , silver , wheat , wheat , wheat , wheat , wheat , wheat , and disease .
GOLD:	And you mix the grain you sellwith chaff swept from the floor.Then you enslave poor peoplefor one piece of silver or a pair of sandals .

ID:	1637
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Abner Joins Forces with David

ID:	1638
INPUT:	Danizhé'é naazį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi niye'ké naazį́į dooleeł ; nahasdzáán t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' bikáá'góó naat'áanii danilį́įgo ádadííliił .
PRED:	Give his sons to the kings of the earth , and give them authority to the earth .
GOLD:	Your sons will become kings like their father.You will make them rulers over many lands .

ID:	1639
INPUT:	Dé'éyóní éí ínáóltą'í biniyé béeso bada'ayohníiłgo t'áá áko , nidi nihikwá'ásiní éí ínáóltą'í t'áágééd béeso bada'ayohníił doo ; ákót'éego Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí baa nidaahkaii t'áá ałtso yik'ijidlíigo kéyah biih wohnéehgo ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Do n't charge interest on interest in interest in interest in charge interest on you . Do n't charge interest in charge interest in the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	You may charge interest to foreigners , but you may not charge interest to Israelites , so that the Lord your God may bless you in everything you do in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	1640
INPUT:	Áko ánáádahodoo'niid , T'áá bąąhági ánít'éego ni'dizhchį́ , da' ákoósh nanihinítin ? Áko Jew dine'é áłah nádleehdóó yits'ádahast'e' .
PRED:	Then they said , “ If you have a son of man , what should you be circumcised ? ” So they gathered from the community .
GOLD:	“ You were born a total sinner ! ” they answered . “ Are you trying to teach us ? ” And they threw him out of the synagogue .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	Éí bąą bits'ąą ádaa áhólyą́ą dooleełii baa nánooshkąąh ; wáin , doodaii' tó tsi'na'iiłáii t'áadoo nidlání , índa doo daadą́ą́góó bee nihá haz'áanii doo ła' dííyį́įł da ,
PRED:	So do n't be afraid of the cup of wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink .
GOLD:	So be careful ; you must not drink wine or any other alcoholic drink nor eat any forbidden food .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	Áko t'áá bí bee Ízrel dine'é nayídeintaahgo bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii dayíists'ą́ą'go daats'í bił béédahodoozįįł ; éí dabizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' Mózes yiniit'aa yee haadzíí' nít'éé' .
PRED:	So when the Israelites heard what they were saying , they would know that Moses had obeyed the commands of Moses .
GOLD:	These people were left to test the Israelites — to see whether they would obey the commands the Lord had given to their ancestors through Moses .

ID:	1643
INPUT:	Áko ha'asídí ání , Baa nitsískeesgo alą́ąjį' yilwołígíí éí Zéídak biye' Ahímeiyaz nidzit'i'ígi át'éego yilwoł . Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Éí lá éí diné yá'át'éehii át'į́ ni . Áko hane' yá'át'éehii yoo'áałgo át'į́ .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Ahimaaz replied . “ I 'll tell you the king what is right . ” And the king said , “ and he will tell you what you are doing . ”
GOLD:	“ The first man runs like Ahimaaz son of Zadok , ” the watchman said. “ He is a good man and comes with good news , ” the king replied .

ID:	1644
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó sohodizingo t'áá aaníí Diyin God doo yidiits'a' da , índa Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii doo yik'ítsídíłkees da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid to hear the truth of God , and the Almighty does n't know the Almighty .
GOLD:	But it is wrong to say God does n't listen , to say the Almighty is n't concerned .

ID:	1645
INPUT:	Lébanah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Héígabah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Shálmai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	From the family of Lebanon : Uel ,
GOLD:	Lebanah , Hagabah , Shalmai ,

ID:	1646
INPUT:	Ákohgo neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii yiih yiyíínil , áádóó éí tsits'aa' tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí t'áá ałch'ijí ní'áago áyiilaa , áádóó aa a'ááh hasinii bił haz'áanii bidadinítą́ągo áyiilaa ,
PRED:	He threw the Ark of the Covenant into the Ark of the Covenant and placed it on the Ark of the Covenant . He overlaid the Ark with the Ark of the Covenant ,
GOLD:	He took the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant and placed them inside the Ark . Then he attached the carrying poles to the Ark , and he set the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on top of it .

ID:	1647
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso hazaad deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'óó bił adahayóigo ádadííniid , Jerúsalemdi díí yízhí dayózhíigo sodadilzinígíí ádooldįįł nízingo atííł'į́į́ nít'é'ígíí da' doósh éí át'į́į da ? Índa ła' bidazh'dootł'óołgo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii baazhdoo'ishísh doo biniyé jiníyáa da ?
PRED:	When they heard this , they said to him , “ Do n't you turn to the gods of Jerusalem ? Do n't you turn to the gods of Jerusalem ? ”
GOLD:	All who heard him were amazed . “ Is n't this the same man who caused such devastation among Jesus ' followers in Jerusalem ? ” they asked . “ And did n't he come here to arrest them and take them in chains to the leading priests ? ”

ID:	1648
INPUT:	Áko Josáíyah łahjį' ádzaii éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Josiah 's reign are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Josiah 's reign and all his deeds are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	Áko áháłní , K'ad shizaad doohts'į́į́h ; shá halne'ii nihitahgi hólǫ́ǫgo shí , Bóhólníihii nishłíinii , t'áá shí ił áhát'į́ bii'dóó bich'į' ádééhodeesdzįįł , na'iigeeł bii'dóó bich'į' hadeesdzih .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , my words ! Listen to me , my words ! Listen to what the Lord says : I am saying , ‘ Listen to you ! '
GOLD:	And the Lord said to them , “ Now listen to what I say : “ If there were prophets among you , I , the Lord , would reveal myself in visions.I would speak to them in dreams .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	Bíni'dii náshiits'ǫs , háálá ne'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' éí wáin biláahgo łikan .
PRED:	Let me drink the wine of wine , for it is better to drink .
GOLD:	Kiss me and kiss me again , for your love is sweeter than wine .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	Nidi Peter áháłní , Ha'át'éegoshą' Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i bídínóohtahgo ahadi'nooht'ą́ ? Jó'akon , nahastiin yę́ę yóó'ádayiilaaígíí tł'óó'dę́ę́' bikédil dadiits'a' , áko ni ałdó' ch'ídandoołtééł .
PRED:	But Peter replied , “ Why are you going to see the Spirit of the Lord ? ” And he said , “ Listen to the door of the Lord 's coming ! ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	1652
INPUT:	áko nik'ihojidlíi dooleeł , háálá éí t'áadoo yee k'éédadó'ne'í da . Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii náábi'diiljée'di índa k'ééndi'doolnííł .
PRED:	May God bless you again , for you will never again again again again again be again . I will plant your good deeds , and you will die .
GOLD:	Then at the resurrection of the righteous , God will reward you for inviting those who could not repay you . ”

ID:	1653
INPUT:	Áko hoos'įįdgo diné áádóó dabitélii bił bééda'iisnii' .
PRED:	So the next morning Jesus told his disciples what had happened .
GOLD:	The brothers were up at dawn and were sent on their journey with their loaded donkeys .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	Hwe'ana'í danilíinii yáhásin bee hadadideeshłííł , nidi naat'á ch'ah hak'i dí'ánígíí bee bééhózingo hóhólníhígíí náás yit'ih doo .
PRED:	He will show his victory over those who fear him , but he will make the crown of his throne .
GOLD:	I will clothe his enemies with shame , but he will be a glorious king . ”

ID:	1655
INPUT:	Tel-míílah , <unk> sha , Kíírab , Ádan índa Ímer kin hadaas'áádóó díí ninádahaasná , nidi dabizhé'é yę́ę dabik'éí áádóó ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii éí Ízrel dine'é daats'í danilį́įgo éí naaltsoos bee hwéédahózinígíí hwee ádaadin .
PRED:	Another time later , teachers of religious law and returned to the towns of Israel and returned to exile , but they did n't know what they had said .
GOLD:	Another group returned at this time from the towns of Tel-melah , Tel-harsha , Kerub , Addan , and Immer . However , they could not prove that they or their families were descendants of Israel .

ID:	1656
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é yaa hodiní'ą́ , áko hak'ee dadiniihígíí hondant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	The nations were afraid of the nations , and they hated them .
GOLD:	He handed them over to pagan nations , and they were ruled by those who hated them .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	Dabizlohiísh yee áda'doosįįłgo dabidoolghał ? Baa nida'iiniihii bich'į' nidahidoonihiísh biniyé ałtaidoolgish ?
PRED:	Do you think I am trying to catch up with lies ? Do you have a burden to others ?
GOLD:	Will merchants try to buy itto sell it in their shops ?

ID:	1658
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída bee hoséł'áanii baa naahkaigo , shik'isóó danohłį́ .
PRED:	So I am telling you what I am giving you .
GOLD:	You are my friends if you do what I command .

ID:	1659
INPUT:	Da'joodláanii ahił dajídlį́įgo kééhojit'į́
PRED:	Jesus Promises the Twelve Disciples
GOLD:	The Believers Form a Community

ID:	1660
INPUT:	Nihaa dadeest'áanii t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó Bóhólníihii bich'į' bił dah nídi'diilnihgo náádahaniihii náádahołniih doo ; éí dadílyinii agháadi yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You must offer sacrifices to the Lord , and you must offer sacrifices to the Lord . Instead , you must offer sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Be sure to give to the Lord the best portions of the gifts given to you .

ID:	1661
INPUT:	Díí kót'éego dazdootsaałígíí bee Diyin God baa hozhdoonih biniyé yee hach'į' haadzíí' . Áádóó kóhodííniid , Shikéé' yínááł .
PRED:	This is what God said to him , “ This is what God has commanded me . ” And he told me , “ I am here to follow me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus said this to let him know by what kind of death he would glorify God . Then Jesus told him , “ Follow me . ”

ID:	1662
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é binanit'a'í jílį́ .
PRED:	King Solomon , the king of Israel , was a king of Israel .
GOLD:	King Solomon now ruled over all Israel ,

ID:	1663
INPUT:	Shoo , dasoolįhgo Bóhólníihii yá'át'éehii jílį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł ! Bóhólníihii beijólíii éí hak'ihojidlí !
PRED:	Look , if you have a part of the Lord , you will know what he has done .
GOLD:	Taste and see that the Lord is good.Oh , the joys of those who take refuge in him !

ID:	1664
INPUT:	Háadishą' shá chohoo'į́ ? Jó , shá chohoo'į́įgo háishą' yoo'į́į doo ?
PRED:	Where is my hope for me ? Who is my hope ?
GOLD:	Where then is my hope ? Can anyone find it ?

ID:	1665
INPUT:	Áádóó náábikéédę́ę'go shoo , tł'oh naadą́ą́' bineest'ą' tsosts'id daniiłna'go áádóó áłts'óózí daazlį́į'go índa ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyol dabíí<unk> go diigaigo bąąh náádahasdlį́į́' .
PRED:	When the other crop began to grow , the weeds were seven crop , and the winds covered the wind and the wind .
GOLD:	Then seven more heads of grain appeared , but these were blighted , shriveled , and withered by the east wind .

ID:	1666
INPUT:	Éí bąą shiye' nílíinii , ajooba' Christ Jesus bii' hólónígíí bee nidziil doo .
PRED:	Therefore , my son , my child , will be your strength in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	Timothy , my dear son , be strong through the grace that God gives you in Christ Jesus .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'áádóó diné t'áá ałtso ch'íheezhjée'go Jesus bidááh náznísą́ . Áko dajiiłtsą́ągo nídajookąąhgo ádajiní , Nihikéyahdóó nówehjį' haninááh .
PRED:	As soon as they left the town , Jesus went out to meet him and cried out to him , “ Go back to the land of our land . ”
GOLD:	Then the entire town came out to meet Jesus , but they begged him to go away and leave them alone .

ID:	1668
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádadííniid , Baa nídahidii'nił , áádóó doo yik'é nihich'į' nida'dooléeł da ; t'áá ádííníniidígi ádadii'nííł . Áko nááda'iiłniihii hágo bidííniidgo binááł ádee hadahoyééłdzíí' , Díí bee nihoot'áanii bik'ehgo ádadii'nííł .
PRED:	“ Get up , ” they said , “ and do n't want us to join us in front of us . ” So they told them , “ We will do what you have done . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ We will give back everything and demand nothing more from the people . We will do as you say. ” Then I called the priests and made the nobles and officials swear to do what they had promised .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	Ísakar dine'é bitahdóó éí Ázan biye' naat'áanii nilíinii Páltiyel niiltį́ .
PRED:	BenjaminPalti son of Iphu
GOLD:	IssacharPaltiel son of Azzan

ID:	1670
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí diné áyidííniid , T'áadoo ádił dahonołyé'í ; ts'ídá doo yá'áshónígi ánáádaaht'į́įgo t'áadoo yee' t'ą́ąjį' dahohjahí ; Bóhólníihii bikéé' dayínóhkááh , ákót'éego nihijéí t'áá át'é bee Bóhólníihii bá nidaał'a' .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid ! ” Samuel replied . “ Do n't be afraid to do evil in the Lord 's sight . You must follow the example of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” Samuel reassured them . “ You have certainly done wrong , but make sure now that you worship the Lord with all your heart , and do n't turn your back on him .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Líbna dine'é áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í Ízrel dine'é yílák'eidíí'ą́ągo atídayiilaa áádóó diltłish yee nideistseed , áko diné t'áá át'é ałtso nideistseedgo t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' áádeisįįd da ; t'áá Jériko kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa yę́ęgi át'éego díí aláahgo naat'áanii ałdó' ákódayiilaa .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave another message to the king of Israel and killed all the people of Israel . So they killed all the king of Jericho , and they killed all the king of Jericho .
GOLD:	There , too , the Lord gave them the town and its king . He killed everyone in it , leaving no survivors . Then Joshua killed the king of Libnah as he had killed the king of Jericho .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	Áádóó Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' tsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí nidahaaznii'ígíí éí t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo hastą́ądi neeznádiin béésh łigaii shékel wolyéii bą́ą́h nida'iizlį́į́' áádóó łį́į́' ałdó' t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin bą́ą́h nida'iizlį́į́' ; kót'éego Het dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii índa Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso yich'į' nináádayiis'nii' .
PRED:	He brought the chariot commanders of Egypt , and he sold fifty pieces of silver . He also sold fifty pieces of silver , horses , horses , horses , and the king of Aram .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	1673
INPUT:	Áádóó náádadi'yoołnihgo nááhidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniihgo t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You must present a peace offering to the Lord as a peace offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ When you sacrifice a peace offering to the Lord , offer it properly so you will be accepted by God .

ID:	1674
INPUT:	Jó , nijéí hodooyąął , áádóó ił ééhózin éí nii' sizíinii yił hodooshǫǫł ;
PRED:	See , if you are my heart , you will become my heart .
GOLD:	For wisdom will enter your heart , and knowledge will fill you with joy .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	Jesus ánáázhdoo'niid , Da' doósh bee nił hweeshne' da , iinídlą́ągo Diyin God yee ayóó át'éii yidííłtsééł ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you believe in God 's glory ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	1676
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ááłáhídi mííl nááhaigo Séítan be'estł'ónígíí béédidoochił ,
PRED:	A thousand years later Satan will free from Satan , and he will be healed .
GOLD:	When the thousand years come to an end , Satan will be let out of his prison .

ID:	1677
INPUT:	nidi t'áá ałtsojį' Diyin God yá naal'a'í niidlį́įgo ádééhoniilzinii , yéego ha'ííníilníigo ti'danihiyoołnííh , nihich'į' naho'diilná , nihich'į' nahwii'ná ,
PRED:	But we are confident in God 's household , our servant , and we are confident in trouble .
GOLD:	In everything we do , we show that we are true ministers of God . We patiently endure troubles and hardships and calamities of every kind .

ID:	1678
INPUT:	Niísh áłtsé ni'dizhchį́ ? Deílk'idígíí t'ah doo ádaalnééhdą́ą́'ásh ándiilyaa ?
PRED:	Are you the Messiah ? Have you been born ? Are you the Messiah ?
GOLD:	“ Were you the first person ever born ? Were you born before the hills were made ?

ID:	1679
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné éí Jesus yaa ádahalyánígíí Jesus yá nidahast'i' áádóó niyí'da<unk> xas ,
PRED:	Jesus went to the crowd and gave them this message .
GOLD:	The guards in charge of Jesus began mocking and beating him .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah t'áadoo deísółts'ą́'í , háálá Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í kóní , Aa doolyéełii bee shił lą́ da'ohłeehgo wóshdę́ę́' shich'į' ch'ínóhkááh , áádóó t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihich'il na'atł'o'ii áádóó nihifig sikaadii bąąhdóó da'ohsą́ą doo áádóó t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihito' bá na'az'ą́ą́dóó da'ohdlą́ą doo ;
PRED:	“ Do n't listen to Hezekiah , for this is what the king of Assyria says : Do n't let me go out to the wilderness of Assyria , and you will take one of your fruit from the wilderness .
GOLD:	“ Do n't listen to Hezekiah ! These are the terms the king of Assyria is offering : Make peace with me — open the gates and come out . Then each of you can continue eating from your own grapevine and fig tree and drinking from your own well .

ID:	1681
INPUT:	Áádóó Jeremáíyah éí naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso , índa diné t'áá ałtso yich'į' haadzíi'go kóní , Díí saad dasidoots'ą́'ígíí t'áá ałtso díí kin si'ánígíí áádóó díí kin haal'áhígíí bee bik'ijį' hadíídzih , shiłníigo Bóhólníihii shiníł'a' .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah sent this message to Jeremiah : “ This is what the Lord says : Write this message to all the people who have heard this message from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then Jeremiah spoke to the officials and the people in his own defense . “ The Lord sent me to prophesy against this Temple and this city , ” he said . “ The Lord gave me every word that I have spoken .

ID:	1682
INPUT:	Nidi t'ah aláhídi át'éego Saul bidziil yileełgo Damáskasgi Jew dine'é kéédahat'ínígíí , Díí t'áá aaníí Christ nilį́ , yiłníigo t'áadoo yee hadaodziihígóó áyiilaa .
PRED:	But when Saul was in Damascus , he became stronger and strong in Damascus , and he did n't believe that he was from Damascus .
GOLD:	Saul 's preaching became more and more powerful , and the Jews in Damascus could n't refute his proofs that Jesus was indeed the Messiah .

ID:	1683
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Da' nihíísh ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego doo ak'ida'doohtįįh da ? Da' díísh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Ha'át'íhída t'áá bikáá'dę́ę́' diné biih hwiileehgo doo <unk> xǫǫh át'ée da ,
PRED:	“ Do n't you understand this ? ” he asked . “ Do n't you understand this ? Do n't you understand what you do ? ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't you understand either ? ” he asked . “ Ca n't you see that the food you put into your body can not defile you ?

ID:	1684
INPUT:	Áko Férisii danilíinii ánáádahodoo'niid , Da' nihíísh ałdó' t'áá ádzaagóó ádanihi'di'niist'aa' ?
PRED:	Then the Pharisees asked , “ Are you going to the entrance ? ”
GOLD:	“ Have you been led astray , too ? ” the Pharisees mocked .

ID:	1685
INPUT:	Iiláíhu éí Job yich'ahóóshkeed
PRED:	Eliphaz 's Second Response to Eliphaz
GOLD:	Elihu Presents His Case against Job

ID:	1686
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íní'eezh yę́ędą́ą́' éí didlidgo náádahaniihii , doodaii' náádahaniihii t'áadoo bee bich'į' yéíłti' da índa t'áadoo bee bich'į' hahásdzíi' da ,
PRED:	I brought your ancestors out of Egypt to bring them out of Egypt . I told you not to offer sacrifices to your ancestors ,
GOLD:	When I led your ancestors out of Egypt , it was not burnt offerings and sacrifices I wanted from them .

ID:	1687
INPUT:	Nidi hoł oo'ołgo diné dahoołtsą́ągo lą'í hwéédahoosįįdgo , da'níłts'ą́ą́dę́ę́' kin hadaas'áádę́ę́' t'áá ni' dayíjeehgo t'áá hó áłtsé áadi neheezhjéé' .
PRED:	But when the crowd saw him , he sent a huge crowd away from the town , and the other towns were scattered .
GOLD:	But many people recognized them and saw them leaving , and people from many towns ran ahead along the shore and got there ahead of them .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad , bee hólóonii t'áá ałtso bidinílchíidgo tídílééh , áko t'áá ninii'jį' níídóodzih .
PRED:	“ But now , take your hand and kill him . ”
GOLD:	But reach out and take away everything he has , and he will surely curse you to your face ! ”

ID:	1689
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi t'áadoo ákóde yah adahisoonáa da ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God yee haadzíi'ii bich'į' nídadoołtee' .
PRED:	But you have rebelled against the Lord your God , but you have rebelled against us .
GOLD:	“ But you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God and refused to go in .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	Ádam jiináago neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin honááhaigo haye' nááhásdlį́į́' ; t'áá honáłt'éego índa t'áá ájít'éhígi át'éego há náánázhchį́ ; éí Seth bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	When Adam was 30 years old , he became the father of Adam , and he gave birth to his son . He was the name of Seth .
GOLD:	When Adam was 130 years old , he became the father of a son who was just like him — in his very image . He named his son Seth .

ID:	1691
INPUT:	T'áá shí kódíshníigo ádee hadeesdzíí' , ní Bóhólníihii , háálá díí baa nisíníyá : t'ááłá'í niye'ígíí doo shąąh síní'įįdgóó bąą
PRED:	Then I said , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The Lord has given me , for I have obeyed all my wealth .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord says : Because you have obeyed me and have not withheld even your son , your only son , I swear by my own name that

ID:	1692
INPUT:	Áádóó ashdla'ígi daats'í oolkiłgo ch'ínáánádzá , nít'éé' náánáła' t'óó nináádaazį'go yik'ínáánádzá , áko ííłní , Ha' át'íishą' biniyé kwe'é shá bíighah t'áadoo baa nidaahkaígóó t'óó nidaahsį' ?
PRED:	About that time he went out to Jesus and said to them , “ Have you been healed ? ” And he said , “ You have never been healed ? ”
GOLD:	“ At five o'clock that afternoon he was in town again and saw some more people standing around . He asked them , ‘ Why have n't you been working today ? '

ID:	1693
INPUT:	Áko áshidííniid , Naakidi mííldóó ba'aan táadi neeznádiin i'íí'ą́ąjį' áádóó hoos'įįdjį' índa hodiyingo haz'áanii hasht'ééhodoolnííł .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ I will remain in the sanctuary until evening . ”
GOLD:	The other replied , “ It will take 2,300 evenings and mornings ; then the Temple will be made right again . ”

ID:	1694
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é éí Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii nídeidii'ą́ągo Ében-íízer kin shijaa'dóó Áshdad kin haal' áajį' deiz'ą́ ,
PRED:	Then the Philistines attacked the Ark of God and conquered it .
GOLD:	After the Philistines captured the Ark of God , they took it from the battleground at Ebenezer to the town of Ashdod .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	K'éé'dídléehii léi' álástsii' k'iididoolééłgóó ch'íníyá , áko álástsii' ła' nihiyiiłkaad , nít'éé' ła' atiinjį' ahineezdee'go bik'i na'asdee' , áko tsídii nidahaast'a'go ałtso yaa nahodeeskai .
PRED:	“ Suppose a farmer planted a field , some seeds fell on the footpath , and some seeds fell on the ground .
GOLD:	“ A farmer went out to plant his seed . As he scattered it across his field , some seed fell on a footpath , where it was stepped on , and the birds ate it .

ID:	1696
INPUT:	Áko deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá ła' bizhi'ee Diyin God yich'į' hadaasdzíí' , Ni t'éí Bóhólníihii [ Diyin <unk> nílíinii , yádiłhił índa nahasdzáán áádóó tónteel índa biyi'di dahólóonii t'áá ałtso íinilaa ,
PRED:	When they heard this , the voice of God said , “ You are the Lord , the God of the earth and the earth .
GOLD:	When they heard the report , all the believers lifted their voices together in prayer to God : “ O Sovereign Lord , Creator of heaven and earth , the sea , and everything in them —

ID:	1697
INPUT:	K'ad k'éé'dídléehii baa hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii ááhyiłníinii dadoohts'į́į́h .
PRED:	“ Listen to the farmer 's message ; listen to the meaning of the farmer .
GOLD:	“ Now listen to the explanation of the parable about the farmer planting seeds :

ID:	1698
INPUT:	Doodaii' éí diné jiisxínígíí dił bąąh háálį́ ájiilaii biniinaa bik'éí k'ééhodidoodlíłígíí bił hodoochxih áádóó hódoolwoł ; jó , yisdázhdínóochéłígóó há doo deeghání dago biniinaa hodiyoołhééł , azhą́ biniinaa hodi'yoolyéłígíí doo bą́ą́h ílį́į da nidi , áádóó doo bik'eezhdiniihgóó hoolzhiizh da nít'éé' nidi hodiyoołhééł .
PRED:	No one will be put to death , for the death of the murderer 's death will be broken into the grave.It will be destroyed , and no one will be put to death , but no one will be killed .
GOLD:	“ If the distance to the nearest city of refuge is too far , an enraged avenger might be able to chase down and kill the person who caused the death . Then the slayer would die unfairly , since he had never shown hostility toward the person who died .

ID:	1699
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , éí yoołkáałdi doo ałtso ánihideeshdįįł da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But in that day , says the Lord , “ I will destroy you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Yet even in those days I will not blot you out completely , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1700
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii ła' ákwii nidaháaztą́ągo t'áá dabiyi'ídi t'óó bił daahaadago nitsídaakees ,
PRED:	Then some of the teachers of religious law lived in religious law and taught them .
GOLD:	But some of the teachers of religious law who were sitting there thought to themselves ,

ID:	1701
INPUT:	Áko déédíljahdóó łeeshch'iih nízhdiijaa'go Féro bidááhdę́ę́' nizhní' <unk> , áádóó Mózes éí yá bich'į'go łeeshch'iih yááyiighazgo diné áádóó naaldlooshii bitahgóó ch'ozh łóód hááłnii' .
PRED:	Then he took the ashes of Pharaoh and Aaron and took the ashes of the ashes of Moses and Aaron and the ashes of the ashes .
GOLD:	So they took soot from a brick kiln and went and stood before Pharaoh . As Pharaoh watched , Moses threw the soot into the air , and boils broke out on people and animals alike .

ID:	1702
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é naanish baa dadeest'ą́
PRED:	The Levites Given to the Levites
GOLD:	Duties of the Kohathite Clan

ID:	1703
INPUT:	Íísíníłts'ą́ą'go honíyą́ , shiye' , áádóó yínááłgóó nijéí baa áhólyą́ .
PRED:	Listen to me , my child , and watch over your heart .
GOLD:	My child , listen and be wise : Keep your heart on the right course .

ID:	1704
INPUT:	Peter áádóó John hwéédoochidgo , diné bił dah jookahígíí baa níjít'áázh , áko aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii ádahodííniidii baa hojoolne' .
PRED:	Peter and John went out to see him , and the leading priests returned to the leading priests and the elders of the high priest .
GOLD:	As soon as they were freed , Peter and John returned to the other believers and told them what the leading priests and elders had said .

ID:	1705
INPUT:	Sodizin yidiits'a'ii nílíinii , diné t'áá ałtso naa hakááh .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to all people .
GOLD:	for you answer our prayers.All of us must come to you .

ID:	1706
INPUT:	Shinaagóó neeznáadi mííl diné shik'iidoojah biniyé nidahaaznánígíí doo binásdzid da dooleeł .
PRED:	My enemies are afraid of me , but they are afraid of me .
GOLD:	I am not afraid of ten thousand enemieswho surround me on every side .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	Ha'a'aahjígo hoodzooígíí éí Jórdan tooh bee hodeesdzo . Díí Bénjamin dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo kéyah bíí' dadooleełii bináhásdzo .
PRED:	“ These are the boundary of Benjamin 's boundary . The boundary of Benjamin 's tribe will be allotted to the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	The eastern boundary was the Jordan River.These were the boundaries of the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	1708
INPUT:	Éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Heziikáíyah dadootsaałgo bitah doo hóóts'íid da . Áádóó Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah Diyin God yá halne'ii haa níyáago áhodííniid , Bóhólníihii kóní , Na'áłchíní bá t'áá ałtso hasht'edíílííł , háálá dadíítsaał , doo náádidíídáał da .
PRED:	About that time Hezekiah became very old , and Isaiah son of Amoz began to die . He said , “ The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz will die , for he will never die . ”
GOLD:	About that time Hezekiah became deathly ill , and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz went to visit him . He gave the king this message : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ Set your affairs in order , for you are going to die . You will not recover from this illness . ' ”

ID:	1709
INPUT:	Abínídóó e'e'áahjį' diné nidoolnish yiniyé nídahidii'néehgo dah hidilníísh .
PRED:	So we went to the evening and started to spend the night .
GOLD:	Then people go off to their work , where they labor until evening .

ID:	1710
INPUT:	Ákondi ákódzaa , háálá áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii índa nááda'iiłniihii éí hatahgóó t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii nideistseedgo bidił dadeezna'go éí yee ádił nida'iisíí' áádóó doo ákwii ádáát'įįd da .
PRED:	But this is what happened , for the priests have sinned against the priests and priests and priests have sinned against their sins .
GOLD:	Yet it happened because of the sins of her prophetsand the sins of her priests , who defiled the cityby shedding innocent blood .

ID:	1711
INPUT:	Asdzání nił danilíinii bitahgi aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii dabitsi'ké ła' naazį́ : asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh éí Ófer kéyahdę́ę́' óola bee éé' disǫsii ályaaígíí yee hadít'éego ninish'náájí sizį́ .
PRED:	The kings of the kings of the king 's daughters were decorated with gold . His mother was decorated with gold .
GOLD:	Kings ' daughters are among your noble women.At your right side stands the queen , wearing jewelry of finest gold from Ophir !

ID:	1712
INPUT:	Áádóó shinááł chérabim dabit'a' deideesbaalgo bąąs t'áá bíighahgóó deílyeedgo nídadiit'a' áádóó náás dadeest'a' ; nít'éé' Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí ha'a'aahjígo dáń'dítį́hígíí ch'é'étiingi nidahaastłahgo Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God bibi'oh adidilyéehii bik'ijį' eeldoh .
PRED:	The cherubim spread their wings on the wings of the cherubim , and the wings of the Lord opened the wings of the cherubim . The people of Israel looked at the east side of the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	And as I watched , the cherubim flew with their wheels to the east gate of the Lord 's Temple . And the glory of the God of Israel hovered above them .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	Mt . 26 : <unk>
PRED:	Teaching about Prayer
GOLD:	Peter 's First Denial

ID:	1714
INPUT:	Áádóó hak'ijį' Éínath biye' Shámgar éí béégashii binahaalyéii bee Filístiya dine'é hastą́ądi neeznádiin neistseed , índa Ízrel dine'é yisdáyíínil .
PRED:	Adam 's son , the Philistines killed the Philistines , but he killed the Philistines and killed Israel .
GOLD:	After Ehud , Shamgar son of Anath rescued Israel . He once killed 600 Philistines with an ox goad .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ádííniid , Bíni'dii t'áá bí bighangóó nídídááh , áko doo bił ahiideestséeł da . Áko Ábsalam éí t'áá bí bighangóó dah nídiidzá , índa aláahgo naat'áanii t'áadoo yił ahiiltsą́ą da .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ Let 's go home ! Let us see the king 's home , and we will never see you. ” So Absalom returned to his home .
GOLD:	But the king gave this order : “ Absalom may go to his own house , but he must never come into my presence. ” So Absalom did not see the king .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	Nóah éí ashdladi neeznádiin honááhai . Áko Shem áádóó Ham índa Jéífeth há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	Noah was thirty years old when he became the father of Shem , Shem , and Japheth .
GOLD:	After Noah was 500 years old , he became the father of Shem , Ham , and Japheth .

ID:	1717
INPUT:	Jáshowa éí aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii yik'eh deesdlį́į́'
PRED:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Kings Defeated West of the Jordan

ID:	1718
INPUT:	Eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadlá yóweh ho'doo'niid
PRED:	A Call to Holy Spirit
GOLD:	There Is Only One God

ID:	1719
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí bidine'é yił hólǫ́ǫ doogo yee nihoní'ą́
PRED:	The
GOLD:	's Glory

ID:	1720
INPUT:	Áko Íísa biye'ké kódaolyéé nít'éé' : Íísa be'asdzą́ą́ Éídah biyáázh Élifaz wolyéii áádóó Íísa be'asdzą́ą́ Báshiimath biyáázh Rúwel wolyéii .
PRED:	These are the names of Esau 's sons , Esau 's wife , the wife of Esau 's wife , the wife of Esau 's wife .
GOLD:	These are the names of Esau 's sons : Eliphaz , the son of Esau 's wife Adah ; and Reuel , the son of Esau 's wife Basemath .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	Dził danohłíinii áádóó nihí bidziilgo nahasdzáán bee niłdzilii danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii agha'dit'áahgo deísółts'ą́ą́' , háálá Bóhólníihii bidine'é yił ałghada'dit'ááh índa Ízrel dine'é yik'i hodidoo'ááł .
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord : “ Listen to the people of Israel , for the Lord will judge the people of Israel .
GOLD:	And now , O mountains , listen to the Lord 's complaint ! He has a case against his people.He will bring charges against Israel .

ID:	1722
INPUT:	T'óó áhodiilgisii yee ááníłígíí ałdó' doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ da ; azhą́ jooba' nahas'áanii t'áá ákogi át'éego yádaałti' nidi , badahojoobá'íii wooch'ííd yee íidoołdįįłgo yinaha'á .
PRED:	The wicked are like a fool , but the wicked are crushed by justice . But the wicked are crushed , but the wicked are destroyed .
GOLD:	The smooth tricks of scoundrels are evil.They plot crooked schemes.They lie to convict the poor , even when the cause of the poor is just .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	Dooyéí haa a'áhí dadínóohsįįł da ; iiná hąąh yiz'įįdii iiná bąąh nídoot'įįł , bináá' atíjiilaago hanáá' atínídoolnííł , biwoo' atíjiilaago hawoo' atínídoolnííł , bíla' atíjiilaago hála' atínídoolnííł , bikee' atíjiilaago hakee' atínídoolnííł .
PRED:	“ Oh , I will never forget the seed of the field , for the eye of the wicked will be crushed , and the hair of the wicked will be punished .
GOLD:	You must show no pity for the guilty ! Your rule should be life for life , eye for eye , tooth for tooth , hand for hand , foot for foot .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	Áko oodlą́ áádóó ił chohoo'į́ índa ayóó'ó'ó'ní , díí táa'go dahólǫ́ , nidi aláahdi át'éii éí ayóó'ó'ó'ní .
PRED:	And in faith , love , love , and love is greater than these things .
GOLD:	Three things will last forever — faith , hope , and love — and the greatest of these is love .

ID:	1725
INPUT:	áádóó yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' adinídíin doo , áko nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' adinídíin doo ; éí t'áá ákót'é silį́į́' .
PRED:	He will light the light from the sky , and the earth will be light .
GOLD:	Let these lights in the sky shine down on the earth. ” And that is what happened .

ID:	1726
INPUT:	Badahojoobá'íii áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii yik'édí nilį́ , áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii bida'iina' yisdáyiinííł .
PRED:	She is the poor and needy ; he is the one who gives justice to the needy .
GOLD:	He feels pity for the weak and the needy , and he will rescue them .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ash łahjį' ádzaaígíí áádóó yaa naayáii éí t'áá át'é índa yee ayóó át'éii bee Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Amazáíyah yik'ijį' naazbaa'ígíí éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę binaaltsoos Kránikals wolyéii bik'inídaháasdzo .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoash 's reign and everything he did , including the extent of his power and his war with King Amaziah of Judah , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	1728
INPUT:	Áko shibąąhági át'éii índa shidine'é Ízrel bibąąhági ádaat'éii bá bee ádaa hashne'go sodeeszingo Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God bidził diyinii bá ná'ooshkąąhgo
PRED:	Then I prayed to the Lord my God , the God of Israel , and I cried out to the Lord my God .
GOLD:	I went on praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my people , pleading with the Lord my God for Jerusalem , his holy mountain .

ID:	1729
INPUT:	tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' yídííłtahgo t'ááłá'í nítínígo nidadool'aał biniyé yah ahekáhígíí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' nidaalnish doo .
PRED:	He will send fifty years to send fifty years to prepare the Tabernacle for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	List all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who are eligible to serve in the Tabernacle .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Jew dine'é ła' Shúshan kin haal'áagi bighan ; éí Mórdiikai wolyé , Jéíyer biye' nilį́ áádóó Shímiyai yę́ę hanálí nít'éé' índa naakidi náhánálí Kish éí Bénjamin dine'é nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	In the fortress of Susa , one of the Jews in the fortress of Susa , one of the tribe of Benjamin , were one of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	At that time there was a Jewish man in the fortress of Susa whose name was Mordecai son of Jair . He was from the tribe of Benjamin and was a descendant of Kish and Shimei .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	Áko nihits'íís dadínóonéełii bąąhági át'éii t'áadoo yee ádíhólníihgo ádeínóhsiní , adáhonooní t'áadoo bida'íínóhsiní .
PRED:	Do n't let your body be allowed to live in the wilderness . Do n't be allowed to live in the field .
GOLD:	Do not let sin control the way you live ; do not give in to sinful desires .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	Diné t'áá jíl'áá nít'éé' Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó díí nááhidoonihii naat'áanii baa dahizhdi'aah doo .
PRED:	“ Suppose a man from among the tribes of Israel , no one can accept this gift from among you .
GOLD:	All the people of Israel must join in bringing these offerings to the prince .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	nidi áshíłní , She'ajooba' doo bee ni'oh neesh'ą́ą da , háálá doo adziil hólǫ́ǫgi shidziil bee hada'íłt'é . Éí bąą ha'át'íhída doo bich'į' shidziilii t'óó yówehda bee ádaa hash'niihgo baa shił hózhǫ́ǫ doo , áko Christ bibee adziilii yee shii' kééhat'į́į doo .
PRED:	But he said to me , “ I 'm not too proud for you , for I am not worthy to boast about Christ . I 'm not worthy to boast about Christ .
GOLD:	Each time he said , “ My grace is all you need . My power works best in weakness. ” So now I am glad to boast about my weaknesses , so that the power of Christ can work through me .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	Háálá éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' t'ah doo tó yiląąhgóó Nóah tsinaa'eeł yiih yíyáajį' diné da'ayą́ áádóó da'adlą́ áádóó nida'ayeh índa ahaa daha'nííł nít'éé' ,
PRED:	For the time of Noah went into the boat to the shore of the boat , the people ate and drank from the water .
GOLD:	In those days before the flood , the people were enjoying banquets and parties and weddings right up to the time Noah entered his boat .

ID:	1735
INPUT:	Áko éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go bił dahóózhǫǫdgo , Béeso naa dadii'nił , dahodííniid . Áádóó ha'át'éegoda ashja'iilaago nináhozhdidoo'áałgi baa nitsídzíkeesgo hodideeshzhiizh .
PRED:	When they heard that they were afraid , they said , “ We wo n't have enough money for us . ”
GOLD:	They were delighted when they heard why he had come , and they promised to give him money . So he began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii binahjį' Bóhólníihii hahaasdzíi'ii ałtso bohodoolnííł biniyé ádzaa :
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :
GOLD:	All of this occurred to fulfill the Lord 's message through his prophet :

ID:	1737
INPUT:	Háálá nich'į' nahwiiłnánígíí beidiyíínah ; tó íína'ígíí nahalingo doo béénílniih da doo .
PRED:	For you are like a spring of water ; you will not remember the springs of water .
GOLD:	You will forget your misery ; it will be like water flowing away .

ID:	1738
INPUT:	áko kót'éego naaltsoos bił adadzis'a' : Daal'aadii índa da'oodlání bá aląąjį' nisiidzíinii , nihik'is daniidlį́įgo , Ántiyakgóó áádóó Síriyagóó índa Silíshiyagóó doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahdóó nihik'is danohłíinii , k'é danihidii'ní .
PRED:	Then he sent this letter to the apostles : “ We are apostles and apostles to Antioch of Syria , dear brothers and sisters . We have been sent to Antioch of Syria . ”
GOLD:	This is the letter they took with them : “ This letter is from the apostles and elders , your brothers in Jerusalem . It is written to the Gentile believers in Antioch , Syria , and Cilicia . Greetings !

ID:	1739
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ánínígi át'éego , Jéíkab ayóó'óósh'ní , nidi Íisa éí jiiséłxáá' .
PRED:	I am writing these words in the Scriptures : “ I love Jacob , ” he said , “ I am the one who loves Jacob . ”
GOLD:	In the words of the Scriptures , “ I loved Jacob , but I rejected Esau . ”

ID:	1740
INPUT:	Áko lá índa t'áá aaníí t'áadoo haada níínílniní de ádííníił ni , áádóó doo ách'į' na'íínídlíígóó doo nił yée' da doo .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of us , and do n't be afraid of us . Do not stand at your presence .
GOLD:	Then your face will brighten with innocence.You will be strong and free of fear .

ID:	1741
INPUT:	Áko ałdó' Éíhab bighandóó danilíinii dayíkaígi át'éego jiníyá , háálá bimá éí doo yá'ádaashóonii ádoolníiłgo yínabiniłtin nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Ahab 's brothers did what was evil in Ahab 's home , for he knew what was evil in the grave .
GOLD:	Ahaziah also followed the evil example of King Ahab 's family , for his mother encouraged him in doing wrong .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áháłní , T'áadoo bahat'aadí diné t'áá ałtso bich'į' yáshti' ; t'áá áłahjį' kin bii' áłah nída'adleeh góne' índa kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' Jew dine'é t'áá ałtso áłah nídaadleehgi niná'níshtįįh nít'éé' ; t'áá nahont'inee ha'át'íida t'áadoo bee haasdzíi' da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't be afraid of all the people of the Temple . I did n't spend the Temple in the Temple of the Jews in the Temple . I did n't tell them what I told them . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Everyone knows what I teach . I have preached regularly in the synagogues and the Temple , where the people gather . I have not spoken in secret .

ID:	1743
INPUT:	Ner biye' Ábner bééhonísin ; bí éí nini'dooloh yiniyé naa níyá , áko dah hidiinááhgóó áádóó yah anáhídáahgi índa baa nanináhígíí t'áá ałtso bił bééhodoozįįł yiniyé át'į́ .
PRED:	Abner son of Ner , and Abner 's son will know that you are going to go to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	You know perfectly well that he came to spy on you and find out everything you 're doing ! ”

ID:	1744
INPUT:	Naal'a'í bik'ehgo da'agizhígíí ánáádoo'niid , Mó'ab dine'é ch'ikę́ę́h át'į́ , Mó'ab kéyahdę́ę́' Neiyómii yił nát'áázh .
PRED:	Then the servant of Moab said , “ Moab is the daughter of Moab , the daughter of Moab . ”
GOLD:	And the foreman replied , “ She is the young woman from Moab who came back with Naomi .

ID:	1745
INPUT:	Áádóó ázhdííniid , T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Díí asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii bahojoobá'í nidi t'áá ádzíłtso haláahgo i'íínilgo át'é ,
PRED:	Then he said , “ I tell you the truth , this woman is better than a widow .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , ” Jesus said , “ this poor widow has given more than all the rest of them .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	Áko Gíliyad kéyahdóó diné aląąjį' naazíinii éí Jéfthah ádeidííniid , K'ad nich'į' nináániikai ni : Áman dine'é bił da'ahidiigą́ą́ł biniyé bich'į' nihił dadííbah . Áko Gíliyad kéyahgi kééhwiit'íinii t'áá áníiltso nihinanít'áa doo .
PRED:	Then the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah , “ Now we will fight against us . We will fight against us and fight against us . We will be our king in Gilead . ”
GOLD:	“ Because we need you , ” the elders replied . “ If you lead us in battle against the Ammonites , we will make you ruler over all the people of Gilead . ”

ID:	1747
INPUT:	Diné há naal'a'í t'áá áłchíní nilį́į́dą́ą́' baa <unk> jólnáago neeyą́ągo haye' ídidoolnííł .
PRED:	“ If you have a little child 's servant , you will have plenty to grow .
GOLD:	A servant pampered from childhoodwill become a rebel .

ID:	1748
INPUT:	Ákohgo dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' Mózes doo hah níjídááhgóó diné haa ákodaniizį́į'go Éran yaa áłah silį́į'go ádeidííniid , Haa'íshą' , diyin nihilą́ąjį' hoo'į́į dooleełígíí nihá ádíílííł , háálá díí diné éí Mózes joolyéii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezhígíí háájí shį́į́ dzizlį́į'go doo nihił béédahózin da .
PRED:	When Moses saw that Moses was coming to the mountain , he said to Aaron , “ Let us see how we are looking for us , for we are looking for us to see the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	When the people saw how long it was taking Moses to come back down the mountain , they gathered around Aaron . “ Come on , ” they said , “ make us some gods who can lead us . We do n't know what happened to this fellow Moses , who brought us here from the land of Egypt . ”

ID:	1749
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ éí díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii nídaohdį́įh doo , áádóó tsosts'id jį́ aleeh góne' Bóhólníihii bich'į'go dahodíínóhsingo áłah náhdleeh doo .
PRED:	On the seventh day you must eat the bread made without yeast . You must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	For seven days the bread you eat must be made without yeast . Then on the seventh day , celebrate a feast to the Lord .

ID:	1750
INPUT:	Áko diné áłah daazlį́į'ii , áhóót'įįdígíí dayiiłtsą́ągo , biyid nídeineests'ingo anáhaaskai .
PRED:	When the crowd saw Jesus , they looked up and looked at the table .
GOLD:	And when all the crowd that came to see the crucifixion saw what had happened , they went home in deep sorrow .

ID:	1751
INPUT:	Háálá éí tsídii ahiyiileehii índa <unk> niidóóh ooghą́ąłii bits'ą́ą́dóó yisdándoołtééł .
PRED:	For the field will be cursed , and the proud will soon be saved .
GOLD:	For he will rescue you from every trapand protect you from deadly disease .

ID:	1752
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel t' ah abínídą́ą́' nízhdii'na'go Saul bidááh deeshááł jiniizį́į́' ; nít'éé' Sámuel hoł hóóne' , Kármel kin shijaa'gi Saul níyá , hodoo'niid , índa áadi tsé bee ééhániihii ádá áyiilaa , áádóó t'óó Gílgal haz'ání góyaa ííyá ni .
PRED:	When Saul heard what Saul had happened , Saul went to Saul and went to meet him at Gilgal . He said to Saul , “ You have made me a stone of stone and a stone of stone . ”
GOLD:	Early the next morning Samuel went to find Saul . Someone told him , “ Saul went to the town of Carmel to set up a monument to himself ; then he went on to Gilgal . ”

ID:	1753
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad nílááh , ákǫ́ǫ́ dínááh ; nił honishłǫ́ǫgo yániishti' doo , áko bee hahidíídzihígíí bínaninishtin doo .
PRED:	“ Go and tell you , and teach them what I am giving you . I will teach you what I am giving you .
GOLD:	Now go ! I will be with you as you speak , and I will instruct you in what to say . ”

ID:	1754
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii yá halne'ii léi' áadi naagháá lá ; éí Óbed wolyéego Samériya kin haal'áajį' ooné łígíí yidááh níyáago áyidííniid , Jó , danihizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii éí Júdah dine'é yich'į' báhóóchįįdgo biniinaa nihílák'ehodíí'ą́ , nidi t'óó báhádzidgo nihá dahazhchįįdgo nidasoołtseedígíí yá'ąąsh góde aho<unk> ts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the Lord was there when he arrived at the town of Samaria . He said to the men of Samaria , “ You have been angry with us , but the anger of the Lord , the God of Judah , who was angry with you . ”
GOLD:	But a prophet of the Lord named Oded was there in Samaria when the army of Israel returned home . He went out to meet them and said , “ The Lord , the God of your ancestors , was angry with Judah and let you defeat them . But you have gone too far , killing them without mercy , and all heaven is disturbed .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	Háálá oodlą́ bee aa hodzódlí binahjį' Diyin God bibee ajooba' yee yisdánihíínil , áko díí doo t'áá nihí ádaahdzaa da , nidi Diyin God einíláii át'é .
PRED:	For you have been faithful to God 's grace , and you have never been saved . And you do n't believe God 's gift .
GOLD:	God saved you by his grace when you believed . And you ca n't take credit for this ; it is a gift from God .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	Áko ahééh danízinii łahjį' bił ałts'áá'nilii yidááh doonééł biniyé łahjigo yinaashiijí dah diiná , áádóó łahjį' diné ał níí'dóó bił yishnéłígíí éí bii' déédadiljahgo bá ch'íláyi' yaa'áhígíí biláahdi áádóó tsé ahénátł'inígíí bikáá'góó hóteelgo tsé ahénátł'injį' bikéé' niikai ,
PRED:	Then they began to come to meet the terms of the covenant with thanks and all the people who were left in the middle of the Jordan River . And when they left the valley of refuge , they went out to the top of the Jordan Valley .
GOLD:	The second choir giving thanks went northward around the other way to meet them . I followed them , together with the other half of the people , along the top of the wall past the Tower of the Ovens to the Broad Wall ,

ID:	1757
INPUT:	Ákwii Kíbrath-hatéí'avah hoolyée doo , jidííniid , háálá ákwii diné a<unk> bida'niighą́ą́' yę́ę yóó'ádajiilaa .
PRED:	They said , “ Where is the place of Cyprus , for the people have defiled their sins . ”
GOLD:	So that place was called Kibroth-hattaavah ( which means “ graves of gluttony ” ) because there they buried the people who had craved meat from Egypt .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'éii yíká dichin áádóó dibáá' danilíinii bik'idahojidlí , háálá éí yee hwiih dadooleeł .
PRED:	God blesses the hungry and thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty people will be hungry .
GOLD:	God blesses those who hunger and thirst for justice , for they will be satisfied .

ID:	1759
INPUT:	Áko kwe'é t'áá shí baa nitséskeesígíí nihił ch'ínísh'aah ; jó , k'ad ła' nááhaídą́ą́' doo t'óó baa nidiikah danoozį́'í t'éiyá da , nidi bídanoohdlį́įgo baa nídoohkai yę́ę k'ad ła'daahłéhígíí nihá yá'át'ééh ,
PRED:	I am telling you what I am saying , for I am not one of you . I am not here in the wilderness , not one of you .
GOLD:	Here is my advice : It would be good for you to finish what you started a year ago . Last year you were the first who wanted to give , and you were the first to begin doing it .

ID:	1760
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' táá' nááhaijį' hodííchįįd . David éí Bóhólníihii nayídééłkid , áádóó Bóhólníihii hach'į' haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Saul yę́ę áádóó ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii bił dił nidaashchxii'go ída'iilaa ; jó , Gíbiyan dine'é nideistseed ; éí bąą áhát'į́ .
PRED:	About three years later David became angry and asked the Lord , “ The Lord has spoken ! ” And Saul replied , “ The Lord has made both both people and the people of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	There was a famine during David 's reign that lasted for three years , so David asked the Lord about it . And the Lord said , “ The famine has come because Saul and his family are guilty of murdering the Gibeonites . ”

ID:	1761
INPUT:	Hastą́ą́h góne' diyingo naal'a'í dilní dah yootį́łígíí kwííłní , Tooh ayóó át'éii , Yufréítiiz nílį́įdi dį́į'go diyingo nidaal'a'í bida'astł'ónígíí bidahidíchííd .
PRED:	He said to the angel , “ Sit in the Euphrates River , and the great waters of the Euphrates River will be taken into the Euphrates River . ”
GOLD:	And the voice said to the sixth angel who held the trumpet , “ Release the four angels who are bound at the great Euphrates River . ”

ID:	1762
INPUT:	Diyin God ainíláii bá choo'į́įgo bee na'nitin
PRED:	Freedom from God 's Faith
GOLD:	Living for God

ID:	1763
INPUT:	Tsé dantsaaígíí nídiiníiłgo Júdah dine'é danilíinii binááł Tahápaniizdi Féro bighan bich'į' yah e'etiinígi hashtł'ish <unk> nihígi hashtł'ish bii' nídíł'įįhgo
PRED:	“ We will break through the city of Memphis , in the middle of Egypt , in the middle of Pharaoh 's palace .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jó'ab ádííniid , T'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee' t'óó shiníníłtł'ahgo ádíní , áko tsiidétáán táa'go dah yidiijaa'go Ábsalam bijéí góne' yaa ayiisgeed ; chéch'il yiih dinoolne'go t'ahdii t'áá hináago dah naal<unk> nít'éé' lá .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of me ! ” Joab replied . “ I 've been like a spear in a field , and a spear in a field . ”
GOLD:	“ Enough of this nonsense , ” Joab said . Then he took three daggers and plunged them into Absalom 's heart as he dangled , still alive , in the great tree .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi diné ła' shizhé'é t'áadoo dabidohníní , háálá t'ááłá'í nihiTaa' nilį́ , éí yá'ąąshdi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone say , ‘ You are my father , for you are my Father . ' ”
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	Nihí nihizhé'é yaa naagháhígíí baa nidaahkai . Áko ádahodííniid , Nihí doo adilyé bee danihi'dizhchį́į da , áko nihiTaa' t'ááłá'í , éí Diyin God .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of your father , ” they said . “ You are saying , ‘ This is the Holy Spirit . '
GOLD:	No , you are imitating your real father. ” They replied , “ We are n't illegitimate children ! God himself is our true Father . ”

ID:	1767
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ana'í doonéełgo nihikéyah yinídoot'ihgo bee nihidziilii nihits'ą́ą́' yaa kódeidoolííł , índa bidziilgo nihił nahaz'ánídóó ałtso nihighada'doolyééł .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ The land of your enemies will return to your enemies , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Therefore , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ an enemy is coming ! He will surround them and shatter their defenses.Then he will plunder all their fortresses . ”

ID:	1768
INPUT:	Díí shił ádzaaígíí Jerúsalem atíidoolííł biniyé Diyin God honíle' yę́ędą́ą́' nahalin índa Kííbar tooh nílínígíí bibąąhdi shił ádzaa yę́ę nahalin áádóó ni'jį' níshjool .
PRED:	I was like this in Jerusalem , just as I was pleasing in the sight of God as I had seen .
GOLD:	This vision was just like the others I had seen , first by the Kebar River and then when he came to destroy Jerusalem . I fell face down on the ground .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	Áko Shííkem éí Jéíkab bitsi' Dáínah k'ad yidáahjį' bi'niitsą́ , áko ch'ikę́ę́h ayóó'áyó'níigo hazhóó'ógo łíídilchíigo yich'į' yáłti' .
PRED:	So Shechem died because of his daughter , Dinah , the daughter of Shechem , and she cried out to the daughter of Hamor .
GOLD:	But then he fell in love with her , and he tried to win her affection with tender words .

ID:	1770
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' nidaho'diizhchínígíí t'áá ádzíłtso shíí' dajílį́ , índa danihilį́į'da , béégashii áádóó dibéda dabi<unk> go alą́ąjį' nidahachíhígíí t'áá ałtso daashí .
PRED:	These were the clans of the clans of the clans of the tribe of Levi , goats , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	“ The firstborn of every animal belongs to me , including the firstborn males from your herds of cattle and your flocks of sheep and goats .

ID:	1771
INPUT:	Áko éí beiníłką́ądi shiTaa' bii' honishłónígíí , áádóó shii' dahonohłónígíí , índa nihii' dahonishłónígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And you will be ashamed of my Father , and you will know that I am in the presence of my Father .
GOLD:	When I am raised to life again , you will know that I am in my Father , and you are in me , and I am in you .

ID:	1772
INPUT:	Nidi hazhé'é doo yits'íídgóó diné yich'į' nahwiisnáa'go áádóó bik'is t'áá na'níle'dii yigha'ídláago índa bidine'é yitahgóó doo yá'át'éehii yaa naayáago biniinaa doo ákwii áát'įįdii bąą dadootsaał , jó'akon .
PRED:	But if your father is cursed , he will die in a field and your brother 's hometown . He will die among the sins of their sins .
GOLD:	But the father will die for his many sins — for being cruel , robbing people , and doing what was clearly wrong among his people .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	T'áá Lat bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' áhoot'éé nít'é'ígi át'éego , da'jiyą́ áádóó da'jidlą́ , ahaa nida'jiilniih , haa nida'iiniih , k'éédazh'didlééh áádóó kin ádajile' ,
PRED:	So Lot did what was happened when they were eating and drinking in the streets . Then they said , “ Let 's pay attention to what they have done . ”
GOLD:	“ And the world will be as it was in the days of Lot . People went about their daily business — eating and drinking , buying and selling , farming and building —

ID:	1774
INPUT:	Doósh nihił béédahózin da ? Doo ákogi ádaat'éii Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ts'ídá doo bíí' dadooleeł da . Éí bąą t'áadoo yóó'adanihinii'áhí : na'ageh bee tsi'dajíkáahii , e'elyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáii , dazhdiléii , hats'íís bee adádazhnoolníinii , diné t'óó baa yáhásingo t'áá hó ahaa ninájíldeehii ,
PRED:	And why do n't you know what is right ? Do n't you realize that the Kingdom of God is right with God ? That 's why is why we do n't know that anyone who does what is right , and those who are sinning against God 's law .
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that those who do wrong will not inherit the Kingdom of God ? Do n't fool yourselves . Those who indulge in sexual sin , or who worship idols , or commit adultery , or are male prostitutes , or practice homosexuality ,

ID:	1775
INPUT:	Áádóó sin yee dahataałii áádóó dáń'daditį́hí yaa ádahalyáanii dabiDiyin God bich'į' nahaghá áádóó í'dídééh ałtso áńdaajiil'įįhgo nidajil'a' nít'éé' ; David yę́ę índa biye' Sálaman yę́ę éí t'áá yee haadzíi'ii bik'eh ádajít'éé nít'éé' .
PRED:	And they did what was pleasing in the gates of God and the gatekeepers at the gates of David and his son David .
GOLD:	They performed the service of their God and the service of purification , as commanded by David and his son Solomon , and so did the singers and the gatekeepers .

ID:	1776
INPUT:	Índa ani'įįhii yah ii'néehii habi'deel'į́į'go bił nidzílghaal ládą́ą́' bidiłígíí doo ła'da bee bohodidoot'ih da .
PRED:	The heavens will be thrown into the sky , and no one can ever endure it .
GOLD:	“ If a thief is caught in the act of breaking into a house and is struck and killed in the process , the person who killed the thief is not guilty of murder .

ID:	1777
INPUT:	Mt . 8 : <unk>
PRED:	Jesus Calms the Storm
GOLD:	Jesus and John the Baptist

ID:	1778
INPUT:	Kót'éego t'óó báhádzidgo shibee atí'él'íinii bee atíniishłaago hwiih deeshłeeł ; áadi índa doo łe'nisin da doo , áko hasht'edíínísht'éego ts'ídá doo shá nááhodoochįįł da .
PRED:	I will make my anger with anger , but I will not punish you with anger . I will not be angry with my jealousy .
GOLD:	“ Then at last my fury against you will be spent , and my jealous anger will subside . I will be calm and will not be angry with you anymore .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	áádóó níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaa haz'ą́ągi ahééníbaalígíí áádóó bá ííyah danii'áii índa bitł'ááh naaznilii t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí índa ch'é'étiingi dáádiníbaalígíí ; tł'óół índa anídaalkałígíí ; níbaal bii' hodílzinii bee bina'anishii t'áá ałtso ,
PRED:	All the curtains of the Tabernacle , the curtain of the Tabernacle , the curtain for the entrance of the Tabernacle , the posts , and the bases .
GOLD:	the curtains for the walls of the courtyard ; the posts and their bases ; the curtain for the entrance to the courtyard ; the ropes and tent pegs ; all the furnishings to be used in worship at the Tabernacle ;

ID:	1780
INPUT:	Áko asdzání na'ageh yee tsi'naagháhígíí łahgo át'éego yąąh tsíńdookosgi ch'ééh bee bá hooł'a' , nidi doo t'áá k'ad yi'iilaa da .
PRED:	Then she refused to repent of sexual immorality , but he refused to repent of their sins .
GOLD:	I gave her time to repent , but she does not want to turn away from her immorality .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	Nidi Paul éí doo íinízin da , háálá Pamfíliyadóó łah hats'ą́ą́' t'ą́ą́' hááyáago t'áadoo náásgóó hoł náádeeshnish da .
PRED:	But Paul refused to understand what Paul had said , for he refused to do what he meant .
GOLD:	But Paul disagreed strongly , since John Mark had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in their work .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	Áko ts'ísee k'ehgo dajiináanii Diyin God doo bił dahojíshǫ́ǫ le' át'ée da .
PRED:	May God 's sinful nature be wicked , and they do n't belong to God .
GOLD:	That 's why those who are still under the control of their sinful nature can never please God .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	Áko ashdladi mííl diné nízhdiinilgo Béthel kin shijaa'ígíí áádóó Éí'ai kin haal'áhígíí bita'gi Éí'ai e'e'aahjígo aa héeshjée'go ájiilaa .
PRED:	So they left Bethel and set up the town of Bethel and started to Bethel .
GOLD:	That night Joshua sent about 5,000 men to lie in ambush between Bethel and Ai , on the west side of the town .

ID:	1784
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran ííłní , Ízrel dine'é binááł doo shiinohdlą́ą́góó áádóó doo shidíínóhsingóó biniinaa díí áłah nilínígíí kéyah baa dinish'aahígíí doo biih dooh'ish da .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ You must not enter the presence of the Lord . You must not enter the land I am giving you .
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Because you did not trust me enough to demonstrate my holiness to the people of Israel , you will not lead them into the land I am giving them ! ”

ID:	1785
INPUT:	Nidabidiztseedii ch'íhidooltł'iłgo dabits'íís bits'ą́ą́dóó dííłdzid dah didooldoh , áádóó dabidiłę́ę éí dził bąąh danílį́į doo .
PRED:	You will be afraid of your body , and you will be afraid of the mountains .
GOLD:	Their dead will be left unburied , and the stench of rotting bodies will fill the land.The mountains will flow with their blood .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	Éí bee ajooba' nitsiinázt'i' doo áádóó yoo' nizhóníii hayo' áhojiilaa nahonílin doo .
PRED:	You have made a robe for you ; they are like jewels .
GOLD:	What you learn from them will crown you with graceand be a chain of honor around your neck .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	Saul éí Áman dine'é yik'eh deesdlį́į́'
PRED:	Saul Becomes Saul 's Judge
GOLD:	Saul Defeats the Ammonites

ID:	1788
INPUT:	Shiníbaal si'ą́ą́dóó t'áá háiida , Hach'iyą' t'ah doo bee hwiih deidleeh da , doo niihí da ?
PRED:	“ What do n't you eat the food of the earth ? ”
GOLD:	“ My servants have never said , ‘ He let others go hungry . '

ID:	1789
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é ábidiní , Tł'ízíchǫǫh éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áádóó dóola yázhí índa dibé yázhí éí t'áá áłah ła' binááhaí hadaałt'éii didlidgo nááhániihii át'éego nídadidooh'ish .
PRED:	Then Israel said to the people of Israel , “ Take a male goat as a sin offering and a young goat for a sin offering .
GOLD:	Then tell the Israelites , ‘ Take a male goat for a sin offering , and take a calf and a lamb , both a year old and without defects , for a burnt offering .

ID:	1790
INPUT:	Nit'áá aaníinii bii'góó shił yí'ash , áádóó nashinítin , háálá Diyin God bee yisdááyáii nílį́ ; t'áá áłahjį' niba' ánísht'é .
PRED:	You teach me the truth , for you are my helper and my salvation .
GOLD:	Lead me by your truth and teach me , for you are the God who saves me.All day long I put my hope in you .

ID:	1791
INPUT:	Áádóó bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ą́ą dooleełígíí neeznáá béésh łitsoii yee áyiilaa ; t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo éí hastą́ądi ké naazlá ádaníłnééz áádóó hastą́ądi ké naazlá ádaníłtéél índa dego dį́į́'dóó ná'áłníí' ké naazlá ádanízah .
PRED:	He also made a bronze bronze basin basin called the Sea , which was 71/2 feet long and 30 feet wide .
GOLD:	Huram also made ten bronze water carts , each 6 feet long , 6 feet wide , and 41/2 feet tall .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	Jesus ánáádoo'niid , Diné baa násht'į́į doo biniyé díí nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' níyá , éí doo da'oo'ínígíí da'oo'į́į dooleeł biniyé , da'oo'ínígíí doo da'oo'į́į da doo ałdó' biniyé .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I have come to see this world so that they can see the eyes of the world .
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ I entered this world to render judgment — to give sight to the blind and to show those who think they see that they are blind . ”

ID:	1793
INPUT:	Ákót'éego dahinohná , háálá Jesus nihíká níyáago yisdánihidooniłígíí k'ad koshídę́ę́' hoolzhishgo nihił béédahózin . Da'iisiidląąd yę́ędą́ą́' ánízah hadziih yę́ę k'ad t'áá bi'oh ánízah hadziih . Áko t'áá íídą́ą́' ch'éédadiidziłjį' ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	And now we know that Jesus was raised from our Savior . And now we know that we know that we had been raised from the hills . And now we know that we had been raised from the hills .
GOLD:	This is all the more urgent , for you know how late it is ; time is running out . Wake up , for our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed .

ID:	1794
INPUT:	Éí doo ninizį́į́'góogo nínízinígíísh bik'é nich'į' ni'doolééł ? Shí éí doo ná nidideesh'áał da ; ts'ídá yee' t'áá ni nididíí'ááł ; éí bąą nił bééhózinígíí baa hodíílnih .
PRED:	“ Do n't you refuse to listen ? Do n't you turn away from your own eyes ? Do n't you know what you are doing .
GOLD:	“ Must God tailor his justice to your demands ? But you have rejected him ! The choice is yours , not mine.Go ahead , share your wisdom with us .

ID:	1795
INPUT:	Áádóó nidahideest'áanii índa neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' bíighahgo ninádahidit'aahígíí áádóó diyingo ats'ádahideest'ánígíí bee hada'ahódlíigo nidajiijááh nít'éé' . Éí Konanáíyah , Líívai diné nilíinii bee bóhólnííh áádóó bik'is Shímiyai hakéé' góne' sizį́ .
PRED:	I also brought the Levites to the Temple of the Temple , which were given to the Levites , along with the Levites and Levites who were in charge of the Temple .
GOLD:	the people faithfully brought all the gifts , tithes , and other items dedicated for use in the Temple . Conaniah the Levite was put in charge , assisted by his brother Shimei .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	áádóó díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii ts'iizis bee yíkánígíí , tł'oh naadą́ą́' ak'áán éí ak'ah bił ałtaa násdziidgo bááh dá'áka'í nahalinígíí ak'ah bik'i yadziidii , áádóó ak'áán nááhidoonihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii nááhizhdoołnih .
PRED:	“ Take a basket of flour with olive oil , a cake of flour mixed with olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , and liquid offering .
GOLD:	a basket of bread made without yeast — cakes of choice flour mixed with olive oil and wafers spread with olive oil — along with their prescribed grain offerings and liquid offerings .

ID:	1797
INPUT:	Áádóó dį́į́'ts'áadah náhááh góne' Kédorleiyómer índa ła' ananit'a'í danilíinii hoł daníbaa' , áko Ríífem dine'é éí Ásh<unk> yim hoolyéegi áádóó <unk> dine'é éí Ham hoolyéegi índa Íímim dine'é éí <unk> yathéíyim hoolyéegi
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the fourteenth year of the reign of the tribe of Ham , Gad , and Sidon , who lived in the land of Canaan . They also lived in the valley of Ben-Hinnom ,
GOLD:	One year later Kedorlaomer and his allies arrived and defeated the Rephaites at Ashteroth-karnaim , the Zuzites at Ham , the Emites at Shaveh-kiriathaim ,

ID:	1798
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman áádóó áłah ílínígíí t'áá ałtso bił wók'ą́ądi Gíbiyan kin haal'áadi jíkai , háálá Diyin God biníbaal bii' dahozdísinii áadi si'ą́ ; éí Bóhólníihii bá naal'a'í Mózes honoojíidi áyiilaa .
PRED:	So Solomon and all the people of Gibeon went up to the hill country of Gibeon , for the Lord had given him the rest of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he led the entire assembly to the place of worship in Gibeon , for God 's Tabernacle was located there . ( This was the Tabernacle that Moses , the Lord 's servant , had made in the wilderness . )

ID:	1799
INPUT:	Doo yá'ádaashóonii bits'ánínáahgo yá'át'éehgo áánííł , áko hool'áágóó hinínáa doo .
PRED:	Go back to the wicked , and let the wicked live forever .
GOLD:	Turn from evil and do good , and you will live in the land forever .

ID:	1800
INPUT:	áko Jerúsalemdi naashá yę́ędą́ą́' , aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa Jew dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii hwee shił dahoolne'go , Haa nídíít'įįłgo há nihodíí'ááł , dashidííniid .
PRED:	Then the leading priests and the teachers of religious law told me , “ I will tell you what I am saying . ”
GOLD:	When I was in Jerusalem , the leading priests and Jewish elders pressed charges against him and asked me to condemn him .

ID:	1801
INPUT:	Áko díí Shuthíílah biye'ké bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ : Shuthíílah biye' <unk> ba'áłchíní <unk> dine'é danilį́ .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans descended from the clans of the clans of the clans : The named after their ancestor girls .
GOLD:	This was the subclan descended from the Shuthelahites : The Eranites , named after their ancestor Eran .

ID:	1802
INPUT:	Ída'azįįd néit'aahgi shił ní'áázh áádóó bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' éí bidah na'at'a'í nahalingo shik'ijį' yideesbaal .
PRED:	So I took a cup of wine , and I am filled with love .
GOLD:	He escorts me to the banquet hall ; it 's obvious how much he loves me .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	Tó biyi'góó ch'íhínáahgo nił honishłǫ́ǫ doo , áádóó tooh danílíinii biyi'góó ch'íhínáahgo doo nik'i didoolkǫǫł da ; kǫ' biyi'góó ch'íhínáahgo doo nididoohłił da , doo nidi kǫ' dah nídíno'ii nídínaad da doo .
PRED:	Go out and sleep with water , and you will be afraid of the Nile , and you will not let fire fire fire fire fire fire fire fire fire fire . ”
GOLD:	When you go through deep waters , I will be with you.When you go through rivers of difficulty , you will not drown.When you walk through the fire of oppression , you will not be burned up ; the flames will not consume you .

ID:	1804
INPUT:	Nidi bee aa a'ááh nisinii doo t'áá k'ad bits'ą́ąjį' kwíishłaa da ; Saul yę́ę éí bits'ą́ąjį' kwíishłaago ninááł nahjį' kóhooshłaa yę́ęgi át'éego bí doo ákódeeshłíił da .
PRED:	But I will not destroy your unfailing love , and I will not change my mind before you .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	t'áá háiida diné ła' , doodaii' nidine'é Ízrel t'áá át'é éí bijéí biyi'di bee bich'į' nidahwii'nánígíí bił béédahózingo áádóó díí haz'áníjį' dah dadéelníihgo sodadilzingo áádóó nída'ookąąhgo
PRED:	“ If you pray to the people of Israel , you will know that they are in trouble and pray for their suffering ,
GOLD:	and if your people Israel pray about their troubles , raising their hands toward this Temple ,

ID:	1806
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , naanáshi'dee<unk> dóó bik'ijį' łahgo át'éego tsíńdíkééz . Nashinínítą́ą́'dóó bik'ijį' shitsosk'id nídííkaad . Ániid naasháádą́ą́' t'óó baa yáhásinígi áát'įįdii biniinaa shił hóóląąd áádóó yániizį́į́' .
PRED:	“ I have heard my plan , ” he told me . “ I have decided to preach the Good News that has been done to me . ”
GOLD:	I turned away from God , but then I was sorry.I kicked myself for my stupidity ! I was thoroughly ashamed of all I did in my younger days . '

ID:	1807
INPUT:	Áko kéyah háá'áyį́į́h yee ná'áldįįhgo bił hóóchxǫ'go hoolzhish doo áádóó nihí éí nihi'ana'í bikéyahdi naałdeehgo kéyah háádoolyįhgo háá'áyį́į́h yee ná'áldįįh doo .
PRED:	So you will die in the land of Egypt , and your enemies will flourish in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then at last the land will enjoy its neglected Sabbath years as it lies desolate while you are in exile in the land of your enemies . Then the land will finally rest and enjoy the Sabbaths it missed .

ID:	1808
INPUT:	Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah yiyiisxį́į́dóó bik'ijį' diné nidaabaahii áádóó asdzánída áádóó áłchíní índa yúnak danilíinii yisnáago dah yidíníiłkaadii éí Karíyah biye' Johéínan índa siláo binanit'a'í danilíinii yił tádíkáahii Gíbiyandóó shónídayoost'e' .
PRED:	They killed Gedaliah son of Kareah and the other men who had been killed . They were afraid of Gedaliah and the other military leaders , who had been exiled to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders took all the people they had rescued in Gibeon — the soldiers , women , children , and court officials whom Ishmael had captured after he killed Gedaliah .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hazhé'é bitsi' , doodaii' hamá bich'é'é bił jineezhtéezhii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Anyone who has sexual relations with his father or mother will reply , ‘ Amen . 'And all people will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with his sister , whether she is the daughter of his father or his mother . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	1810
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ayóó át'éegi át'éego sitį́ , áádóó náshdóítsoh át'éhígi át'éego háishą' nábididoołt'eeł ? T'áá háiida nik'ijidlíii bik'ihojidlíi doo , índa t'áá háiida hóyée'go ná haadzíi'ii hóyée'go bá ha'doodzih .
PRED:	“ Who will be a lion like a lion , like a lion ? Who will curse you ? Who will curse you ? ”
GOLD:	Like a lion , Israel crouches and lies down ; like a lioness , who dares to arouse her ? Blessed is everyone who blesses you , O Israel , and cursed is everyone who curses you . ”

ID:	1811
INPUT:	Bábilan nahós'a'gi diné yindant'áa doo biniyé Jew dine'é éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo níínínil ; aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , bee háínídzí'ígíí díí diné doo dayíists'ą́ą' da , nidiyin danilíinii doo yá nidaal'a' da índa óola e'elyaii biinisį'ii doo yich'į' nidahałáa da .
PRED:	“ Son of man , be held in charge of Babylon , Shadrach , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , and Abednego , and Abednego to worship the gods of Babylon .
GOLD:	But there are some Jews — Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego — whom you have put in charge of the province of Babylon . They pay no attention to you , Your Majesty . They refuse to serve your gods and do not worship the gold statue you have set up . ”

ID:	1812
INPUT:	Áádóó náánáła' Diyin God bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii t'óó ahayóí Jesus hódahooł'aahii binááł t'áá aaníí baa nijiyáhígíí éí díí naaltsoos doo bik'inídaháasdzo da ,
PRED:	The rest of the events in God 's power are recorded in The Book of Jesus Christ Jesus Christ . These are recorded in The Book of the Son of God .
GOLD:	The disciples saw Jesus do many other miraculous signs in addition to the ones recorded in this book .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	Bíni' Bóhólníihii éí nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso biníłch'i yiDiyin God nilíinii diné ła' dah oonéłígíí yá sizį́įgo íidoolííł ;
PRED:	Let all the nations stand in the presence of the Lord , the spirit of God .
GOLD:	“ O Lord , you are the God who gives breath to all creatures . Please appoint a new man as leader for the community .

ID:	1814
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Samériya dine'é asdzání léi' tó háníyáá lá . Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Tó deeshdlį́łígíí ła' shaa níkaah .
PRED:	When the woman learned about Samaria , she said , “ I 'll find it ! ” So she said , “ I 'll give me some water . ”
GOLD:	Soon a Samaritan woman came to draw water , and Jesus said to her , “ Please give me a drink . ”

ID:	1815
INPUT:	A'áán góyaa adanihidiyooł<unk> ł ; tónteel ałníi'di diné nidaaztseedígi át'éego dadínóohnééł .
PRED:	You will die in the depths of the sea , but you will die in the sea .
GOLD:	They will bring you down to the pit , and you will die in the heart of the sea , pierced with many wounds .

ID:	1816
INPUT:	Mt . 15 : 1-9
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Deaf Man

ID:	1817
INPUT:	Nidi bee hódzáanii áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii hahoyiisdzí'ígíí doo yik'eh dadódle' át'ée da .
PRED:	But the Spirit and the Holy Spirit did not obey him .
GOLD:	None of them could stand against the wisdom and the Spirit with which Stephen spoke .

ID:	1818
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yik'ee ti'hooníihii t'óó ahayóí , nidi éí t'áá át'é yits'ąą Bóhólníihii yisdábiiłteeh .
PRED:	The godly save the godly , but the Lord rescues them from the power of the godly .
GOLD:	The righteous person faces many troubles , but the Lord comes to the rescue each time .

ID:	1819
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizingi yindaal'a'ii Néthinim t'áá át'é áádóó Sálaman bá nidaal'a'í ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	The Temple servants of the Temple servants and his servants returned to the Temple of Solomon .
GOLD:	In all , the Temple servants and the descendants of Solomon 's servants numbered 392 .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bí'ádadíínółtą' ; ákónóht'éego díí jį́į́góó hoolzhish .
PRED:	“ But now , the Lord your God is giving you today .
GOLD:	Rather , cling tightly to the Lord your God as you have done until now .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	Áádóó Léíban ání , Díí tsé ałk'i yanáa'áhígíí díí jį́ nihita'gi bee ééhózin doo . Éí biniinaa Galíid hoosye' .
PRED:	Then Laban said to Laban , “ This is what I have done to you today . ”
GOLD:	Then Laban declared , “ This pile of stones will stand as a witness to remind us of the covenant we have made today. ” This explains why it was called Galeed — “ Witness Pile . ”

ID:	1822
INPUT:	T'áadoo tsxį́įłgo bits'ą́ą́' hidínáhí ; ha'át'íhída doo yá'át'éehii t'ááká <unk> t'ééh lágo , háálá ha'át'íhída baa nideeshaał hiniizįįhgo t'áá bí nízingo yaa naaghá .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't let it be good for you , for he is going to do what he tells us .
GOLD:	Do n't try to avoid doing your duty , and do n't stand with those who plot evil , for the king can do whatever he wants .

ID:	1823
INPUT:	Índa bá halne'ii Néíthan dah yidiił'a'go ání , Jedidáíyah joolyée doo ; Bóhólníihii biniit'aa ákóhozhdííniid .
PRED:	Then Nathan sent this message to Nathan : “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	and sent word through Nathan the prophet that they should name him Jedidiah ( which means “ beloved of the Lord ” ) , as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	Zíínas , bee haz'áanii yína'niłtinii , índa Apálas , t'áá ha'át'íhída doo yídin nilį́į́góó ádíílíiłgo dah náádidoot'ash .
PRED:	Greet the law , Apollos , Apollos , and Apollos , or Apollos , or Apollos , or anything else else .
GOLD:	Do everything you can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos with their trip . See that they are given everything they need .

ID:	1825
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , yót'ááh hiníláii ąą áníléehgo nił hadaoldóóh ! Daadził bidinílníihgo daałid doo !
PRED:	Rise up , O Lord , and let the heavens be filled with smoke .
GOLD:	Open the heavens , Lord , and come down.Touch the mountains so they billow smoke .

ID:	1826
INPUT:	Samériya kéyahgi kéédahat'ínígíí éí Beth-éíven kin shijaa'gi béégashii yáázh be'elyaii yaa nitsinákah doo . Diné índa nááda'iiłniihii éí yaa bił dahoneeni yę́ę yaa yínííł danilį́įgo daacha doo , háálá ayóó át'é dayó'ní yę́ę bił ahóóyáa doo .
PRED:	The people of Samaria will die in the hill country of Samaria , and the calf will be filled with joy . They will weep for joy because you are great .
GOLD:	The people of Samaria tremble in fearfor their calf idol at Beth-aven , and they mourn for it.Though its priests rejoice over it , its glory will be stripped away .

ID:	1827
INPUT:	Héímath hoolyéii éí bik'ą́ąhgo éiyá e'e'aahjigo Ayóó'át'é Tónteel hoolyéhígíí bibąąhgóó bee hoodzo doo . Díí éí e'e'aahjígo hoodzo doo .
PRED:	The boundary will be at the Mediterranean Sea , and it will be extended to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	“ On the west side , the Mediterranean itself will be your border from the southern border to the point where the northern border begins , opposite Lebo-hamath .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	Índa Zedekáíyah ałdó' bináá' haa'nil , áádóó Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí béésh da'ahólzha'í yee dahwiistł'ǫ́ǫgo Bábilan kéyahgóó tsinaabąąs bee hoł aníbą́ą́z . Áko dajiztsą́ bijį́įjį' awáalyaa góne' ahóółt'e' .
PRED:	Then Zedekiah made his eyes and his eyes , and the king of Babylon went to Babylon . The king of Babylon died , and they went to Egypt to Egypt .
GOLD:	Then he gouged out Zedekiah 's eyes and bound him in bronze chains , and the king of Babylon led him away to Babylon . Zedekiah remained there in prison until the day of his death .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	T'óó badaa'ihígi ádajit'ínígíí áádóó bee haz'áanii dajiitíihii biniinaa haa nísíst'įįd áádóó doo honísh'į́į da sélį́į́' .
PRED:	I am innocent , for I am innocent , and I am innocent .
GOLD:	I turned my face away and punished them because of their defilement and their sins .

ID:	1830
INPUT:	Habákak bisodizin
PRED:	Habakkuk 's prayer for the
GOLD:	Habakkuk 's Prayer

ID:	1831
INPUT:	Alezáander béésh łichí'ii yitsidii lą'ígóó doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áshííł'įįd da ; baa nijiyáhígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii k'ééhodidoodlííł .
PRED:	He did n't let me go through the chains of iron , for he has done many things for the Lord .
GOLD:	Alexander the coppersmith did me much harm , but the Lord will judge him for what he has done .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	Ayóó át'é áda'azįįdii binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	A Vision of Praise
GOLD:	Parable of the Great Feast

ID:	1833
INPUT:	Éí bąą naanish bidziilii bee badahojoobá'ígo ájiilaa . Naa'azhníídee'go t'áadoo háká oolyeedí da nít'éé' .
PRED:	So he did n't let the poor get their strength , for he could not help them .
GOLD:	That is why he broke them with hard labor ; they fell , and no one was there to help them .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	Háadiyee' Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í yizhchį́ ? Jó , ha'a'aahdi bisǫ' deiiltsą́ , áko bich'į' nidahodiidlaał biniyé niikai .
PRED:	“ Where is the father of the Jews ? But we saw that he was born to the east of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Where is the newborn king of the Jews ? We saw his star as it rose , and we have come to worship him . ”

ID:	1835
INPUT:	Áko Mary Mágdaliin índa Mary ła'ígíí ałdó' éí tséní'ootsélígíí binaashiidę́ę́' siké .
PRED:	Mary Magdalene Magdalene , Mary Magdalene , who was from the tomb of Mary Magdalene .
GOLD:	Both Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting across from the tomb and watching .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Doo yá'áshónígi ánihi'didoolnííł , dííniidii bohodoolníiłgo nihił béédahózin dooleeł biniyé kwe'é atínihideeshłíłígíí díí bee nihich'į' ééhózin doo :
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will do for you , ” says the Lord. “ We will know that I am going to do this , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ ‘ And this is the proof I give you , ' says the Lord , ‘ that all I have threatened will happen to you and that I will punish you here . '

ID:	1837
INPUT:	T'áá éí bijį́ siláo dahayóii bitahdóó doo nídanilyéesii t'áá łichí'ígo yóó'adahidoojah , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ On the day of the army will be taken away from your mighty warriors , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	On that day the most courageous of your fighting menwill drop their weapons and run for their lives , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1838
INPUT:	Nidine'é Ízrel nich'į' nida'iisíi'go biniinaa bi'ana'í bik'eh dadeesdlį́į'go áádóó nízhi' dayózhíigo nich'į' ninákaigo índa díí kin biyi' nída'ookąąhgo sodadilzingo
PRED:	“ Because of the sins of Israel , the people of Israel have abandoned their enemies and pray to their enemies ,
GOLD:	“ If your people Israel are defeated by their enemies because they have sinned against you , and if they turn back and acknowledge your name and pray to you here in this Temple ,

ID:	1839
INPUT:	Átsé nídízídígíí naadiin dį́į́'góó yoołkáałgo <unk> ayóó át'é tooh nílínígíí bibąąhgi sézį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	The first day I was on the fourteenth day of the Nile River .
GOLD:	On April 23 , as I was standing on the bank of the great Tigris River ,

ID:	1840
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Bóhólníihii bik'ijidlíii nílíinii , yah aninááh . Ha'át'íishą' biniyé tł'óo'di sínízį́ ? Kin góne' ná hasht'ehooshłaa áádóó ghą́ą́'ask'idii ałdó' bá hasht'ehooshłaa .
PRED:	Then he said , “ O Lord , why are you ready to enter the house of the Lord ? Why have you been ready to prepare for your camels ? ”
GOLD:	Laban said to him , “ Come and stay with us , you who are blessed by the Lord ! Why are you standing here outside the town when I have a room all ready for you and a place prepared for the camels ? ”

ID:	1841
INPUT:	háálá bee ak'e'ashchínígíí ałtso bohodoolnííł biniyé díí k'ééhodi'nééh yoołkááł át'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	For this is written in the Scriptures : “ It will happen to this day . ”
GOLD:	For those will be days of God 's vengeance , and the prophetic words of the Scriptures will be fulfilled .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	Kwe'é hool'áágóó hanáshyį́įh doo , kwe'é kééhasht'į́į doo , háálá éí bídin nishłį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	I will live in the place of rest , for there is no rest .
GOLD:	“ This is my resting place forever , ” he said. “ I will live here , for this is the home I desired .

ID:	1843
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Bóhólníihii kóshíłníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1844
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Gíbiyan dine'é hágo yidííniidgo ííłní ; ( áko Gíbiyan dine'é éí doo Ízrel dine'é danilį́į da , nidi Ámor dine'é t'áá ayáhígo yidziihígíí danilį́ . Azhą́ Ízrel dine'é éí Gíbiyan dine'é bich'į' ádee hadazdeesdzíí' nidi Saul éí Ízrel áádóó Júdah dine'é yá yínéés<unk> go Gíbiyan dine'é ałtso nideestsił niizį́į́' : )
PRED:	Then Gideon called the king and said to Gideon , “ He is the son of Gideon , ” Gideon replied . “ He is the tribe of Israel , but he did not destroy the Amorites and the Amorites . But the Israelites did not destroy the Amorites .
GOLD:	So the king summoned the Gibeonites . They were not part of Israel but were all that was left of the nation of the Amorites . The people of Israel had sworn not to kill them , but Saul , in his zeal for Israel and Judah , had tried to wipe them out .

ID:	1845
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Iiláíyashib bik'isóó náá'iiłniihii danilíinii yił dadeeshnishgo dibé bá dáń'dítį́hígíí ádayiilaago dílzingo nideideez'ą́ áádóó dáádílkał yąąh dah deiznilgo Míyah ya'iitł'iníjį' áádóó Hanániyel ya'iitł'iníjį' ałtso tsé deiztł'ingo dílzingo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	Then I took the gatekeepers of the priests and the priests who had been assigned to the Temple of the priests . He rebuilt the wall of the Temple and installed its bolts and bars .
GOLD:	Then Eliashib the high priest and the other priests started to rebuild at the Sheep Gate . They dedicated it and set up its doors , building the wall as far as the Tower of the Hundred , which they dedicated , and the Tower of Hananel .

ID:	1846
INPUT:	Áádóó Héshban kin haal'áádóó Réí<unk> kin haal'áajį' áádóó Bé<unk> nim kin haal'áajį' índa Meihanéíyim kin haal'áádóó Díí<unk> kin haal'áii bikéyahjį' ,
PRED:	From Heshbon , the territory of Heshbon and Dedan , along with the towns of Heshbon and Debir ( which means “ Debir ) .
GOLD:	It extended from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim , and from Mahanaim to the territory of Lo-debar .

ID:	1847
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Éran yich'į' t'áá íiyisí báhóóchįįdgo áho'niiłdįįd nít'éé' ; t'áá éí bijį́ Éran ałdó' bá sodeeszin .
PRED:	The Lord was very angry with Aaron , and Aaron became very angry with them .
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bízhi' baa ch'íhwiish'aah doo ; nihí éí Diyin God ayóó át'éii nilį́įgo baa yádaałti' doo .
PRED:	For I will proclaim your name , O Lord my God , and I will proclaim your greatness .
GOLD:	I will proclaim the name of the Lord ; how glorious is our God !

ID:	1849
INPUT:	Bíni' á<unk> jidlo'ii éí t'áadoo biniyéhí daígíí t'áadoo beijólíhí doo ; jó , t'áadoo biniyéhí daígíí k'ééhodidoodlííł .
PRED:	Do n't be fooled by telling lies , for it is not useless .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	1850
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Éíkish éí bá nidaal'a'í áyidííniid , Shoo , díí diné diigis nilį́į́ lá ! Áko ha'át'íísh biniyé bił shaa noohkai ?
PRED:	Then Achish said to his servants , “ What are you doing ? ” So he asked . “ What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	Finally , King Achish said to his men , “ Must you bring me a madman ?

ID:	1851
INPUT:	Díí ádajoolíłígíí t'áá éí nidahojílin ; t'áá aaníí , bi'eda'alyaii yaa dadzólíhígíí t'áá ałtso ałdó' t'áá ákódaat'é .
PRED:	They are as worthless as witnesses of all these things . They are all who trust in idols .
GOLD:	And those who make idols are just like them , as are all who trust in them .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó Bóhólníihii baa dzíínílí , háálá Bóhólníihii Diyin God yee bidziilii hool'áágóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	trust in the Lord , for he is the God of God forever .
GOLD:	Trust in the Lord always , for the Lord God is the eternal Rock .

ID:	1853
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' bił nidahazt'i'ii bits'ąą dasinoonáago k'ad Christ bił Diyin God bii' nídanihidi'dees'į́į́' .
PRED:	For Christ has seen the world , and now we have seen the power of God .
GOLD:	For you died to this life , and your real life is hidden with Christ in God .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó shidine'é yóó'adajiizh'eezhgo bąą k'ad kwe'é ha'át'íí shee hólǫ́ ? ní Bóhólníihii . Bá nidajil'a'í hahóół'áago shízhi' t'áá ákwíí jį́ baa'ihgo bá yáti'go hoolzhish , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ Do n't you reject my people ? Why have you abandoned me ? That is why I am the Lord , ” says the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	What is this ? ” asks the Lord . “ Why are my people enslaved again ? Those who rule them shout in exultation . My name is blasphemed all day long .

ID:	1855
INPUT:	áko ła' nízhdiinilgo jiyą́ągo níjoodááł , áko hazhé'é áádóó hamá baa nídzídzáago ła' baazhnínilgo éí ałdó' ła' yiyííyą́ą́' . Nidi náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bits'íís bii'dóó tsés'ná bitł'izh nízhdiinilígíí éí t'áadoo bee bił hojoolne' da .
PRED:	So he went to his father and returned to his father and gave him some of his mother . But some of the young lion had intercourse with milk and honey . But the lion refused to eat the milk and honey .
GOLD:	He scooped some of the honey into his hands and ate it along the way . He also gave some to his father and mother , and they ate it . But he did n't tell them he had taken the honey from the carcass of the lion .

ID:	1856
INPUT:	T'áadoo dilyésí bíni' ábi'dildįįh ! Áádóó bíni' łoh néidees'į́į'ii t'áá bí yiih nídoodááł ; bíni' ábidoołdįįłii yiih yitłíísh !
PRED:	Do n't be tossed into a trap ; it is a trap for a trap .
GOLD:	So let sudden ruin come upon them ! Let them be caught in the trap they set for me ! Let them be destroyed in the pit they dug for me .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	<unk> dóó dah náázhdii'náago Íílim hoolyéegi jiníná ; ákwii naakits'áadahgo tó hadaazlį́ índa páam tsosts'idiingo naazkaadgo ákwe'é nizhníná .
PRED:	So they left Succoth and camped at Marah ( which means “ There is twelve feet long and the water where they traveled . )
GOLD:	They left Marah and camped at Elim , where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees .

ID:	1858
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Summary of Rehoboam 's Reign

ID:	1859
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí dine'é yik'ee dadidoogohii bidááhgóó nidahideeshnił , áko azhé'é índa aye' danilíinii t'áá ła' yik'ee dadidoogoh ; hánígóó dabighanii índa dabik'is ádadoodįįł .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I will raise your ancestors in front of your ancestors , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ I will put obstacles in my people 's path.Fathers and sons will both fall over them.Neighbors and friends will die together . ”

ID:	1860
INPUT:	Dził Ííbal bighą́ą'di bee haz'áanii bee ak'e'doolchííł
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The Altar on Mount Ebal

ID:	1861
INPUT:	Na'adlo' baa na'aldeeh ałníi'gi kééhoht'į́ . Na'adlo' baa ooldahígíí biniinaa shéédahodoosįįł yę́ę doo dashinízin da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of me , for I will not be disgraced . I will do what is right .
GOLD:	They pile lie upon lieand utterly refuse to acknowledge me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1862
INPUT:	Áádóó diné dahóyáanii nidadootsił biniyé bee nihoot'áanii baa dahóóne' , áko Daniel áádóó bik'is danilíinii nideidoołtsił biniyé hadeineeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	The wise men tried to kill Daniel and kill Daniel . They tried to kill Daniel and kill Daniel .
GOLD:	And because of the king 's decree , men were sent to find and kill Daniel and his friends .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	t'áá ákwii nááhidííłnihígíí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bíighahgi nidíílééł , áádóó nik'is áłtsé bich'į' nídíídáałgo bił k'é ná'ahididíí' niił , áko índa nídíídáałgo náádi'yííłnih .
PRED:	When you present the altar to the altar , take your brother and put it on the altar . Then you will return to the priest and put it up to death . ”
GOLD:	leave your sacrifice there at the altar . Go and be reconciled to that person . Then come and offer your sacrifice to God .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nidine'é bee bich'oni'nínígíí bee shéénílniihgo shí ałdó' yisdáshíłteeh .
PRED:	O Lord , rescue me from your presence , O Lord , for you are my people .
GOLD:	Remember me , Lord , when you show favor to your people ; come near and rescue me .

ID:	1865
INPUT:	Náánáła' Íílam kéyahdóó dine'é éí t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindóó ba'aan dį́į́' .
PRED:	The people of Elam
GOLD:	The citizens of West Elam1,254

ID:	1866
INPUT:	Jeremáíyah awáalyaa dzizdá yę́ędą́ą́' Bóhólníihii hach' į' haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	When Jeremiah was in prison , the Lord said to him , “ What do you want ? ”
GOLD:	The Lord had given the following message to Jeremiah while he was still in prison :

ID:	1867
INPUT:	áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah íí'eezhgo Diyin God yá naal'a'í <unk> daláíyah biye' Héínan biye'ké danilíinii bighan góne' yah íí'eezh . Éí dáádéesdáhí Shálam biye' Méíyasíyah bighanígíí bikáa'di naat' áanii danilíinii bighanígíí bíighahgóó hooghango ákóne' yah íí'eezh ,
PRED:	When the angel of the Lord came to the Temple of God , the servant of the Temple of the Lord came to the Temple of the Lord , and they took their daughters to the Temple of Shallum son of Recab .
GOLD:	I took them to the Temple , and we went into the room assigned to the sons of Hanan son of Igdaliah , a man of God . This room was located next to the one used by the Temple officials , directly above the room of Maaseiah son of Shallum , the Temple gatekeeper .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	Háálá dił danílį́įgo áyiilaii bitahgi naashchii' ; tsé'éłkáa'gi doo siláhígi naashchii'go áyiilaa ; łeezh yik'iidooził biniyé t'áadoo łeeshtahjį' yayiinil da .
PRED:	For he has made the blood of the wild animals that scurry along the ground in the dust .
GOLD:	For the blood of her murdersis splashed on the rocks.It is n't even spilled on the ground , where the dust could cover it !

ID:	1869
INPUT:	Kíídar kéyahdóó dibé t'áá ałtso naa áłah ádoolnííł ; Niibéíyath kéyahdóó deenásts'aa' ná chodeidoo'įįł ; shibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáá' náádahidoonihgo dínóodzįįł , índa shikin bii' sohodizin ayóó át'éii ayóó ánóolningo biyi'dóó ak'ijishdlíi doo .
PRED:	All the exiles will come to exile , and all the people of Judah will return to me , and they will worship me in the Temple of the Lord . Then I will bless my people , and I will bless them .
GOLD:	The flocks of Kedar will be given to you , and the rams of Nebaioth will be brought for my altars.I will accept their offerings , and I will make my Temple glorious .

ID:	1870
INPUT:	áko na'ach'ąąh yindoolnishii yinaha'áa doo ; éí óola áádóó béésh łigaii índa béésh łitsoii bee ázhdoolííł ;
PRED:	He will master master master 's master , silver , silver , silver , and bronze .
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	1871
INPUT:	Néíthan éí David yideezteh
PRED:	David 's First Covenant
GOLD:	Nathan Rebukes David

ID:	1872
INPUT:	Nidi díí ch'íhoot'ánígíí t'áá aaníígóó ch'ikę́ę́h t'ah doo diné bee haleehii bee bééhózinii t'áadoo bééhoozingóó
PRED:	But if you do n't know this , it is not a virgin .
GOLD:	“ But suppose the man 's accusations are true , and he can show that she was not a virgin .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ła' háá'áazhgo t'ááłáhígóó kééhat'į́įgo , nít'éé' ła' daaztsą́ągo áádóó ba'áłchíní t'áadoo hazlį́į́'góó , hwe'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí doo hak'éí nilíinii doo yił ahaa doot'ash da , nidi bahastiin yę́ę bitsásk'ehgi bik'is be'asdzą́ą́ náájídlį́į doo biniyé baa nínááhodi'dooltééł índa ahastiin yę́ę bik'is hwee ádíhólníihgo ha'áłchíní hodooleeł .
PRED:	So one of them died , and one of his family died without children . She will be married to her husband , and she will be married to her husband . She will be married to her husband , but she will be married to her husband .
GOLD:	“ If two brothers are living together on the same property and one of them dies without a son , his widow may not be married to anyone from outside the family . Instead , her husband 's brother should marry her and have intercourse with her to fulfill the duties of a brother-in-law .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	Áłah náhdleehgo daahsánígíí éí doo Bóhólníihii bidiyingo adą́ át'ée da .
PRED:	“ You must not worship the Lord at the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When you meet together , you are not really interested in the Lord 's Supper .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	Didlidgo náádahaniihii índa bąąhági át'éii biniyé náádahaniihii náádayiiłniihígíí doo baa nił hóózhǫǫd da .
PRED:	I offered sacrifices to the burnt offering and sacrifices of burnt offerings and sacrifices .
GOLD:	You were not pleased with burnt offeringsor other offerings for sin .

ID:	1876
INPUT:	Díidíígíí t'áá ałtso ti'hoo'nííh bee dadeezt'i'ii ádaat'é .
PRED:	This is the fate of everyone who has thrown down to death .
GOLD:	But all this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	1877
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa yił hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' , áádóó éí kéyah biyi'góó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' bééhózínígo tádííyá .
PRED:	Then the Lord told Joshua and Joshua everything he did .
GOLD:	So the Lord was with Joshua , and his reputation spread throughout the land .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	Áko Jerobówam hó ádił ni'jiisí'ígíí bee Ízrel dine'é ádił ni'iidzííh biih jíínilgo biniinaa Ízrel dine'é yóó'iididoo'ááł .
PRED:	But Jeroboam did not forgive the sins of Jeroboam 's sin . He will forgive Israel .
GOLD:	He will abandon Israel because Jeroboam sinned and made Israel sin along with him . ”

ID:	1879
INPUT:	Shiye' , shizaad nabíhíłtsaad ; ádíshnínígíí yíníłts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	My child , listen to my children ; listen to what I say .
GOLD:	My child , pay attention to what I say.Listen carefully to my words .

ID:	1880
INPUT:	t'áá shinii'jį' dine'é shá nídahałchįįhgo hoolzhish ; éí dá'ák'ehgi nááda'iiłniih , áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí bis sit'éhígíí bee ályaii yikáa'gi tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii deidiłid ;
PRED:	I was angry with my people , and he burned incense at the table at the table . He burned incense on the altar and burned incense .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	1881
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii binááł hasht'e'niidooniłgo ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii índa didlidgo nááhániihii néidiyoołnih ,
PRED:	Then the priest must present the sin offering to the Lord as a sin offering and a burnt offering .
GOLD:	The priest will present these offerings before the Lord : first the sin offering and the burnt offering ;

ID:	1882
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ákwe'é yílk'id binániigi bisóodi da'ałchozhgo lą'í naakai ,
PRED:	So they went into the hill country and headed for many months .
GOLD:	There happened to be a large herd of pigs feeding on the hillside nearby .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	Mózes áádóó Éran díí bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóigo áhooníiłii t'áá ałtso Féro binááł ájiilaa , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Féro bijéí nááyííłtł'isgo bikéyahdóó t'áadoo Ízrel dine'é yéé'níłnii' da .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded Pharaoh . He refused to listen to Pharaoh and his heart , just as the Lord had predicted .
GOLD:	Moses and Aaron performed these miracles in Pharaoh 's presence , but the Lord hardened Pharaoh 's heart , and he would n't let the Israelites leave the country .

ID:	1884
INPUT:	Diné léi' Job wolyéego Uz kéyahdi kééhat'į́ ; éí diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahí da nít'éé' áádóó t'áá ákogi ááníiłii nilį́į́ nít'éé' índa Diyin God yidósin áádóó bąąhági át'éii yá doolnih nít'éé' .
PRED:	One day Job was a man who lived in the land of the land of the Negev . He refused to do what was pleasing in the sight of God and righteous .
GOLD:	There once was a man named Job who lived in the land of Uz . He was blameless — a man of complete integrity . He feared God and stayed away from evil .

ID:	1885
INPUT:	Nidi Názarait danilíinii éí wáin deidlą́ągo ádaahłaa áádóó dahalne'ii danilíinii , T'áadoo dahołne'é , dabidohníigo bich'į' hadasoohdzíí' .
PRED:	But you have made a new wine and new wine , and you will say , ‘ Do n't be afraid of your prophets . '
GOLD:	“ But you caused the Nazirites to sin by making them drink wine , and you commanded the prophets , ‘ Shut up ! '

ID:	1886
INPUT:	Áko télii éí Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í yiyiiłtsą́ągo Béílam yił neeztį́įgo Béílam báhóóchįįdgo bigish yee télii néineesxaal .
PRED:	When Balaam saw the angel of the Lord 's Covenant , he crushed Balaam 's staff with his donkey .
GOLD:	This time when the donkey saw the angel , it lay down under Balaam . In a fit of rage Balaam beat the animal again with his staff .

ID:	1887
INPUT:	háálá kodóó náásgóó hooghan t'ááłá'íígíí biyi'dóó ashdlajilt'éego ałts'ájíkah doo , tá'ígíí éí naakiígíí yił ałk'ijį' danidlį́į doo , índa naakiígíí éí tá'ígíí yił ałk'ijį' danidlį́į doo ;
PRED:	For each day you will have one of them , and each of them will be able to be his brothers .
GOLD:	From now on families will be split apart , three in favor of me , and two against — or two in favor and three against .

ID:	1888
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel áyidííniid , Ádaanínígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ła' bá nídiiłteeh . Áko Sámuel éí Ízrel dine'é áyidííniid , Nílááh , t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihikin hadaas'áágóó anáhóhkááh .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Samuel , “ Get up and listen to the king of Israel ! ” So Samuel said to Samuel , “ Go back to the towns of Israel . ”
GOLD:	and the Lord replied , “ Do as they say , and give them a king. ” Then Samuel agreed and sent the people home .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	Áko tsinaa'eeł biih jííyá , nít'éé' ííyol . Áko t'áá íiyisí t'óó bił adahayóí .
PRED:	So the wind went into the boat , and many were filled with the wind .
GOLD:	Then he climbed into the boat , and the wind stopped . They were totally amazed ,

ID:	1890
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' díí bee nihonish'aahígíí éí Jew dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii díí Diyin God bikin áńdeidléhígíí bá kódaaht'į́į dooleeł : éí aláahgo naat'áanii binaalye'é bee t'áá tooh nílínígíí e'e'aahdę́ę'go nidi bíká anídaahjah ; da'ílíinii díí diné tsį́įłgo baa dahidoohnił , áko doo dabidí'nóoltł'ah da .
PRED:	And if I am giving these instructions to the leaders of the Jews , you will live in the middle of the Euphrates River , and do n't let the kings of the Euphrates River . ”
GOLD:	“ Moreover , I hereby decree that you are to help these elders of the Jews as they rebuild this Temple of God . You must pay the full construction costs , without delay , from my taxes collected in the province west of the Euphrates River so that the work will not be interrupted .

ID:	1891
INPUT:	Áko yá'át'éehii bidiníná doo yá'át'éehii yee k'éédashidiidlaa , índa ayóó'óósh'nínígíí bidiníná shik'ee dadeeznih .
PRED:	He has done good for me for doing good ; he has filled me with violence .
GOLD:	They repay evil for good , and hatred for my love .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	Neeznádiin honááhai nidi hats'íís k'adę́ę daatsaahgo doo baa nitsídzíkees da , áádóó Sarah doo ałchíi daígíí ałdó' doo baa nitsídzízkéez da , nidi hwe'oodlą' t'áadoo łahgo ádzaa da .
PRED:	The next day he was sick when he was sick , and he was not born to his own body . He had not been married to his own body .
GOLD:	And Abraham 's faith did not weaken , even though , at about 100 years of age , he figured his body was as good as dead — and so was Sarah 's womb .

ID:	1893
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman dah diiyáago bikáá' náá'iiniihí béésh łitsoii bee ályaii si'áníjį' Bóhólníihii binááł hajiyá ; éí níbaal bii' dahozdísiniigi si'ą́ ; ákwii t'ááłáhídi míilgo didlidgo nááhániihii nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	So Solomon left the bronze altar and placed it in front of the Lord 's bronze pillars at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	There in front of the Tabernacle , Solomon went up to the bronze altar in the Lord 's presence and sacrificed 1,000 burnt offerings on it .

ID:	1894
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ánááshidoo'niid , Diné nílíinii , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Éí bijį́įdi bikáá' náá'iiniihí ályaago bikáá'dóó bik'ehgo hoogáałii bik'ehgo didlidgo náádahaniihii deididoołił , áádóó naaldlooshii náádahaaznii'ii bidił yikáa'gi tádeididoosas .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord : “ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : The altar of the Presence on the altar of the Lord , the God of the Presence on the altar .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : These will be the regulations for the burning of offerings and the sprinkling of blood when the altar is built .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	éí bąą díí baa ákodanoozį́į́' : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God , bí Diyin God nilį́ ; bí Diyin God ba'ahódlíii nilį́ ; éí bibee aha'deet'áanii áádóó yee a'ááh nízinii ayóó'ádabó'níinii índa bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yik'eh dahół'íinii miildi ałk'i ná'iyoochííłgóó yá yi'ósin .
PRED:	But this is what the Lord your God says : “ The Lord your God is a faithful love and faithful love . He is a faithful love for those who love him and faithful love to those who love him .
GOLD:	Understand , therefore , that the Lord your God is indeed God . He is the faithful God who keeps his covenant for a thousand generations and lavishes his unfailing love on those who love him and obey his commands .

ID:	1896
INPUT:	Aláahgo shinanit'a'í nílíinii , baa nánooshkąąh , shidiits'į́į́h . T'óó shaa hojoobá'ígo nánooshkąąhígíí t'áadoo bits'ąą nanít'áhí ; naaltsoos ííł'íní Jánathan bighandi doo dadeestsaałígíí biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ doo anáshidííł'aał da .
PRED:	Listen to me , my lord the king ! Listen to my plea ! Do n't let me be afraid of the poor .
GOLD:	Listen , my lord the king , I beg you . Do n't send me back to the dungeon in the house of Jonathan the secretary , for I will die there . ”

ID:	1897
INPUT:	Nidinééh danilíinii bí nabídídííłkiłgo hazhó'ó yee nił dahodoolnih . Éí bąą shí shidinééh ajooba' bee bich'oninéego baa nitsíníkees le' , háálá áda'azįįd bijį́ niikai . Baa nánihooshkąąh , t'áá ha'át'íhída naa nídéelii éí ná nidaal'a'í áádóó David niye' baa didíí'ááł .
PRED:	“ Take care of your young men and tell them what I am saying , for I am ready to give you victory over your enemies . I will give you victory over your servant David and your servants .
GOLD:	Ask your own men , and they will tell you this is true . So would you be kind to us , since we have come at a time of celebration ? Please share any provisions you might have on hand with us and with your friend David . ”

ID:	1898
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí , éí naaldlooshii bitahdóó aláahgo ábóodziilii áádóó ha'át'íhída doo yik'ee dah diilyeedii ,
PRED:	The lion has roared like a lion , and the Almighty has no stronger than a lion .
GOLD:	the lion , king of animals , who wo n't turn aside for anything ,

ID:	1899
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii yee háádoodzihii t'áá biyi'ídi yaa nitsékos , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii éí saad nichǫ́'í bizéé'dę́ę́' háálį́ .
PRED:	The godly will say , but the words of the wicked will say , ‘ The wicked are a wicked lion . '
GOLD:	The heart of the godly thinks carefully before speaking ; the mouth of the wicked overflows with evil words .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	Haa'íyee' , bich'į' yaa ádadii'níiłgo bich'į' nidahodiidlaał , Bóhólníihii ánihiilaii bich'į' nitsidadidiigoh !
PRED:	Let us stand up to the Lord , and let us fall into the trap of the Lord .
GOLD:	Come , let us worship and bow down.Let us kneel before the Lord our maker ,

ID:	1901
INPUT:	Dį́į'go naanáz'áhídóó bidee' hadaaz'áa dooígíí t'áá ła' bizhi'ee bidee' t'áá bił ádadoohłííł , índa béésh łitsoii bik'ídadoołtih .
PRED:	Make two bronze rings and attach them to the four corners of the bull and its carrying poles .
GOLD:	Make horns for each of its four corners so that the horns and altar are all one piece . Overlay the altar with bronze .

ID:	1902
INPUT:	Jó nihitsii' t'ááłá'í níláhígo nidi ałtso dayéélta' .
PRED:	All who have been taken away from your hair , and you are all taken away .
GOLD:	And the very hairs on your head are all numbered .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	Áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii bibee adziil yee Jesus Gáliliijį' nádzá , áádóó bee baa hane'ígíí kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' bikáá'góó adahosiists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of Jesus returned from Galilee , and he returned from Galilee to Galilee .
GOLD:	Then Jesus returned to Galilee , filled with the Holy Spirit 's power . Reports about him spread quickly through the whole region .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' shidine'é Ízrel bá náhodideesh'áałgo ákwii k'ihodideeshłééł , áko t'áá bí bikéyahgi kéédahat'į́į doo , índa doo nahjį' kónáádabidi'doolníił da , áádóó ałk'idą́ą́' doo yá'áshóonii ba'áłchíní atídahał'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę doo ákónáádahodoodlíił da .
PRED:	I will bring them back to my people of Israel , and I will bring them back to their own land . I will never again again again again again again again again again again again again .
GOLD:	And I will provide a homeland for my people Israel , planting them in a secure place where they will never be disturbed . Evil nations wo n't oppress them as they 've done in the past ,

ID:	1905
INPUT:	A'át'e' doo bijéí bii' dahólóonii bik'idahojidlí , háálá Diyin God dayoo'į́į doo .
PRED:	God blesses those who trust in their hearts , for God blesses them .
GOLD:	God blesses those whose hearts are pure , for they will see God .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bizaad k'ehgo Jónah hasht'e'ádiilyaago Nínevehgóó dashdiiyá . Ákohgo Níneveh ayóó át'é kin haal'á ha'naa nijígháahgo tágí jį́ oodááł bíighah .
PRED:	And the Lord said to Jonah , “ We 've left Nineveh and stayed there for three days . ” So he stayed there for three days .
GOLD:	This time Jonah obeyed the Lord 's command and went to Nineveh , a city so large that it took three days to see it all .

ID:	1907
INPUT:	Áko Íílai biye'ké éí diné doo yá'áshóonii nilį́ ; Bóhólníihii doo yééhósin da .
PRED:	Eli 's sons did not know what was evil in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Now the sons of Eli were scoundrels who had no respect for the Lord

ID:	1908
INPUT:	Áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii dabitélii adeiniiłkaad ; asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii nináda'iisdla'jį' bibéégashii ąąh nidayiinííł .
PRED:	The donkeys of their father 's donkeys , five oxen for five oxen .
GOLD:	They take the orphan 's donkeyand demand the widow 's ox as security for a loan .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	Áko ałk'idą́ą́' nooh dashoołchínígíí daohsą́ą doo , áádóó ániidígíí bá hwiidoo'aał biniyé nooh dashoołchínígíí ch'ídahidoohjih .
PRED:	You did n't eat the food you gave you . You did n't use it to prepare the timber you did .
GOLD:	You will have such a surplus of crops that you will need to clear out the old grain to make room for the new harvest !

ID:	1910
INPUT:	Éí dik'ą́ągo ályaa ; ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí ahą́ą́h nániilyáago yílá deests'ǫ́ǫ́d áníłnééz áádóó yílá deests'ǫ́ǫ́d áníłtéelgo
PRED:	He cast the chestpiece to the top of the chestpiece to the ephod and the top of the chestpiece .
GOLD:	He made the chestpiece of a single piece of cloth folded to form a pouch nine inches square .

ID:	1911
INPUT:	Nidi Nan biye' Jáshowa wolyéii nihiląąjį' sizínígíí éí díí kéyah yiih doogááł ; éí chánah ádeínóhsin ; jó , éí kéyahígíí Ízrel dine'é bíí' dooleełgo íidoolííł .
PRED:	But Joshua son of Nun , which is set aside for the tribes of Israel . He will enter the land I am giving you .
GOLD:	Instead , your assistant , Joshua son of Nun , will lead the people into the land . Encourage him , for he will lead Israel as they take possession of it .

ID:	1912
INPUT:	Háálá Silvéínas áádóó Timothy índa shí ałdó' nihitahgóó Diyin God biYe' Jesus Christ baa dahwiilne'ígíí éí , Aoo' , índa , Dooda , doo ha'níinii át'ée da , nidi bí éí , Aoo' oołeełii nilį́ .
PRED:	We are writing to Timothy , Timothy , Timothy , and the Son of Christ Jesus Christ is the Son of Christ , and Christ is the Son of Christ .
GOLD:	For Jesus Christ , the Son of God , does not waver between “ Yes ” and “ No. ” He is the one whom Silas , Timothy , and I preached to you , and as God 's ultimate “ Yes , ” he always does what he says .

ID:	1913
INPUT:	Daal'aadii índa da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii díidí yaa nídadóot'įįł biniyé ahíikai .
PRED:	The apostles and Silas are witnesses of the church .
GOLD:	So the apostles and elders met together to resolve this issue .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	Áko tł'ée'go Bóhólníihii éí Sálaman yich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago ííłní , Nisodizin diséts'ą́ą́' áádóó díí kin biyi'dóó shich'į' náá'iiniih doo biniyé ádá nidinisht'ą́ .
PRED:	That night the Lord appeared to Solomon and said , “ I have heard my prayer and pray to you .
GOLD:	Then one night the Lord appeared to Solomon and said , “ I have heard your prayer and have chosen this Temple as the place for making sacrifices .

ID:	1915
INPUT:	Níla' ąą ánéinil'įįhgo hináanii t'áá ałtso nináneel'ą́ąjį' deinízinii yee hwiih danilį́įgo áníł'į́ .
PRED:	When you open the door , you will see everything you see , and your hands are under your hands .
GOLD:	When you open your hand , you satisfy the hunger and thirst of every living thing .

ID:	1916
INPUT:	Shiye' nílíinii , ákódaaníinii dadeeskaigóó bikéé' dah doóya' lágo ; t'ááká bikék'edóoya' lágo .
PRED:	My child , do n't let your children stay away ; do n't follow your instructions .
GOLD:	My child , do n't go along with them ! Stay far away from their paths .

ID:	1917
INPUT:	Símiyan dine'é bitahdóó éí Amáíhad biye' <unk> niiltį́ ;
PRED:	Simeon son of Simeon was leader of the tribe of Simeon .
GOLD:	SimeonShemuel son of Ammihud

ID:	1918
INPUT:	Áko tł'éé' hazlį́į́' áádóó jį́ hazlį́į'jį' ashdla'a jį́ azlį́į́' .
PRED:	So evening passed and morning , marking the fourth day .
GOLD:	And evening passed and morning came , marking the fifth day .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę tsosts'idiin yilt'éego Ííjip kéyah góyaa yíkai , áádóó k'ad éí yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' ánéelą́'ígi ánóohłą́ą'go ánihiilaa .
PRED:	“ When your ancestors arrived in Egypt , he made the heavens and the stars of Egypt ,
GOLD:	When your ancestors went down into Egypt , there were only seventy of them . But now the Lord your God has made you as numerous as the stars in the sky !

ID:	1920
INPUT:	Áádóó Beth-hóran wódahdi kin shijaa'ígíí índa Beth-hóran wóyahdi kin shijaa'ígíí ditą́ągo binaagóó ahéé'ítł'ingo áádóó bidáń'daditį́įhgo éí bich'ą́ą́h dah nída'atį́įhgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then he measured the north side of the north side of Beth-horon , and he broke it into the courtyard of the Temple .
GOLD:	He fortified the towns of Upper Beth-horon and Lower Beth-horon , rebuilding their walls and installing barred gates .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	Bii' tá'ádígisí bá naaz'ą́ą dooleełígíí éí tsinaabąąs bijáád bá nidaaz'áhígíí bitł'ááhdóó bídiilyį́į́' ; bijáád éí dį́į'go biyaadóó bąąh dah naaznilgo dego naakidi ké naazláádóó táá' dah alzhin ádanízah .
PRED:	He cast four bronze pillars that decorated the cart , and he cast four bronze basin across the cart .
GOLD:	Under the panels were four wheels that were connected to axles that had been cast as one unit with the cart . The wheels were 21/4 feet in diameter

ID:	1922
INPUT:	Táá' yiską́ągo Féro ch'éenidoołt'eełgo ninaanish naa néididoo'ááł , áádóó Féro bibee adlání bee t'áá nahdę́ę́' baa ná'íkááh nít'éé' yę́ę bee bílák'ee nínáá'íkáah doo .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh ordered that he would leave Pharaoh 's work for Pharaoh 's work , and he will leave Pharaoh 's cup of Pharaoh .
GOLD:	Within three days Pharaoh will lift you up and restore you to your position as his chief cup-bearer .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bikin hadaas'áii bíí' daazlį́'ígíí łahjį' , índa dahootsooígíí Líívai dine'é yaa deideez'ą́ ; éí Bóhólníihii yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo ádzaa .
PRED:	So the tribe of Levi received the following towns and pasturelands from the tribe of Levi , just as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	So by the command of the Lord the people of Israel gave the Levites the following towns and pasturelands out of their own grants of land .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	Bik'ee ti'hoo'níihii nik'iildogo nąąh nááháka'go ts'ídá doo nidziil da .
PRED:	I am deeply troubled by the grave , and you will not be crushed .
GOLD:	If you fail under pressure , your strength is too small .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí Saul áyidííniid , Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é binanit'a'í nílíinii díí jį́ nąąh néist'įįd , áádóó bił kééhót'íinii ła' yeidiní'ą́ ; éí niláahgo yá'át'éehii nilį́ .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ O Lord , you are the king of Israel . You are the one who has given you today . ”
GOLD:	And Samuel said to him , “ The Lord has torn the kingdom of Israel from you today and has given it to someone else — one who is better than you .

ID:	1926
INPUT:	Éí bide ádahólzinii t'áá ákogi át'éego yá k'éédoo'nííł áádóó dichin danilíinii ya'ałtso' . Bóhólníihii éí awáalyaaí ch'ééyii'nííł .
PRED:	The Lord will feed the godly , and he will feed them in prison .
GOLD:	He gives justice to the oppressedand food to the hungry.The Lord frees the prisoners .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	Áko diné doo yá'áshóonii yóó'ádabi'diilyaago yiiłtsą́ . Hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah anídaakah áádóó ch'éédahakááh nít'éé' , áko kin haal'áagi yaa nidaaskai yę́ę baa dahoyoos'nah . Díí ałdó' t'áadoo nánídlíní da .
PRED:	The wicked will die , and the people of the wicked will return to the sanctuary of the sanctuary . They will never again return to their towns , and they will never be forgotten .
GOLD:	I have seen wicked people buried with honor . Yet they were the very ones who frequented the Temple and are now praised in the same city where they committed their crimes ! This , too , is meaningless .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	Da' nihíísh nihitahdóó ła' nihá naal'a'í hólǫ́ǫgo , áko éí nihwiiłdlaadę́ę́' , doodaii' na'niłkaadę́ę́' nádzáago ábididoohniił , Hágoshį́į́ nídaahgo ííyą́ ?
PRED:	“ Are you a servant of your servant ? Do n't you see a fig tree from a tree ?
GOLD:	“ When a servant comes in from plowing or taking care of sheep , does his master say , ‘ Come in and eat with me ' ?

ID:	1929
INPUT:	Diné éí hataos'nii' t'ah doo díík'ǫsh bił álnéhígíí hééł ádajiilaago dah dazhdiijaa' ; biyi' tááda'oo'nihí éí daha'éé' bee ałch'į' beda'astł'ǫ́ǫgo dah dazhdiiłjid .
PRED:	“ If you have been circumcised , you must eat the Passover meal with the bread and eat it with the Passover meal , and put it on the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	The Israelites took their bread dough before yeast was added . They wrapped their kneading boards in their cloaks and carried them on their shoulders .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	This message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1931
INPUT:	Háálá ó'oołdįįłii Bábilan dine'é yich'į' yinééł ; diné há dahayóii deidoołnéełgo hoda'ałtį́į́' dayiizti' , háálá Bóhólníihii Diyin God k'éédoo'níiłii nilíinii ałtso k'ééhodidoodlííł .
PRED:	For he will destroy those who fight against Babylon , for he will destroy those who fight against the Lord their God .
GOLD:	Destroying armies come against Babylon.Her mighty men are captured , and their weapons break in their hands.For the Lord is a God who gives just punishment ; he always repays in full .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	Tsosts'idi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ni'iileehígíí nídeínółtah doo ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' bee higéshí bee tł'oh naadą́ą́' higéésh hahalzhishdóó níléí tsosts'idi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ni'iileehígíí nídeí<unk> <unk> doo .
PRED:	“ On the Sabbath day of your Sabbath , you will harvest your grain on the Sabbath day of grain , but you will be allowed to produce the Sabbath days of your harvest .
GOLD:	“ Count off seven weeks from when you first begin to cut the grain at the time of harvest .

ID:	1933
INPUT:	Ánááshidi'ní , Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bich'į' dínáahgo ádíshnínígíí bee bich'į' hadíídzih .
PRED:	“ Son of man , give me this message to the people of Israel :
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Son of man , go to the people of Israel and give them my messages .

ID:	1934
INPUT:	Hweda'awéé' hanááł nihídahidiiltsxisgo dahidiitáah doo , áádóó dahakin haghadahideest'ą́ą doo , índa hweda'asdzą́ą́ yił nidahidoodił .
PRED:	We will be afraid of their sister , and we will die in terror . We will be killed , and their wives will be killed .
GOLD:	Their little children will be dashed to death before their eyes.Their homes will be sacked , and their wives will be raped .

ID:	1935
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii atíhodoolíiłgo hadił hak'ijį' nídoodleeł ; t'áá hó diné nidilt'éego haláahgo t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó yá'át'éehii nilį́įgo diltłish bee nidzistseed , áko shizhé'é David t'áadoo bił bééhóziní . Ízrel dine'é bisiláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í nilíinii Ner biye' Ábner áádóó Júdah dine'é bisiláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í nilíinii Jííther biye' Améísa ákójííł'įįd lá .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish his people , and he will kill his own people . He will die like a sword of justice , the commander of his father , David , David , the commander of Judah , and Abner son of Zeruiah . He was the army of Zeruiah , and Abner son of Zeruiah .
GOLD:	The Lord will repay him for the murders of two men who were more righteous and better than he . For my father knew nothing about the deaths of Abner son of Ner , commander of the army of Israel , and of Amasa son of Jether , commander of the army of Judah .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee ajooba' bee nihił hashne'go sheidiní'ánígíí shį́į́ daonii' .
PRED:	I have told you what you have done to me .
GOLD:	assuming , by the way , that you know God gave me the special responsibility of extending his grace to you Gentiles .

ID:	1937
INPUT:	Nidi doo t'áá k'ad hak'ee'ąą haalwodgóó hakéé' yilwołgo Ábner bitsiidétáán bikée'jigo hatsą́ą́' biyaa góne' hagháinísxi' , áko t'áá ákwe'é naa'ajíígo'go dadziztsą́ , índa t'áá ałtso hakéé' deíjeehígíí naa'ajíígo'go dadziztsáníjį' niníjéé' .
PRED:	But now I went back to the town of any other nations . When I heard about it , I fell to the ground in front of the ground and fell on his head .
GOLD:	But Asahel refused to turn back , so Abner thrust the butt end of his spear through Asahel 's stomach , and the spear came out through his back . He stumbled to the ground and died there . And everyone who came by that spot stopped and stood still when they saw Asahel lying there .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	Díí tséhígíí lą́ą , éí nihí kin ádaał'íní doo danoozį́į' da yę́ę át'é , nidi t'áá éí tsé bee naaná'ástł'inii silį́į́' .
PRED:	These are the same ones who have never abandoned you , but the builders become the cornerstone .
GOLD:	For Jesus is the one referred to in the Scriptures , where it says , ‘ The stone that you builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone . '

ID:	1939
INPUT:	Áko tł'óół bee tsésǫ' góyaa hadahóólo' , háálá kin haal'áii binaa ahéénátł'inígíí bikáa'di bighan .
PRED:	When the stars were thrown into the wall , it covered the walls of the city .
GOLD:	Then , since Rahab 's house was built into the town wall , she let them down by a rope through the window .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę bídayéełkaah yę́ędą́ą́'dóó wóshdę́ę́' shibik'eh hoogáałii bits'áhisoohkaigo doo bik'eh dahosooł'įįd da . Shaa nánóhkááh ; shí ałdó' nihaa náhodeeshłeeł , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii . Áko ádadohní , Ha'át'éegoshą' t'ą́ą́' nináhidiikah ?
PRED:	“ But you have refused to obey my regulations . You have refused to obey my regulations , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ Why are you looking for me ? ” And the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Ever since the days of your ancestors , you have scorned my decrees and failed to obey them . Now return to me , and I will return to you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies. “ But you ask , ‘ How can we return when we have never gone away ? '

ID:	1941
INPUT:	Naat'á gish biniyé bits'áoz'a' t'áá íiyisí dabidziil nít'éé' ; t'óó ahayóí ats'áoz'a'ígíí bitah góne' yadiineez nít'éé' ; dzíneezgo hats'áoz'a' t'óó ahayóigo ho'doot'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	The crown of the new crown was broken , and the branches had been broken . There was half large branches that belonged to the other branches .
GOLD:	Its branches became strong — strong enough to be a ruler 's scepter.It grew very tall , towering above all others.It stood out because of its heightand its many lush branches .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	áko bááh índa ch'iyáán ałtaaskąądii ts'ídá doo yinízin da .
PRED:	He did n't need food for food , and he refused to desire .
GOLD:	They lose their appetitefor even the most delicious food .

ID:	1943
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii nahalne'
PRED:	John the Baptist Foretold
GOLD:	John the Baptist Prepares the Way

ID:	1944
INPUT:	T'áá háiida éí łikání halchin doo biniyé bił aheełt'éii ádá ájiilyaago éí hadine'é bits'ą́ąjį' hodi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	“ Anyone who is ceremonially clean must be cut off from the community .
GOLD:	Anyone who makes incense like this for personal use will be cut off from the community . ”

ID:	1945
INPUT:	Dį́į́' bik'ehgo íidéetą́ą́' , áádóó bidáá' gónaa éí bee adlání bidáá' gónaaígíí nahalingo ch'ilátah hózhóón lílii wolyéii bee naashch'ąą' . T'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiin tóshjeeh bíighahgo bee tó siką́ .
PRED:	It was about to explain to the story of the girl in the middle of the basin . It was about about about about about about about twelve quarts of choice flour . It was 71/2 feet deep from each side of the basin .
GOLD:	The walls of the Sea were about three inches thick , and its rim flared out like a cup and resembled a water lily blossom . It could hold about 16,500 gallons of water .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	1Chr . 21 : 1-27
PRED:	David 's Covenant Promise
GOLD:	David Builds an Altar

ID:	1947
INPUT:	Kódahóót'įįdóó bik'ijį' Heziikáíyah éí ba'ahódlíigo Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'go Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Senákerib éí Júdah kéyahgi nínáago , Kin hadaas'áii ditą́ągo binída'astł'inígíí yisnááh ádeeshłííł , nízingo yináshzhiizh .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah sent this message to Hezekiah : “ The Lord has given King Hezekiah of Assyria to rebuild the fortified towns of Assyria .
GOLD:	After Hezekiah had faithfully carried out this work , King Sennacherib of Assyria invaded Judah . He laid siege to the fortified towns , giving orders for his army to break through their walls .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	Áko asdzání ła' dił bigháńdiniiltałgo naakits'áadah nááhai lá éí yee hináanii ałtso bik'é azee' bąąh ályaa lá nidi , doo ła'da náábidoołááł át'ée da ,
PRED:	A woman who had suffered suffered suffered suffered for twelve years , for a thousand years could not make a human spirit .
GOLD:	A woman in the crowd had suffered for twelve years with constant bleeding , and she could find no cure .

ID:	1949
INPUT:	Diné ła' be'asdzą́ą́ yóó'ayííłt'e'go áádóó asdzání bits'áníyáádóó náánáła' diné ye'asdzą́ą́ náánásdlį́į'go ákoósh yaa nídoodááł ? Ákódahóót'įįdgo éí kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' dooládó' hóóchxǫ' da doo . Bił ałch'į' dah danilwo'ii t'óó ahayóí bił ahił da'díínílyá , áko shich'į' dah nánídááh , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ If a man marries another man 's wife , she has taken her back to another man 's wife ? Why have you abandoned me ? Why have you abandoned me ? ” says the Lord , “ Why have you abandoned me ? ” And the Lord said , “ Go to me ! ”
GOLD:	“ If a man divorces a womanand she goes and marries someone else , he will not take her back again , for that would surely corrupt the land.But you have prostituted yourself with many lovers , so why are you trying to come back to me ? ” says the Lord .

ID:	1950
INPUT:	Shí dé'éyóní nishłį́ áádóó t'óó átsééd nihitah kééhasht'į́ ; łeeh ho'dii'níiłgi łahgo shaa hodinoh'aah , áko shąąh dadziztsánígíí áajį' yóó'áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	“ I am the foreigners living among you , and I will forgive them .
GOLD:	“ Here I am , a stranger and a foreigner among you . Please sell me a piece of land so I can give my wife a proper burial . ”

ID:	1951
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii diné áłah silį́'ígíí yits'ą́ąjį' dah diikaigo , tsinaa'eeł yázhí bii' dzizdáhígíí yiih yikaigo tsinaa'eeł ła' hanaagóó naaznilígíí bił wónaanígóó dah dazh'diił'éél .
PRED:	So the disciples reached the boat and headed for the boat to the ship . So they went to the boat and headed for the boat .
GOLD:	So they took Jesus in the boat and started out , leaving the crowds behind ( although other boats followed ) .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	Diyin dabidi'níinii áádóó Diyin God t'áá aaníinii
PRED:	True and False Worship
GOLD:	Idolatry Brings Destruction

ID:	1953
INPUT:	Diné nahagizgo yáłti'ii áádóó doo áhályáanii biláahgo diné baa hojoobá'ígo doo bina'adlo'góó naagháii agháago yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	Wise words are wise , and fools are wise .
GOLD:	Better to be poor and honestthan to be dishonest and a fool .

ID:	1954
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Dízdiin nááhaidóó bik'ijį' Ííjip dine'é , dadine'é dabitahgóó tabidi'nooskaadii áádę́ę́' áłah ánáhodeeshdlííł ,
PRED:	But this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will scatter the people of Egypt , and I will scatter them among the Egyptians .
GOLD:	“ But this is what the Sovereign Lord also says : At the end of the forty years I will bring the Egyptians home again from the nations to which they have been scattered .

ID:	1955
INPUT:	Kódíshní , Nił honeedlį́įgo ná yá'át'ééh , háálá oo'áłígíí biyaagi diné ayą́ áádóó adlą́ índa bił hózhǫ́ǫgo hinánígíí t'ah náábíláahgo bá yá'ánáánát'éeh dooleełii ádin , áko oo'áłígíí biyaagi nizhdoołdįįł bijį́įjį' Diyin God haidiní'ánígíí biyi' nijishnishgo hwee hólóonii t'éí doodzih .
PRED:	“ Oh , ” he said , “ for he is better to live in the sun , for he is better to be better off than to live . He is better to be better off than to die . ”
GOLD:	So I recommend having fun , because there is nothing better for people in this world than to eat , drink , and enjoy life . That way they will experience some happiness along with all the hard work God gives them under the sun .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kónínígíí bohoolyaa , Éíbraham éí Diyin God joosdląąd , áko ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'éego há haadzíí' . Áko Diyin God bik'is jílį́įgo há ha'oodzíí' .
PRED:	And the Scriptures say , “ This is what God said through Abraham , and he said to Abraham , “ God 's brother , just as he said . ” And God said , “ God has said . ”
GOLD:	And so it happened just as the Scriptures say : “ Abraham believed God , and God counted him as righteous because of his faith. ” He was even called the friend of God .

ID:	1957
INPUT:	Náhookǫsdę́ę́' siláo dah yinéełii nihits'ą́ąjį' nízaadgóó kóhodeeshłííł índa kéyah bii' doo naagháhígóó hóółtseiijį' ahodínéeshkał ; alą́ąjį' yikahígíí éí ha'a'aahjigo tónteel bii'jį' índa akéédę́ę́' yikahígíí éí e'e'aahjigo tónteel bii'jį' ahodínéeshkał ; hats'á dahoníłchxonígíí <unk> xaaz doo , háálá doo yá'áshǫ' ayóó át'éii yaa naayá .
PRED:	I will drive out the land of the north of the north side of the Euphrates River , and I will pour out the rivers into the Mediterranean Sea . I will pour out the rivers into the sea , and I will pour out the sea to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	I will drive away these armies from the north.I will send them into the parched wastelands.Those in the front will be driven into the Dead Sea , and those at the rear into the Mediterranean.The stench of their rotting bodies will rise over the land. ” Surely the Lord has done great things !

ID:	1958
INPUT:	Jew dine'é éí hane' yá'át'éehii doo deiniizį́į́'góó bąą Diyin God yi'ana'í daazlį́į'go nihíjígo nihá yá'íít'ééh . Nidi ałk'idą́ą́' Jew dine'é dabizhé'é yę́ę Diyin God nábiizlá'ígíí binahjį' t'ah nidi Jew dine'é ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	But if you have been unfaithful to God , we have been unfaithful to God 's servants . But if you have been unfaithful to God , you have obeyed the Good News . But if you have been unfaithful to the Jewish leaders of the Jews .
GOLD:	Many of the people of Israel are now enemies of the Good News , and this benefits you Gentiles . Yet they are still the people he loves because he chose their ancestors Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob .

ID:	1959
INPUT:	Áko t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii t'óó ahayóí dahodooleełgo lą'í yóó'adeidínóo'ah .
PRED:	Many false prophets will deceive many prophets , and many will deceive many prophets .
GOLD:	And many false prophets will appear and will deceive many people .

ID:	1960
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'éegoda atída'jił'į́įgo bik'édígi atínídahodi'doolnííł . T'áá jį́įgo nidi badaa'ihii bee tsi'ndajikaígíí hoł nidahooshǫǫh . Baa yáhásinii índa bąą doo dahats'íidii dajílį́įgo áádóó baa bił dahoneenigo yooch'ííd yee danihinó'áahgo nihitah nída'adį́į́h .
PRED:	They will be ashamed of their wickedness , for they will be ashamed of their wickedness . They will be ashamed of lies in terror , and they will be ashamed of lies in terror .
GOLD:	Their destruction is their reward for the harm they have done . They love to indulge in evil pleasures in broad daylight . They are a disgrace and a stain among you . They delight in deception even as they eat with you in your fellowship meals .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii éí Jó'ab áádóó Abísheiyai índa Ítayai yich'į' haadzíi'go kóní , Shí shąą Ábsalam diné ániid naagháii t'áá baa dajiinohba' . Áko diné t'áá ałtso binááł aláahgo naat'áanii éí siláo binanit'a'í t'áá ałtso Ábsalam doo haada dazhdoolííłgóó yee áhodííniid .
PRED:	Then King David told him , “ I will send you his best warriors to fight the king of Ammon , and all the men of Ammon . ” So Absalom told Absalom , “ Do n't be afraid of all the men . ”
GOLD:	And the king gave this command to Joab , Abishai , and Ittai : “ For my sake , deal gently with young Absalom. ” And all the troops heard the king give this order to his commanders .

ID:	1962
INPUT:	Áko i'íí'ą́ągo Jesus hódahooł'aahii naakits'áadahígíí bił dazh'dooyį́į́ł biniyé jidineezbin ,
PRED:	Then Jesus went to the disciples and sat together with them .
GOLD:	When it was evening , Jesus sat down at the table with the Twelve .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	Nihíyoo <unk> łígíí t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'éł'íinii bii' ałtso bił ahóóyá . T'óó ch'í'ít'ánígo hóóne'ígíí nahalingo nihee ninádahahááh .
PRED:	We know that the day of destruction is coming when we learned that comes from the end of the future .
GOLD:	We live our lives beneath your wrath , ending our years with a groan .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Heziikáíyah haadzíi'go ání , Chaha'oh yildoh náásee neeznáá bik'eh ánízahjį' eeldohgo éí t'áá bééhózíní , éí dooda , nidi bíni' chaha'oh neeznáá bik'eh ánízahjį' t'ą́ą́' nídoolkił .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to Hezekiah , “ Go and get ten steps for ten steps , but do n't have ten steps for ten steps . ”
GOLD:	“ The shadow always moves forward , ” Hezekiah replied , “ so that would be easy . Make it go ten steps backward instead . ”

ID:	1965
INPUT:	Ani'įįhii adínóo'į́į́ł áádóó ni'doołtsił índa í'doołdįįł t'éiyá yiniyé nádááh , nidi shí t'éí shidibé iiná bee dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł , áádóó łą́ągo bee dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł biniyé níyá .
PRED:	I will destroy the wicked , and my life will disappear , but my life will be filled with grief .
GOLD:	The thief 's purpose is to steal and kill and destroy . My purpose is to give them a rich and satisfying life .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	Háálá kót'éego baa hóóne' , Melkízedek náá'iiłniihii nilíinii bik'ehgo hool'áágóó náá'iiłniihii nílį́ .
PRED:	For this is what God says : “ He is the High Priest in the order of Melchizedek . ”
GOLD:	And the psalmist pointed this out when he prophesied , “ You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek . ”

ID:	1967
INPUT:	Na'niłkaadii biníbaal nahjį' kólyaaígi át'éegobinahjį' hinishnánígíí shits'á honíle' ; she'iina' éí atł'óii biis<unk> yizdisígíí nahalin ; adiniih bik'ee nihozhneeł'ąąhígíí yee she'iina' niidoołt'ih ; jį́įgo áádóó tł'ée'go shá nihonít'i'go íílééh .
PRED:	My heart is like a pillar of smoke from the Tabernacle , for I am taking care of your life . May the day of Heaven 's Armies be destroyed by night and night .
GOLD:	My life has been blown awaylike a shepherd 's tent in a storm.It has been cut short , as when a weaver cuts cloth from a loom.Suddenly , my life was over .

ID:	1968
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ááníiłgo bee ha'át'íí Diyin God baa hínííł ? Ha'át'íí éí nits'ą́ą́dóó néidiyiilé ?
PRED:	What do you think of God ? What do you want to judge others ?
GOLD:	If you are good , is this some great gift to him ? What could you possibly give him ?

ID:	1969
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá bí bizaad yee yik'i dahodii'ááh , áádóó yah a'atiingi shá baa hwiinít'į́į doo , nízinii łoh bá niit'ááh , índa t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yádaałti'go t'áá ákogi át'éii yiniyé át'íinii nahjį' kódeile' .
PRED:	And let the godly enter the trap of the wicked , and they follow me as a trap of justice .
GOLD:	Those who convict the innocentby their false testimony will disappear.A similar fate awaits those who use trickery to pervert justiceand who tell lies to destroy the innocent .

ID:	1970
INPUT:	Nááyówehgo , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí tsés'náłtsooí hatahjį' yi'doołnih ; nidahaasdzí'ígíí t'áá bí nihits'ąą nida'ádinil'inígíí ałtso ábi'disdįįdjį' yi'doołnih .
PRED:	“ But now , Lord your God will drive you out of the land of the Lord your God has destroyed you .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	1971
INPUT:	Ajéí bił hózhóonii éí azee' idééłnínígíí nahalingo yá'át'ééh , nidi yínííł hade át'įįhgo hatah doo ákóhooł'įįh da .
PRED:	Wise words are like a little heart , but a fool makes a heavy heart sick .
GOLD:	A cheerful heart is good medicine , but a broken spirit saps a person 's strength .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	Áko táá' nídeezid binih yáádayiitséehgo yaa nídiikaígíí tsosts'id nídeezidjį' ałtso yáádayiitsih .
PRED:	Then the third year of the third year , he ordered everyone to enter the place where he had prepared for seven months .
GOLD:	They began piling them up in late spring , and the heaps continued to grow until early autumn .

ID:	1973
INPUT:	áádóó bikáa'gi nahashch'id bikágí yik'ínídeiłtih doo áádóó náábíkáa'gi éí na'at'ą́hí t'áá át'é yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí bik'ínáltihgo ádayósin doo índa tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí éí tsits'aa' dílzinii bąąh hadaazhahígíí bii' nídítsih doo .
PRED:	He must cut off the hide of fine goatskin leather and put it on its carrying poles . Then he will break the Ark of the Covenant and cover it with its carrying poles .
GOLD:	Then they must cover the inner curtain with fine goatskin leather and spread over that a single piece of blue cloth . Finally , they must put the carrying poles of the Ark in place .

ID:	1974
INPUT:	Áádóó áłah ílínígíí t'áá ałtso nidahałáago dahataałígíí éí dahataał índa béésh dilní bee í'dílzoołí yee ádaanínígíí dadiists'ą́ą́' , áko didlidgo náá'iiniihígíí ałtso deidííłidjį' nidahałá bíighah azlį́į́' .
PRED:	When the crowds gathered in their worship , they sang a solemn song to the people who were standing in front of the trumpets . Then they broke up the burnt offering and burned up the burnt offering .
GOLD:	The entire assembly worshiped the Lord as the singers sang and the trumpets blew , until all the burnt offerings were finished .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí yideeztehgo ííłní , T'áadoo ádíníní , hayi'dę́ę́' haninááh !
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Do n't be afraid ! Get up ! Get up ! ”
GOLD:	But Jesus reprimanded him . “ Be quiet ! Come out of the man , ” he ordered .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	<unk> yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro-nííko éí Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yich'į' nídiibaa'go Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígóó yinéełgo aláahgo naat'áanii Josáíyah hach'į' nídiibaa'go Megído kin haal'áagi jiiłtsą́ągo ákwii jiisxį́ .
PRED:	In the fifth year of King Josiah 's reign , he mobilized his army to attack the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River in the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	While Josiah was king , Pharaoh Neco , king of Egypt , went to the Euphrates River to help the king of Assyria . King Josiah and his army marched out to fight him , but King Neco killed him when they met at Megiddo .

ID:	1977
INPUT:	Ne'ásaa' bee íłbézhí t'áadoo daniidóhí ch'il deeníní biyaa hadíídeezígíí nahalingo t'áá dahináago Diyin God hashké nídzingo até'éł'íinii yee nahjį' kóhodoolííł .
PRED:	Do n't let it be like a pot with a pot . Do n't make it clear to God 's fierce anger .
GOLD:	God will sweep them away , both young and old , faster than a pot heats over burning thorns .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	Tó nidayólíhígi daakahgo tó ádingo bichohoo'į́ ádaadįįh , áádóó t'óó bił dahaada łeh .
PRED:	When they find water , they disappear like water , and they disappear .
GOLD:	They count on it but are disappointed.When they arrive , their hopes are dashed .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	Éí t'áá aaníí . Jó , éí doo da'oodlą́ą́góó biniinaa nahgóó adabi'diisti' , nidi ni éí ne'oodlą' bee doo nahgóó andi'dootih da . Áko t'áadoo ádaa hó'niihí , t'óó hodíínísin .
PRED:	That is why he said , “ You are not trying to believe in the faith of faith , but you do n't have faith in faith . ” So you did n't believe it .
GOLD:	Yes , but remember — those branches were broken off because they did n't believe in Christ , and you are there because you do believe . So do n't think highly of yourself , but fear what could happen .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'éé nít'éé' bitahdóó diné doo ła' Ábsalam baa dzólnínígi át'éego baa ha'niih da . Bikétł'ááhdóó bitsiit'áajį' t'áá íiyisí hadaałt'é .
PRED:	There was no one like a man named Absalom , and no one could praise Absalom .
GOLD:	Now Absalom was praised as the most handsome man in all Israel . He was flawless from head to foot .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	Bee ééhózinii daniidzin daaníigo dayííkeed
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Four Thousand
GOLD:	Peter 's Declaration about Jesus

ID:	1982
INPUT:	Háálá ádajooníiłii áádóó hantsíkees shił bééhózin ; ał'ąą dine'é áádóó bizaad ał'ąą ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso áłah áhodeeshłíłígíí baa hodoolzhish , áko nihizhdookahgo bee ayóó ánísht'éii deizdoołtsééł .
PRED:	For I know what I am going to see , and I will see all the nations of the world . I will see the glory of all the nations . ”
GOLD:	“ I can see what they are doing , and I know what they are thinking . So I will gather all nations and peoples together , and they will see my glory .

ID:	1983
INPUT:	Ách'į' kónanihídlééh , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , áko nich'į' dah nídidiikah ; ałk'idą́ą́' nihídayééłkaah yę́ęgi át'éego ániidí ánánihídlééh .
PRED:	Give us what the Lord says : “ Sit in front of us , O Lord , just as you did . ”
GOLD:	Restore us , O Lord , and bring us back to you again ! Give us back the joys we once had !

ID:	1984
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa naayáago Nííbat biye' Jerobówam yee ni'iisí'ígíí t'áá át'é éí bee Ízrel dine'é nida'iisíihgo áyiilaii t'áadoo yóó'iidíí'ą́ą da .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1985
INPUT:	Tį' , Bóhólníihii bich'į' t'ą́ą́' nídiikah , háálá bí nini<unk> nizh , áko bí nánihidoołdzih ; adanihideesnih nidi , hasht'éénihidoodlííł .
PRED:	Come and listen to the Lord , for he will answer you . He will answer you , but I will heal you .
GOLD:	“ Come , let us return to the Lord.He has torn us to pieces ; now he will heal us.He has injured us ; now he will bandage our wounds .

ID:	1986
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii bitsi' bighan góne' ayóó ánóolningo óola yishbizhgo éé' ályaii yee hadít'é .
PRED:	She was a beautiful robe in the palace of the royal palace , and he wore a beautiful robe .
GOLD:	The bride , a princess , looks gloriousin her golden gown .

ID:	1987
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii baa dzíínílíi doo , áko nikee' doo niitł'ááhgóó áyósin doo .
PRED:	For he does not trust in the Lord , and he does not trust in his feet .
GOLD:	for the Lord is your security.He will keep your foot from being caught in a trap .

ID:	1988
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii dabidił éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah iikáah łeh , nidi dabitsį' níbaal haal'áhídóó bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi dadidlid łeh .
PRED:	The blood of the blood of the blood — the blood of the sin offering — the blood of the Most High .
GOLD:	Under the old system , the high priest brought the blood of animals into the Holy Place as a sacrifice for sin , and the bodies of the animals were burned outside the camp .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	Jó , éí t'óó kónízahíjį' diyingo nidaal'a'í t'áá bi'ohgo ájít'éego áhwiinilaa , áádóó aa ha'niihjí índa ił ídlį́į́jí naat'á ch'ah hak'i dííní'ą́ .
PRED:	You have made a little while he has made you right with a crown of honor and honor .
GOLD:	Yet you made them only a little lower than Godand crowned them with glory and honor .

ID:	1990
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bindanit'a'í bi'deesteh
PRED:	The Victory of the Priests
GOLD:	Judgment against Israel 's Leaders

ID:	1991
INPUT:	dį́į́' góne' hanáádiit'i'ígíí éí béril , áádóó ániks , índa jásper ; t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo óola binídadeesghasgo ádaalyaa .
PRED:	On the fourth day , the fourth row was made by two gold , and every green jasper .
GOLD:	The fourth row contained a blue-green beryl , an onyx , and a green jasper . All these stones were set in gold filigree .

ID:	1992
INPUT:	Éíbram éí Ííjip kéyahgi naagháá nít'éé'
PRED:	Abram Rules in Egypt
GOLD:	Abram and Sarai in Egypt

ID:	1993
INPUT:	Áko baa nihinoohkaídóó nídidoohjahgo kin haal'áhígíí dadoołnééł , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí nihaididoo'ááł .
PRED:	When you see that you will die , you will die because the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	you will jump up from your ambush and take possession of the town , for the Lord your God will give it to you .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	Háálá hajéí bee Jesus joodląąhgo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'éego há ha'adzih , áádóó t'áá hó Jesus bee ádee hazdidzihgo yisdáho'diltééh .
PRED:	For he is a faithful person who is right with us , and he will be saved .
GOLD:	For it is by believing in your heart that you are made right with God , and it is by openly declaring your faith that you are saved .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus dayílk'idgóó ajííyáago t'áá hóznízinígíí hágo bizhdííniid , áko éí haa haaskai .
PRED:	When Jesus arrived at the tomb , he called for them , and he healed them .
GOLD:	Afterward Jesus went up on a mountain and called out the ones he wanted to go with him . And they came to him .

ID:	1996
INPUT:	diné shide ádahósinii áádóó agháago shi'ana'í danilį́įgo shinás'áhígíí bits'ąą náshidíł'įįh .
PRED:	Rescue me from the plots of my enemies ; stay away from my enemies .
GOLD:	Protect me from wicked people who attack me , from murderous enemies who surround me .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	Áko Nóah áádóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ áádóó haye'ké índa bida'asdzą́ą́ bił ch'íjíkai .
PRED:	So Noah took his wives and his wives and his wives and wives .
GOLD:	So Noah , his wife , and his sons and their wives left the boat .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	Áádóó Jánathan éí Adonáíjah áyidííniid , Nidaga' , bídahwííníilníihii aláahgo naat'áanii David yee' éí Sálaman aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then Jonathan said to David , “ We have made you king king ! ”
GOLD:	“ Not at all ! ” Jonathan replied . “ Our lord King David has just declared Solomon king !

ID:	1999
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii kóshidííniid , Nílááh , ha'ídées'į́'í ła' niníłteeh ; bíni'dii yoo'ínígíí yaa halne' doo .
PRED:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Go back to my enemies , and let them tell them what you have done .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Lord said to me , “ Put a watchman on the city wall.Let him shout out what he sees .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	Ákwe'é Béthel hoolyée doo , jidííniid ; bitséédą́ą́' Luz hoolyéego kin haal' áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	Bethel ( which means “ From Bethel ( which means “ From Bethel ” ) .
GOLD:	He named that place Bethel ( which means “ house of God ” ) , although it was previously called Luz .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	Áádóó David akéé'dóó nijighá , áko táa'go alą́ąjį'ígíí éí Saul yikéé' naakai .
PRED:	So David 's oldest son , and Saul 's two sons were defeated .
GOLD:	David was the youngest son . David 's three oldest brothers stayed with Saul 's army ,

ID:	2002
INPUT:	hooghandóó iiyehii ch'íghááh nahalingo áádóó diné bidziilii bił hózhǫ́ǫgo yiiltéhígíí nahalingo ha'a'ááh .
PRED:	When a person turns out from his home , it is like a strong donkey .
GOLD:	It bursts forth like a radiant bridegroom after his wedding.It rejoices like a great athlete eager to run the race .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	Nízaadgóó hada'íínółní , nihidishnínígíí bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo bąą shí ałdó' nahasdzáán t'áá si'ą́ą́ nít'éé' ach'į' nahwii'ná bee bich'į' hoolzhishígíí , éí nihokáá' dine'é bee bóhon<unk> át'éii , bits'ą́ąjį' nihííníshtą' doo .
PRED:	I told you , ‘ You are very careful to obey all the world . I am sending you away from the beginning of the world , and you will be able to be saved . '
GOLD:	“ Because you have obeyed my command to persevere , I will protect you from the great time of testing that will come upon the whole world to test those who belong to this world .

ID:	2004
INPUT:	Łah yaa adeez'ą́ągo sohodizin baa hoolzhiizhgo Peter áádóó John éí kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góde joo'ash .
PRED:	One day when Jesus arrived at the Temple , Peter and John went to the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Peter and John went to the Temple one afternoon to take part in the three o'clock prayer service .

ID:	2005
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é áádóó Ízrel dine'é doo ách'į' nida'jódlíígóó kéédahojit'į́įgo t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Dan kin haal'áádóó Bíyer-shííba kin shijaa'jį' hach'il na'atł'o'ii áádóó hatsin fig sikaadii bee dahozdíl<unk> go Sálaman abíyííłką́ .
PRED:	“ All the people of Judah will be given to the people of Israel . They will be able to go to Beersheba in the north side of the hill country of Dan and to Beersheba .
GOLD:	During the lifetime of Solomon , all of Judah and Israel lived in peace and safety . And from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south , each family had its own home and garden .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	<unk> nishłį́ , yisdáshíłteeh , háálá nibik'ehgo iináanii bíká ásht'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ I am the one who sent me , for he rescued me from his commandments .
GOLD:	I am yours ; rescue me ! For I have worked hard at obeying your commandments .

ID:	2007
INPUT:	Nihokáá' t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí yee nant'áa doo
PRED:	But the Lord will rule over the earth , and he will rule over the earth .
GOLD:	The

ID:	2008
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel dine'é kódashiłníigo díí shí deídóokił : dibé nahalingo diné nihá nízhdínóołt'į́į́ł .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the people of Israel says : I will feed you like sheep .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am ready to hear Israel 's prayers and to increase their numbers like a flock .

ID:	2009
INPUT:	Tsin nitł'izii bee tsin níyizii áyiilaa áádóó óola yik'íísti' ; éí bikáá' adání bee naat'áa doo .
PRED:	He made poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He made these poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .

ID:	2010
INPUT:	Łį́į́' bá bee atsxis hólǫ́ , télii bá azáát'i'í hólǫ́ áádóó diné doo áhályáanii bíígháándę́ę́' bee nídínóolghałii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The oxen are like a horse , and a fool is beaten with a fool .
GOLD:	Guide a horse with a whip , a donkey with a bridle , and a fool with a rod to his back !

ID:	2011
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí Bóhólníihii yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí báhóóchįįdgo didooljé'ígi át'éego Jéíkab dine'é yich'į' hashké niidzį́į́' áádóó t'óó yówehda Ízrel dine'é yich'į' báhóóchįįd .
PRED:	When the Lord heard this , he became very angry with Israel , and he became very angry with Israel .
GOLD:	When the Lord heard them , he was furious.The fire of his wrath burned against Jacob.Yes , his anger rose against Israel ,

ID:	2012
INPUT:	Ákót'éego óola índa béésh łigaii bee nishíních'ąą'go áni'diilyaa nít' éé' ; áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii áádóó na'at'ą́hí da'dijihígíí índa na'at'ą́hí naashch'ąą'go bik'i tá'doolkadii ni'éé' nít'éé' ; ak'áán dibahí áádóó tsés'ná bitł'izh índa ak'ah t'áá bił niyą́ą́ nít'éé' , t'áá íiyisí ayóó áníínílnin nít'éé' índa t'áá náás iiyííłdiłgo asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nílį́įjį' nííníyáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	So I took a gold robe of gold , purple , and scarlet thread and fine linen cloth . I gave you cedar , purple , purple , purple , purple , and scarlet thread and honey .
GOLD:	And so you were adorned with gold and silver . Your clothes were made of fine linen and costly fabric and were beautifully embroidered . You ate the finest foods — choice flour , honey , and olive oil — and became more beautiful than ever . You looked like a queen , and so you were !

ID:	2013
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Záíyandóó Jerúsalemgi kééhat'íinii baa ha'niih ! Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord in Jerusalem ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	The Lord be praised from Zion , for he lives here in Jerusalem.Praise the Lord !

ID:	2014
INPUT:	Bee dahool' inígíí bikáá' yí'nilgo Bóhólníihii binááł deidiiłtłah ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí yi'iilaa .
PRED:	So they did as the Lord commanded Moses , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Then he lit the lamps in the Lord 's presence , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	2015
INPUT:	Anáá' baa áháyánígi át'éego shaa áhólyą́ ; nit'a' biyaagi náshidíł'įįh ;
PRED:	Guard my eyes like a bird that makes me stagger under your wings .
GOLD:	Guard me as you would guard your own eyes.Hide me in the shadow of your wings .

ID:	2016
INPUT:	Naagé ách'ą́ą́h dah yit'áałii índa naagé dah dadohjáahgo anaa'jį' hidohkááh .
PRED:	Take the shields and weapons of battle , and run to the battle .
GOLD:	“ Prepare your shields , and advance into battle !

ID:	2017
INPUT:	Áko Záíba éí aláahgo naat'áanii áyidííniid , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í nishłį́įgo shich'į' yee hahaasdzí'ígíí t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo ná naal'a'í nishłíinii éí bik'eh ádeeshnííł . Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii ájíní , Miifíbosheth éí shibikáá' adání yich'į' dah náńdaahgo aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké atah jílį́įgo bił nída'jidį́įh doo .
PRED:	Then she said to the king , “ I am the Lord . I am the servant of the Lord , and I will give you whatever pleases him . ”
GOLD:	Ziba replied , “ Yes , my lord the king ; I am your servant , and I will do all that you have commanded. ” And from that time on , Mephibosheth ate regularly at David 's table , like one of the king 's own sons .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	Nidi adeenáago nihá naal'a' doo áádóó t'óó átsééd kééhat'íinii nahalingo nihił bighan doo , áádóó baa hózhǫ́ǫgo yihah wolyéhígíí baa hoolzhiizhjį' nihá naal'a' doo .
PRED:	But if you are living in your home , you will be a permanent law for your home .
GOLD:	Treat him instead as a hired worker or as a temporary resident who lives with you , and he will serve you only until the Year of Jubilee .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Bénjamin atah jiiłtsą́ągo hakin yaa áhályáanii ábizhdííniid , Díí diné shighan góne' yah ani'éésh . Áádóó aałk'ee áhóléehgo ałníní'ą́ągo díí diné shił da'dooyį́į́ł .
PRED:	When Joseph saw the men of Benjamin , he said to Joseph , “ Bring me into the house of the man who has been killed . ” So he told me , “ Bring me a man to me . ”
GOLD:	When Joseph saw Benjamin with them , he said to the manager of his household , “ These men will eat with me this noon . Take them inside the palace . Then go slaughter an animal , and prepare a big feast . ”

ID:	2020
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , doósh nahjį' ninihidííní'ą́ą da ? Diyin God nílíinii , nihisiláo dah yinéełii t'áadoo bił yínínáa da .
PRED:	O God , do n't you stop telling us , O God , do n't let us live forever ?
GOLD:	Have you rejected us , O God ? Will you no longer march with our armies ?

ID:	2021
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné nílíinii , áhodooníiłii baa hólne' áádóó ahííkad ; háni'dii táadi diltłish bik'i néikęęs ; nidabidiztseedii bidiltłish éí diné ayóó ádaat'éii nidabidiztseedii bidiltłish bił biná'áznánígíí át'é .
PRED:	“ Son of man , let the sword be killed , and the sword of the sword will be killed by the sword of the sword .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy to themand clap your hands.Then take the sword and brandish it twice , even three times , to symbolize the great massacre , the great massacre facing them on every side .

ID:	2022
INPUT:	Áko Ébed biye' Géíyal dashdiiyáago kin haal'áhí yah a'atiinígi dzizį́ , áádóó Abímelek índa diné bił naakaígíí aa niheekai yę́ędóó nídiijéé' .
PRED:	So Gaal son of Zeruiah went to the town of Gaal and the other men who had left Abimelech .
GOLD:	Gaal was standing at the city gates when Abimelech and his army came out of hiding .

ID:	2023
INPUT:	Áko ałch'į' yájíłti'ígíí áádzísįįdgo Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́' Diyin God dah náhodiile' .
PRED:	So he went to the ground and told him , “ May God be healed . ”
GOLD:	When God had finished speaking , he left Abraham .

ID:	2024
INPUT:	Díí kót'éego t'áá ákwii k'os dah yildohgo e'e'ááhdóó náhool'įįh , áko abínígo k'os dah nídiildohgo nihináájí'nééh , áko jį́įgo , doodaii' tł'ée'goda k'os dah nídiildohgo dah náázhdii'nééh .
PRED:	When you cross the cloud of the evening , the cloud of the evening and the evening of the evening , the cloud left the night and night .
GOLD:	Sometimes the cloud stayed only overnight and lifted the next morning . But day or night , when the cloud lifted , the people broke camp and moved on .

ID:	2025
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é bindanit'a'í danilíinii díí deidiizts'ą́ą'go aláahgo naat'áanii bighandóó dah diikaigo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ą́ądi yíkai , áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáń'dítį́į́h ániidíii bíighahgi dineezbin .
PRED:	When the leaders of Judah heard this , the king of Judah went to the Temple of the Lord , and they went to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When the officials of Judah heard what was happening , they rushed over from the palace and sat down at the New Gate of the Temple to hold court .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph hazhé'é índa hak'isóó kéyah baa hozhdiní'ánígíí éí Ííjip kéyahgi agháago yá'áhoot'éehgi Rámsiiz hoolyéedi hasht'e'nidahaazná . T'áá Féro ádííniidígi át'éego ádadziidzaa .
PRED:	So Joseph took his brothers and sisters in the land of Egypt , where they left the land of Egypt . So they left Pharaoh 's household in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph assigned the best land of Egypt — the region of Rameses — to his father and his brothers , and he settled them there , just as Pharaoh had commanded .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	Áko diné haniinaa ałts'ákah .
PRED:	So the people tried to get away because of them .
GOLD:	So the crowd was divided about him .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	Ákohgo kódíshníigo nił hodeeshnih nisingo baa nitsískees , Kǫ́ǫ́ nidaháaztánígíí índa shidine'é bahastóí danilíinii dabinááł nahíłniih . Jó , t'ą́ą́' náhideeshnih nínízingo t'ą́ą́' náhidííłnih , nidi doo ádíínííłdą́ą́' shił náhodíílnih , áko shił bééhózin doo , háálá ni , doodago éí ła' t'ą́ą́' néidiyoołnihígíí t'áá ádin , áko shí t'éí nikéé' góne' naashá . Áko áhodííniid , T'ą́ą́' náhideeshnih .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ I will tell you what I am doing . I will tell you what you are doing . I will tell you what you are doing , and I will tell you what you have done . ”
GOLD:	I thought I should speak to you about it so that you can redeem it if you wish . If you want the land , then buy it here in the presence of these witnesses . But if you do n't want it , let me know right away , because I am next in line to redeem it after you. ” The man replied , “ All right , I 'll redeem it . ”

ID:	2029
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'ákóne' yí'ishgo bikáa'di jį́įgo k'os níyizgo yilzhoł , índa tł'ée'go éí yinééłgóó bee bá hool'in doo biniyé bikáa'di kǫ' níyizii bik'ehgo yííní'eezh .
PRED:	Then I looked at the sun , and a cloud covered it with a fire . He brought them into a fire , but he brought them into a fire .
GOLD:	You led our ancestors by a pillar of cloud during the day and a pillar of fire at night so that they could find their way .

ID:	2030
INPUT:	éí bąą ła'dadoohłííł . Baa nidiikah danoozį́į́' yę́ęgi át'éego t'áá bídanooł'ánígíí bik'ehgo ła'dadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of this , as you did .
GOLD:	Now you should finish what you started . Let the eagerness you showed in the beginning be matched now by your giving . Give in proportion to what you have .

ID:	2031
INPUT:	Ákoshą' Paul ha'át'íí nilį́ ? Apá<unk> shą' ałdó' ha'át'íí nilį́ ? Jó , Diyin God yá naal'a'í niidlį́įgo hane' yá'át'éehii bee nihił dahwiilne'ígíí bee da'iisoohdląąd . Bóhólníihii t'áá ał'ąą nihaidiní'ánígíí bik'ehgo neiil'a' .
PRED:	And why do you think about the Good News ? It is God 's servant , who sent us to preach the Good News that we preach the Good News of the Lord .
GOLD:	After all , who is Apollos ? Who is Paul ? We are only God 's servants through whom you believed the Good News . Each of us did the work the Lord gave us .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	Nidi diné danilíinii doo dahwíists'ą́ą' da . Ákohgo diné be'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní yisxiłgo diné yich'į' ch'íhóníyil áádóó tł'éé' bíighah nídayi'iyiiłnaadgo hoos'įįd , áko hoos'įįdjį' t'óó yik'i deeskai .
PRED:	But the men refused to listen to their wife , and they tried to kill him . So they went out to see what they had happened .
GOLD:	But they would n't listen to him . So the Levite took hold of his concubine and pushed her out the door . The men of the town abused her all night , taking turns raping her until morning . Finally , at dawn they let her go .

ID:	2033
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii hashkéii biisxį́įgo háni'dii bitsį' yidzí'ígíí bee bééhózin doo biniyé nízhdoojih , áko doo ninázh'doodléeł da .
PRED:	“ If the animal has been torn apart , let the animal be taken away from the day of the animal , it must not accept it .
GOLD:	If it was torn to pieces by a wild animal , the remains of the carcass must be shown as evidence , and no compensation will be required .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	Háálá Nííbat biye' Jerobówam jideeskáa'go ni'iisí'ígíí áádóó éí bee Ízrel dine'é ádił nida'iisíihgo ádayiilaa ; éí eda'alyaii daahóhígíí bee Bóhólníihii Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God yádahóółchįįd .
PRED:	For Jeroboam son of Nebat had committed the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat , and the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .
GOLD:	He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat in all the sins he had committed and led Israel to commit . The people provoked the anger of the Lord , the God of Israel , with their worthless idols .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída táyi' dahólóonii bit'a' ádinii áádóó bikágí doo dich'ízhígíí éí baa'ih danohsin doo .
PRED:	You must not eat any bird that is ceremonially unclean . You must not eat it .
GOLD:	Any marine animal that does not have both fins and scales is detestable to you .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	Áko nídahooł'aahii , Éí bii'dę́ę́' hadanołchééh , bidishníigo néisiskan , nidi ch'ééh ádayííł'įįd .
PRED:	So the disciples begged him to get out of the water , but they did n't help him .
GOLD:	I begged your disciples to cast out the spirit , but they could n't do it . ”

ID:	2037
INPUT:	Kót'éego Iizííkiyel nihich'į' bee ééhózinii át'ée doo : t' áá ałtso nihinááł yaa naayáhígíí bik'ehgo nihí ałdó' ákódanoht'ée doo ; díí baa hoolzhiizhgo Bóhólníihii Diyin God nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I am giving you what you have done , and you will know that I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Ezekiel is an example for you ; you will do just as he has done . And when that time comes , you will know that I am the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	2038
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' dine'é bił áhooníłígi át'éego naaldlooshii ałdó' bił áhoonííł ; ts'ídá t'ááłáhígo haz'ą́ ákót'éego bił áhoonííł : t'ááłá'í daatsaahígi át'éego ła'ígíí ałdó' daniné ; t'áá aaníí , t'áá ałtso aheełt'éego nídídzih ; éí bąą diné éí naaldlooshii doo yiláahgo át'ée da , háálá ts'ídá t'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nídandlíní da .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ The wild animals will be like a wild animal , a wild animal that is not like a wild animal . It is like a wild animal that is not greater than any wild animals . ”
GOLD:	For people and animals share the same fate — both breathe and both must die . So people have no real advantage over the animals . How meaningless !

ID:	2039
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'áá hó hatsin ałnáoszid jootį́įłgo kintahdóó Tsiits'in Si'ání hoolyéégóó hoł dah adiildee' , éí Hííbrew k'ehjí Gálgatha hoolyé .
PRED:	Jesus took his body into the village of Jesus and told him , “ You are called out of the village of the Nazarene . ”
GOLD:	Carrying the cross by himself , he went to the place called Place of the Skull ( in Hebrew , Golgotha ) .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	Diné ła' bee ak'idi'yiitįįh bee hólóonii éí bijéí yee hóyą́ , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii yaa nitsídaakeesii bééhózingo áálnííł .
PRED:	Wise words are wise , but fools are wise , but fools know what they say .
GOLD:	Wisdom is enshrined in an understanding heart ; wisdom is not found among fools .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ah abínídą́ą́' nídiijée'go dziłghą́ą́' góde haaskaigo ádaaní , Jó , kǫ́ǫ́ neiikai ; Bóhólníihii nihaa hodiní'ání góde hadiikah daniidzin , háálá ádił da'siilziih .
PRED:	Early the next morning they left the hill country and told us , “ We have sinned against us , for we have sinned against us . We have sinned against us because we have sinned against us . ”
GOLD:	Then they got up early the next morning and went to the top of the range of hills . “ Let 's go , ” they said . “ We realize that we have sinned , but now we are ready to enter the land the Lord has promised us . ”

ID:	2042
INPUT:	Da' doósh díí nihił béédahózin da , ła' ałjiłnii bił jiináago éí bił ats'íís t'ááłá'íígíí jileeh ? Háálá Diyin God ání , T'ááłá'í ats'íís jidooleeł .
PRED:	Do n't you know these things ? Do n't you know the body of God 's body ? For it is only one part of the body . ”
GOLD:	And do n't you realize that if a man joins himself to a prostitute , he becomes one body with her ? For the Scriptures say , “ The two are united into one . ”

ID:	2043
INPUT:	Nahgóó dashdiináago Ííjip dine'é bił dahóózhǫǫd , háálá haniinaa Ííjip dine'é nídaasdzííd .
PRED:	There he was great joy for Egypt , for there was great joy for Egypt .
GOLD:	Egypt was glad when they were gone , for they feared them greatly .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	Jó , shił bééhózingo nááshiisnii'ii hiná , áádóó niidoołkáałjį' ayííłką́ągo bí t'éí nihokáa'gi ahidíízį́į doo .
PRED:	I know that you know that I am planning to prepare a meal for you . ”
GOLD:	“ But as for me , I know that my Redeemer lives , and he will stand upon the earth at last .

ID:	2045
INPUT:	Ná'ooshkąąhgo sodiszin yę́ędą́ą́' shich'į' ééhosínísįįd ; dziil bee shii' sizíinii bidziilgo íinilaa .
PRED:	I prayed to my prayer , and he made me strong .
GOLD:	As soon as I pray , you answer me ; you encourage me by giving me strength .

ID:	2046
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad hasht'e'ninánóhkáahgo k'éhézdon atiin góne' dah nídahidoohkááh , áádóó nihiDiyin God Bóhólníihii áníinii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ , áko Bóhólníihii doo yá'át'éhígi ánihi'didoolnííł dííniidii łahgo át'éego yaa tsíńdookos .
PRED:	Now go to the road to your husband , and do n't let them go into the road to the Lord your God , and do what is right . ”
GOLD:	But if you stop your sinning and begin to obey the Lord your God , he will change his mind about this disaster that he has announced against you .

ID:	2047
INPUT:	nidi nááda'ayołniihgo didlidgo nááhániihii , éí náádahidoonihii didlidgo łikání halchingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih dooígíí dóola yázhí t'ááłá'ígo , deenásts'aa' t'ááłá'ígo índa dibé yázhí tsosts'idgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii ,
PRED:	“ You must present a burnt offering to the Lord , a pleasing aroma to the Lord , a young bull , a ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .
GOLD:	You must present a burnt offering as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of one young bull , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	2048
INPUT:	Áko hodíínísingo doo ashą́ą́góó tł'oh yishbizhii shi'ée'go łeeshch'iih ák'éhésgazgo sodiszingo ná'ooshkąąhgo Bóhólníihii Diyin God bich'į' déé'į́į́' .
PRED:	As I was praying to me , I cried out to the ground , and I cried out to the Lord my God for help .
GOLD:	So I turned to the Lord God and pleaded with him in prayer and fasting . I also wore rough burlap and sprinkled myself with ashes .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá áníiltso chin nilíinii nidahoniidlin áádóó t'áá ákogi ádeiit'ínígíí anilí baa'ihii nidahalin , índa t'áá áníiltso at'ąą' dadiibéehii nidahoniidlin áádóó doo ákwii ádeiit'ínígíí níyol nahalingo yóó'adanihii'éésh .
PRED:	But we will be hungry and hungry , and we will be like grass . We will be like grass , and we will be like grass . We will be like the wind of the wind .
GOLD:	We are all infected and impure with sin.When we display our righteous deeds , they are nothing but filthy rags.Like autumn leaves , we wither and fall , and our sins sweep us away like the wind .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii náádoodáłígíí t'ah doo baa hoolzhííshgóó t'áadoo aa nídaaht'į́įgo ándahoyo'aahí . Bóhólníihii nádzáago índa chahałheełdi ádajíít'įįdii yikáá' haidoonił índa t'áá hayi'ídi nidahodziz'áanii ííshjání íidoolííł . Áko éí bik'ehgo t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Diyin God haa haniih doo .
PRED:	Therefore , you will rise before the Lord , and you will rise again before you before the Lord . But you will see what you have done . But you will know that the Lord your God has done for you .
GOLD:	So do n't make judgments about anyone ahead of time — before the Lord returns . For he will bring our darkest secrets to light and will reveal our private motives . Then God will give to each one whatever praise is due .

ID:	2051
INPUT:	Ákohgo Zuf hoolyéegi jiní'áazhgo há naal'a'í bił joo'ashígíí ábijiní , Tį' , t'ą́ą́' nikéédiit'ash ; shizhé'é daats'í télii yaa yooznahgo , jó , nihída nihikéé' bíni' íí'á .
PRED:	When he returned to his servant , he said to his servant , “ Come , let 's get away from my father 's donkeys . ”
GOLD:	Finally , they entered the region of Zuph , and Saul said to his servant , “ Let 's go home . By now my father will be more worried about us than about the donkeys ! ”

ID:	2052
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí shí éí tsé yitł'ingo bo'oonishígíí t'áá k'éséłt'i' ; kéyah nidi t'áadoo ła' nidahaalnii' da ; shá nidaal'a'í éí t'áá ałtso kwe'é t'áá ahąąh deílníísh nít'éé' .
PRED:	I was not a stone that I was taken away from my own land , but no one was left in the city .
GOLD:	I also devoted myself to working on the wall and refused to acquire any land . And I required all my servants to spend time working on the wall .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso t'óó bił adahóóyóigo ádadííniid , Da' díísh David biYe' át'į́ ?
PRED:	And all the people were astounded . “ Is he the Son of David ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	The crowd was amazed and asked , “ Could it be that Jesus is the Son of David , the Messiah ? ”

ID:	2054
INPUT:	Hoos'įįdgo Jew dine'é ła' ahíikaigo , T'áadoo Paul dasiilyéhí doo nááda'diidį́įł da , doo nidi nááda'diidlį́įł da , daaníigo ádee hadadeesdzíi'go niná'ádadeest'ą́ .
PRED:	Early the next morning , Paul went out to work and never eat it . But we did n't eat it again .
GOLD:	The next morning a group of Jews got together and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul .

ID:	2055
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ;
PRED:	He brought a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , which equals twenty pounds of choice flour moistened with olive oil . This is the sanctuary shekel , which equals twenty gerahs .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	2056
INPUT:	ádaa dzódlíii , biyooch'íidgo yáłti'ii , t'áadoo át'éhígóó naagháii <unk> <unk> go bidił dahidinéehii ,
PRED:	Do n't say , ‘ Do n't be fooled by a fool ! '
GOLD:	haughty eyes , a lying tongue , hands that kill the innocent ,

ID:	2057
INPUT:	Áko ni , diné nílíinii , nidine'é ábidiní , Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii bee haz'áanii doo yik'eh hół'į́į da silį́į'go t'áá ákogi ájoonííł nít'éé' yę́ę doo yisdáhodoołtéeł da , áádóó diné doo yá'áshóonii bidoo yá'áshǫ' yits'áníyáago bidoo yá'áshǫ' yee doo ádił náá'doolzih da , índa diné t'áá ákogi ájít'éii ádił ni'dziilzíihgo t'áá ákogi ájoonííł nít'éé' yę́ę bee jiináago doo bízhneel'ą́ą da doo .
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against the people , ‘ Son of man , ' he said , “ If you refuse to obey the law of the righteous people , you will be punished , and the righteous will be punished .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give your people this message : The righteous behavior of righteous people will not save them if they turn to sin , nor will the wicked behavior of wicked people destroy them if they repent and turn from their sins .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	Éí bąą bídahólníihii dooda bee bich'į' nidzistee'ii , éí Diyin God bibik'eh hoogáałii bich'į' dooda bee nidzistee'go át'é , áko dooda bee nidzistee'ii bee haa nídahódóot'įįłii ák'ijį' bídajílná .
PRED:	Therefore , they have rebelled against the Lord , and they have rebelled against him . They have rebelled against God , and they have rebelled against us .
GOLD:	So anyone who rebels against authority is rebelling against what God has instituted , and they will be punished .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	Áádóó tsin nitł'izii bee tsin níyizii ashdla'go níbaal bii' hodílzinii booshk'iizhjí naaniigo bąąh daní'áa doo biniyéhígíí áyiilaa ,
PRED:	He made five poles from acacia wood , five crossbars for the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he made crossbars of acacia wood to link the frames , five crossbars for the north side of the Tabernacle

ID:	2060
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii éí t'áá ákogi át'éego bééhózin doo . Bí éí tsé shá nilį́ áádóó doo ákogi é'ét'éii bii' ádin .
PRED:	The Lord knows where I am righteous , and he does what is right .
GOLD:	They will declare , “ The Lord is just ! He is my rock ! There is no evil in him ! ”

ID:	2061
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é nát'ą́ą́' hak'i néijée'go Bénjamin dine'é t'áá íiyisí t'óó bił dahóóyée'go nídaasdzííd , háálá doo yá'át'éehii bik'i hoole'go yaa ákodaniizį́į́' .
PRED:	When the Israelites returned to Benjamin , the men of Benjamin attacked Benjamin , for they were afraid of the wicked .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	Siláo dah yikahii bitsi' nílíinii , nidine'é ał'ąą dah naazhjaa'go ídadi'doolnííł , háálá nihináshzhiizhgo nihik'ijį' nídiildzil , áko Ízrel dine'é bá hoo'áałii hał yee biniitsį' nídeididoołhał .
PRED:	“ Son of Man , the daughter of the tribe of Persia , will soon be attacked , for the people of Israel will break the flesh of their enemies .
GOLD:	Mobilize ! Marshal your troops ! The enemy is laying siege to Jerusalem.They will strike Israel 's leaderin the face with a rod .

ID:	2063
INPUT:	Tó bitáláwosh yóó'ahi'eełígi át'éego Samériyadóó aláahgo naat'áanii ábidi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	The waters of Samaria will disappear like a mighty flood , and the king will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Samaria and its king will be cut off ; they will float away like driftwood on an ocean wave .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	Dooládó' bibee adziilii ayóó át'éii nihí da'iiniidlánígíí nihiyi' naalnishgo nihił béédahózin doo biniyé sodiszin . Jó , éí bibee adziil yee ayóó ábóodziilii yik'ehgo áánííł .
PRED:	Oh , that I am writing to you in the power of the church that I am in the power of the church .
GOLD:	I also pray that you will understand the incredible greatness of God 's power for us who believe him . This is the same mighty power

ID:	2065
INPUT:	Kármeldóó dine'é <unk> yai ałdó' , Árba dine'é Péí<unk> ałdó' ,
PRED:	From the tribe of Sheba was born from the tribe of Elihu , born from birth .
GOLD:	Hezro from Carmel ; Paarai from Arba ;

ID:	2066
INPUT:	Diné ła'da bibéésh łigaii , doodaii' bi'óola , doodaii' yee hadít'éii doo bidáneesh<unk> da .
PRED:	“ Do n't you make a gold or gold or silver or gold .
GOLD:	“ I have never coveted anyone 's silver or gold or fine clothes .

ID:	2067
INPUT:	Áádóó bił kééhót'íinii bich'į' kéyah nahíłniihgo , doodaii' baa nahíłniihgo t'áadoo ałch'į' ałde áhwíínóhsiní .
PRED:	“ Do not charge to your neighbor as you live in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	“ When you make an agreement with your neighbor to buy or sell property , you must not take advantage of each other .

ID:	2068
INPUT:	Nímshai biye' Jííhu éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į doo biniyé ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo bidíísį́h índa Éí<unk> hólahdóó Shéífat biye' Iiláísha éí nitsásk'eh góne' Diyin God yá halne' doo biniyé ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo bidíísį́h .
PRED:	Jehu son of Nimshi , king of Israel , king of Israel , king of Israel , and give him oil to Balak son of Zippor .
GOLD:	Then anoint Jehu grandson of Nimshi to be king of Israel , and anoint Elisha son of Shaphat from the town of Abel-meholah to replace you as my prophet .

ID:	2069
INPUT:	Áádóó bitsii' k' ínéígishgo , áko t'ááłá'í nínáhahgo bitsii' k'ínéígish , háálá bitsii' t'óó ahayóigo nidaazgo bąą k'ínéígish ; aláahgo naat'áanii bibee dah adiidlohígíí bik'ehgo dah néidiyiidlohgo naakidi neeznádiin shékel bíighahgo bitsii' áníłdáás .
PRED:	One day a man who had been cut off from a field , for a long hair is cut off his head . So the king 's hair was wearing a cloak for fifty pieces of silver .
GOLD:	He cut his hair only once a year , and then only because it was so heavy . When he weighed it out , it came to five pounds !

ID:	2070
INPUT:	Áko hódzą́ áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįh t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii hazhó'ó yínahódíłkidgo álílee k'ehgo ída'ooł'įįłii índa déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii aláahgo bee hóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' nidahaaskaígíí t'áá ałtso biláahgo neeznáadi ahą́ą́h nániiláago yá'át'éehgo ak'idazhdiitánígíí bił bééhoozin .
PRED:	The wise men and wise wise wise , and the king knew what he had done .
GOLD:	Whenever the king consulted them in any matter requiring wisdom and balanced judgment , he found them ten times more capable than any of the magicians and enchanters in his entire kingdom .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	Deílk'idgóó nínádahago' yę́ęgóó ch'il ahoshí áádóó ch'il deeníní t'óó báhádzidgo deíl'áago biniinaa doo ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ naagháa da doo , nidi béégashii áádóó dibéda t'éí bá át'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	The mountains will be filled with water , and the grapevines will be filled with water , and no one will care for them .
GOLD:	No one will go to the fertile hillsides where the gardens once grew , for briers and thorns will cover them . Cattle , sheep , and goats will graze there .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	Nihich'į' doo yá'át'ééhgóó ádaaníiłii t'áadoo t'áá éí bee k'éédadohdle'é . Diné t'áá ałtso binááł bił yá'ádaat'éehii bee dahinohná .
PRED:	Do n't worry about what you do evil , or you will have done evil in your sight .
GOLD:	Never pay back evil with more evil . Do things in such a way that everyone can see you are honorable .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	Áádóó Rúben dine'é bikéyah éí Jórdan tooh bihoodzo nít'éé' . Díí kéyah Rúben dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchííłgóó ákwii kin hadaas'áii áádóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił bíí' át'é .
PRED:	These were the tribes of Reuben , the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The Jordan River marked the western boundary for the tribe of Reuben . The towns and their surrounding villages in this area were given as a homeland to the clans of the tribe of Reuben .

ID:	2074
INPUT:	Áhóót'įįdígíí bik'ee dadinoołgęęzhgo nisoozį́ áádóó danoł<unk> go t'áadoo baa nída'ahodółt'į́'í ; bił nidahondooh , nidi wáin doo bik'ee da ; nida'nt'i , nidi doo tó diłhił bik'ee da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your guilt , and do n't worry about it . Do n't worry about a little yeast . Do n't be a drunk with wine .
GOLD:	Are you amazed and incredulous ? Do n't you believe it ? Then go ahead and be blind.You are stupid , but not from wine ! You stagger , but not from liquor !

ID:	2075
INPUT:	Didlidgo nááhániihii nidadziłtseedígi éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii nidadziłtseed doo , áádóó bidiłígíí éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi yik'ínídeiłka' doo .
PRED:	They will slaughter the burnt offering on the mountain of burnt offering and slaughter them on the hills .
GOLD:	The animal sacrificed as a guilt offering must be slaughtered at the place where the burnt offerings are slaughtered , and its blood must be splattered against all sides of the altar .

ID:	2076
INPUT:	Da'ooyą́ą́'dóó hwiih dasoolį́į'go nihighan yá'át'ééh ádahoołaaígíí bii' kéédahoht'į́įgo ,
PRED:	And when you eat the grain offering you have been satisfied , you have been planted in the house of God 's house .
GOLD:	For when you have become full and prosperous and have built fine homes to live in ,

ID:	2077
INPUT:	Diyin God íinízin ládą́ą́' t'áá ha'át'éhígoda k'ad índída nihaa deesháłígíí shá bohónéedzą́ íidoolíiłgo Diyin God bííníshkeedgo sodiszin .
PRED:	And if God has done this , why should I ask you what I am saying , and I will give you wisdom to God .
GOLD:	One of the things I always pray for is the opportunity , God willing , to come at last to see you .

ID:	2078
INPUT:	Áko t'ah abíínígo nízhdiijée'go didlidgo náádahaniihígíí áádóó hózhǫ́ǫ́jí náádahaniihígíí náádadziisnii' , áádóó diné dineezbingo da'ííyą́ą́' áádóó da'oodlą́ą́' , índa nídiijée'go tsi'deeskaigo be'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáago ida'niilzhiizh .
PRED:	Early the next morning he took the burnt offering and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings . Then they ate their Asherah poles and drank from their pagan gods .
GOLD:	The people got up early the next morning to sacrifice burnt offerings and peace offerings . After this , they celebrated with feasting and drinking , and they indulged in pagan revelry .

ID:	2079
INPUT:	Yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí éí bee éé' ts'ídá yá'át'éhígíí yiih nídaakahgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ągi nidaal'a' doo biniyé ádayiilaa ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo éé' dadílzinii Éran bá ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He made the wall of acacia wood and blue , purple , and scarlet thread and scarlet thread for the Lord 's Temple . He commanded Moses to serve the Lord for Aaron , just as he had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The craftsmen made beautiful sacred garments of blue , purple , and scarlet cloth — clothing for Aaron to wear while ministering in the Holy Place , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	2080
INPUT:	Áádóó kódeiniidzį́į́' , Náasdi ákónihi'doo'niidgo , doodaii' nihada'áłchíní ákódabi'doo'niidgo , kódadidii'niił , Shoo , Bóhólníihii bibikáá' náá'iiniihí béé'ályaaii éí danihizhé'é yę́ę ádayiilaa ; éí didlidgo náádahaniihii índa náádahidoonihii doo yiniyé ádayiilaa da , nidi éí nihita'gi bee ééhózinii biniyé át'é .
PRED:	And he said , “ This is what the Lord says : Look , we will say , ‘ Look , ' he said , ‘ Look , ' he has made us a sacrifice for the altar of the Lord . '
GOLD:	“ If they say this , our descendants can reply , ‘ Look at this copy of the Lord 's altar that our ancestors made . It is not for burnt offerings or sacrifices ; it is a reminder of the relationship both of us have with the Lord . '

ID:	2081
INPUT:	Ákódzaago íídą́ą́' Júdah bik'isóó yits'ą́ą́' dah diiyáago Adálam dine'é léi' ła' Háírah yolyéego yaa níyá .
PRED:	At that time , when he returned to Judah , he went to his home .
GOLD:	About this time , Judah left home and moved to Adullam , where he stayed with a man named Hirah .

ID:	2082
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ałdó' Jézebel yaa haadzíi'go ání , Jézriyel kin haal'áii binaa ahéé'ítł'in bíighahgi łééchąą'í éí Jézebel deidoolghał .
PRED:	Then this message came to Jezebel from the Lord : “ The town of Jezebel has been killed in the town of Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	“ And regarding Jezebel , the Lord says , ‘ Dogs will eat Jezebel 's body at the plot of land in Jezreel . '

ID:	2083
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihoo'ishígíí éí kéyah yá'áhoot'ééhgóó , kéyahgi tó danílį́į́góó áádóó deíldzis góyaa índa deílk'id bitsį́įgi tó hadaazlį́į́góó nihideezh'eezh ;
PRED:	You have brought me into the land of the Sovereign Lord your God , who brought me into the valley of worship in the wilderness .
GOLD:	For the Lord your God is bringing you into a good land of flowing streams and pools of water , with fountains and springs that gush out in the valleys and hills .

ID:	2084
INPUT:	Łeezh nísínídlį́į'jį' nitásiil nahgóó ahíghaasgo nanilnishgo índa íyą́ą doo , háálá łeezh bits'ą́ą́dóó áni'diilyaago łeezh nílį́ , áko łeezh nídíídleeł .
PRED:	When you grow up , you will grow up into the dust , and let the dust fall into the dust .
GOLD:	By the sweat of your browwill you have food to eatuntil you return to the groundfrom which you were made.For you were made from dust , and to dust you will return . ”

ID:	2085
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá hąhí Diyin God éí Christ bibee ajooba' yee nihíká ádííniidii bits'ánáhóhjeehgo náánáła' hane' bikéé' naanánoohdahgo bik'ee t'óó shił ahayóí !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits God , ” the cry of God . “ Come and help me ! ”
GOLD:	I am shocked that you are turning away so soon from God , who called you to himself through the loving mercy of Christ . You are following a different way that pretends to be the Good News

ID:	2086
INPUT:	Nóah haye'ké táá' há niheezhchį́ : Shem áádóó Ham índa Jéífeth daolyé .
PRED:	The three sons of Noah had three sons , Shem , Ham , and Japheth .
GOLD:	Noah was the father of three sons : Shem , Ham , and Japheth .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	Áko tsinaa'eeł bii'dę́ę́' hajookaigo t'áá áko diné hwéédahoosįįd .
PRED:	So the disciples returned from the boat and began to see him .
GOLD:	and climbed out . The people recognized Jesus at once ,

ID:	2088
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodishní , Diné t'ááłá'í nootínígo doo daaldinii danół'íinii áts'á dahidoołtł'ił , índa Ííjip kéyahdi eda'alyaii doo bee ádidoołchxǫǫ ł da ; shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	I tell them , ‘ I will destroy the people of Egypt , ' says the Sovereign Lord . I am the God of Egypt . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Then I said to them , ‘ Each of you , get rid of the vile images you are so obsessed with . Do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt , for I am the Lord your God . '

ID:	2089
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah anádáahgo , aa ádahalyánígíí éí naagé nínádeidii'nił , áádóó bighan góne' ninádei'nił .
PRED:	The king will break the shields of the Lord 's Temple in front of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Whenever the king went to the Temple of the Lord , the guards would also take the shields and then return them to the guardroom .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	Nihik'eelyéí áádóó nihich'il na'atł'o'ii neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'í shijaa' nínáyiidlahgo bá naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó bá nidaal'a'í yitaa néi'nih doo .
PRED:	I will plant your fields and vineyards and olive groves for the land I have given you .
GOLD:	He will take a tenth of your grain and your grape harvest and distribute it among his officers and attendants .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	Áko asdzání ábizhdííniid , Shitsi' , ne'oodlą' bee doo ánít'éhí da násínídlį́į́' ; nił hózhǫ́ǫgo náádááł , áádóó nąąh dah haz'ą́ nít'é'ígíí bits'ą́ąjį' hadaníłt'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Dear daughter , ” she said , “ you are defiled by your faith . You have been filled with joy , and you will be healed .
GOLD:	And he said to her , “ Daughter , your faith has made you well . Go in peace . Your suffering is over . ”

ID:	2092
INPUT:	Nidi Éíbram éí Sérai áyidííniid , Ninaal'a'í bee nóhólnííh , jó'akon ; t'áá ni nínízinígi áhodíílííł . Áko Sérai atíháł'į́įgo bits'ą́ą́' yóó'ajoolwod .
PRED:	But Sarai said to her servant , “ You have taken away your servant , Sarai , Sarai , Sarai , and he chased her away .
GOLD:	Abram replied , “ Look , she is your servant , so deal with her as you see fit. ” Then Sarai treated Hagar so harshly that she finally ran away .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá ni t'éí ááhyiłníinii baa hodíílnihgo nidantł'ago deít'éehii k'énááłdǫǫłgo bíninil'ą́ągo yínii' . K'ad díí bee ak'e'ashchínígíí yíníłta' áádóó ááhyiłníinii shił bééhózin íinilaago éé' tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bee handi'doolnííł índa óola béésh da'ahólzha'í nizénázt'i'go éí táá' góne' aláahgo bee íhólníihgo bił haz'áanii binanít'áago ándeeshłííł .
PRED:	But you will tell you what you say , ‘ I will tell you what I am going to do . I will teach you what you are going to do . I will teach you the meaning of the kingdom of the Most High . ' ”
GOLD:	I am told that you can give interpretations and solve difficult problems . If you can read these words and tell me their meaning , you will be clothed in purple robes of royal honor , and you will have a gold chain placed around your neck . You will become the third highest ruler in the kingdom . ”

ID:	2094
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí bizhé'é yę́ę David bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah neezdá , áádóó aláahgo yee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ayóó át'éego chánah silį́į́' .
PRED:	Solomon became the next king 's father , and he reigned in his royal royal royal throne .
GOLD:	Solomon became king and sat on the throne of David his father , and his kingdom was firmly established .

ID:	2095
INPUT:	Áko awáalyaaí yaa áhályáanii awáalyaa naazhjé'ígíí t'áá ałtso yee Jóseph yíhoos'níí' ; ákwii yaa naakaígíí t'áá ałtso hó hak'ehgo baa na'aldeeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Joseph took the prisoners of the prisoners in prison , including Joseph 's household , and he put them in charge of the prison .
GOLD:	Before long , the warden put Joseph in charge of all the other prisoners and over everything that happened in the prison .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	Jesus áhodííniid , T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Nihí shikéé' dah dahidoohkaígíí , łahgo náhodeesdzáadi Diné Silį́į'ii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bits'ádi'nílíidii yikáá'dóó dah neezdáago , nihí ałdó' bikáá'dóó nidahat'áii naakits'áadahgo bikáá'dóó dah nisoodáago , Ízrel dine'é naakits'áadahgo bindanoht'áa doo .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ I tell you the truth , you will sit on the throne of the Son of Man . Then you will sit on the throne of the throne of the twelve tribes of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I assure you that when the world is made new and the Son of Man sits upon his glorious throne , you who have been my followers will also sit on twelve thrones , judging the twelve tribes of Israel .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné bá nidzizį́įgo nidazhnitinii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii hak'ijį' nilį́įgo kwáháłní , Shidibé hazhó'ó naakai yę́ę nihaa tadaozhjéé' , áádóó da'níłts'ą́ą'gi nihaa adahaaswod , áádóó doo bik'i dasídóo'į́į' da nít'éé' . Shoo , doo yá'át'éhígi ádaohdzaaígíí biniinaa atínihideeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ Therefore , listen to the people of Israel , the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : “ Listen to me , O people of Israel ! I will see you , ” says the Lord. “ The Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says to these shepherds : “ Instead of caring for my flock and leading them to safety , you have deserted them and driven them to destruction . Now I will pour out judgment on you for the evil you have done to them .

ID:	2098
INPUT:	Díí diné tł'ée'go Jesus yaa níyáago áyidííniid , Na'nitiní , Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' na'nitinii nílį́įgo nihił béédahózin , háálá diné ła' Diyin God doo hoł hólǫ́ǫ́góó , bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii baa nanináhígíí ch'ééh ázhdooł'įįł .
PRED:	Jesus went to the night and said to them , “ Teacher , we know that God is from the beginning of the man of God . ”
GOLD:	After dark one evening , he came to speak with Jesus . “ Rabbi , ” he said , “ we all know that God has sent you to teach us . Your miraculous signs are evidence that God is with you . ”

ID:	2099
INPUT:	( Nidi David shá naal'a'í nilíinii binahjį' áádóó Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó kin haal'á náhodii'ánígíí Jerúsalem binahjį' t'ááłá'í dine'égo haa dideesh'ááł , )
PRED:	But David 's servant David , the servant of Israel , and I will bring them out of Jerusalem to the city of Israel .
GOLD:	But I will leave him one tribe for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem , which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	Chérabim dah diijahgo bąąs t'áá bíighahgóó deílyeed ; chérabim nídadiit'ááh biniyé dabit'a' de ádayiił'įįhgo bąąs doo bits'áhályeed da .
PRED:	The cherubim spread the wings of the cherubim across the wings of the cherubim , but the wings of the cherubim can not run from the wings of the cherubim .
GOLD:	When the cherubim moved , the wheels moved with them . When they lifted their wings to fly , the wheels stayed beside them .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	Jerúsalem ádił da'asiihii
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Sins of Jerusalem

ID:	2102
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo nant'áago t'ááłá'í náhááh góne' átsé nídízííd binih Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáádílkał aa nídazdeeztą́ągo hasht'éédajiidlaa .
PRED:	In the fourteenth year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , he restored the doors of the Lord 's Temple . He restored the doors of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	In the very first month of the first year of his reign , Hezekiah reopened the doors of the Temple of the Lord and repaired them .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	E'asdzą́ą́ jílíinii hahastiin ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' bíí' jílį́ . Nidi hahastiin hats'ą́ą́' daaztsą́ągo béédoochidii jileeh , áko t'áá hó jinízinígíí bił ahaa náázhdoot'ash , nidi Bóhólníihii íinízinii bik'ehgo t'éiyá .
PRED:	But if her husband is alive , let her marry her husband . But if she sees her husband , she will be able to know that the Lord is alive .
GOLD:	A wife is bound to her husband as long as he lives . If her husband dies , she is free to marry anyone she wishes , but only if he loves the Lord .

ID:	2104
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ha'asídí diné ła' náánáálwołgo yiyiiłtsą́ągo ch'é'étiin yaa áhályánígíí yił hoolne'go ííłní , Shoo , diné ła' náánáálwoł . Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Éí ałdó' baa hane' hólǫ́ sha'shin .
PRED:	When the man saw a man coming to her husband , he said to her husband , “ Look ! A man is coming to see the king ! ” And the king said , “ Look ! ”
GOLD:	the watchman saw another man running toward them . He shouted down , “ Here comes another one ! ” The king replied , “ He also will have news . ”

ID:	2105
INPUT:	Ákohgo Líívai dine'é éí Júdah kéyahdi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę ła' Bénjamin bikéyahdi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	So the Levites lived in Judah and lived in the land of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Some of the Levites who lived in Judah were sent to live with the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	Kin biyi'dę́ę́' dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' niilkaadígíí bik'i na'ashk'aazhgo adee' áádóó ch'ilátah hózhóón bééda'alyaago naashch'ąą' . Dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' tsé bik'ijį' niilkaadígíí bee tsé doo daat'į́į́góó ályaa .
PRED:	Each frame was decorated with cedar , decorated with cedar , purple , and scarlet thread . It was decorated with cedar and Holy Place .
GOLD:	Cedar paneling completely covered the stone walls throughout the Temple , and the paneling was decorated with carvings of gourds and open flowers .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	Nihokáá'góó kéédahoht'íinii , yéé' áádóó a'áán índa łoh nihik'i náhoodleeł .
PRED:	You will fall into the sky , and your enemies will fall into a trap .
GOLD:	Terror and traps and snares will be your lot , you people of the earth .

ID:	2108
INPUT:	Amaráíyah , Málak , Hátash ,
PRED:	Harim , Malluch ,
GOLD:	Amariah , Malluch , Hattush ,

ID:	2109
INPUT:	Áko Bígthan áádóó Tííresh , díí nidilt'éhígíí aláahgo naat'áanii yá naal'a'í ch'é'étiingi nídídáhí nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras yidiyoołhééł hát'į́ nít'éé' yę́ę Mórdiikai haa nahasne'go bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo bééhoozin .
PRED:	When King Xerxes and his two wives were at the entrance of the royal palace , the King Xerxes and Mordecai learned that Mordecai had been killed .
GOLD:	In those records he discovered an account of how Mordecai had exposed the plot of Bigthana and Teresh , two of the eunuchs who guarded the door to the king 's private quarters . They had plotted to assassinate King Xerxes .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	Jó , shizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii t'áá ałtso bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii binááł diné daneeznáanii nidahoniidlin nít'éé' . Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi ná naal'a'í nishłíinii nibikáá' adání yich'į' dah nídinibįįhgo nída'adį́įhii bitahgi ná'áshdį́įh doogo nishííníłtį́ . Éí bąą ha'át'íí t'áá ákóne' át'éii shį́įshą' náánáła' aláahgo naat'áanii baa nínáánáoshkąąh dooleeł ?
PRED:	I am the king of my family , my lord the king of my family , even though I was living in the place of the dead . And why should I eat the wine of the earth ? ”
GOLD:	All my relatives and I could expect only death from you , my lord , but instead you have honored me by allowing me to eat at your own table ! What more can I ask ? ”

ID:	2111
INPUT:	Jííbas kin haal'á bíighahgi jookahgo k'adę́ę e'e'aah , áko naal'a'í binanit'a'í áyidííniid , Tį' , díí Jííbas dine'é bikin haal'áhíjį' diikahgo t'áá ákwii danihiidoołkááł .
PRED:	So they went to the town and told the king , “ Let 's go to the town of Ai , ” they said . “ We will go to the town of Ai . ”
GOLD:	It was late in the day when they neared Jebus , and the man 's servant said to him , “ Let 's stop at this Jebusite town and spend the night there . ”

ID:	2112
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego éí bee nihá k'ééhoodǫǫł doo .
PRED:	and a male goat for a sin offering , just as a sin offering for the sin offering .
GOLD:	Also , offer one male goat to purify yourselves and make yourselves right with the Lord .

ID:	2113
INPUT:	áádóó naat'ááh kin góne' yah anínáádzoodzáago Jesus ábizhdííniid , Háádę́ę'shą' naniná ? Nidi Jesus t'áadoo haadzíi' da .
PRED:	Jesus returned to the outer courtyard and asked Jesus , “ Where did n't you come from ? ” But Jesus replied .
GOLD:	He took Jesus back into the headquarters again and asked him , “ Where are you from ? ” But Jesus gave no answer .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii páam sikaadii nooséłígi át'éego nanise' , áádóó Lébanan kéyahdi gadtsoh nahalingo nanise' .
PRED:	The godly are like a palm tree , like the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	But the godly will flourish like palm treesand grow strong like the cedars of Lebanon .

ID:	2115
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí naakidi neeznádiin naagé óola t'áá bízhání yee ádayiilaa ; naagé t'ááłá'í ní'ą́ bik'ehgo óola hastą́ądi neeznádiin shékel wolyéhígíí bíighahgo bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	King Solomon also made two shields of gold , and he overlaid the shields with gold .
GOLD:	King Solomon made 200 large shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than fifteen pounds .

ID:	2116
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go dashdiiyá . Nít'éé' diné léi' , yúnak nilį́įgo t'áá íiyisí bóhólnííh , Iithiyópiyadóó asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh <unk> dasii yolyé , éí binaalye'é t'áá ałtso bá baa áhojilyą́ , áko Jerúsalemdi Diyin God bich'į' nahozhdoołaał biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ nijiyá ,
PRED:	As he got up and went to Jerusalem , a man who was filled with the master 's wife , was filled with the girl in Jerusalem . He went to Jerusalem to worship the wife of God , and he went to Jerusalem to worship him .
GOLD:	So he started out , and he met the treasurer of Ethiopia , a eunuch of great authority under the Kandake , the queen of Ethiopia . The eunuch had gone to Jerusalem to worship ,

ID:	2117
INPUT:	Diné doo shich'ijí jílínígíí éí shits'ą́ą́jí jílį́ , áádóó doo shił ahanizh'niiłkaadígíí éí ta'izhnoołkaad .
PRED:	Anyone who belongs to me is not working with me , and it is not working with me .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who is n't with me opposes me , and anyone who is n't working with me is actually working against me .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	K'ad nihidishtaałígíí baa híínídáagoádił ni'iisíhígíísh doo hanisíid da ?
PRED:	And why are you looking for our sins ? Are you looking for our sins ?
GOLD:	For then you would guard my steps , instead of watching for my sins .

ID:	2119
INPUT:	beeldléí nahalingo dadíídis , áko łahgo ádadoonííł . Nidi ni t'éí t'ááłáhígi ánít'é , índa nee nináháháahii doo nidoot'ih da .
PRED:	You will die like water , but you will die , but you will be cursed .
GOLD:	You will fold them up like a cloakand discard them like old clothing.But you are always the same ; you will live forever . ”

ID:	2120
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes índa Diyin God yá dahalne'ii binaaltsoos t'áá ałtso t'áá dadeezt'i'dóó , éí t'áá hó áhodi'doolníiłgi Diyin God bizaad bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí t'áá ałtso hazhó'ó yee hoł hoolne' .
PRED:	So Moses and all the prophets are recorded in the Book of God . They read everything in the Scriptures say .
GOLD:	Then Jesus took them through the writings of Moses and all the prophets , explaining from all the Scriptures the things concerning himself .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	Nidi Férisii áádóó Sádjusii danilíinii tó bee dabidi'doolzįh biniyé deíkáahgo jiiłtsą́ągo ábijiní , T <unk> ba'áłchíní danohłíinii ! Háishą' Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo bibee até'él'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' dah dadínóohchééh nihidííniid ?
PRED:	But when the Pharisees and Sadducees saw that they were baptized in the boat , they said , “ Who is our God ? ”
GOLD:	But when he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees coming to watch him baptize , he denounced them . “ You brood of snakes ! ” he exclaimed . “ Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	2122
INPUT:	da' doósh éí Diyin God bił bééhodoozįįł da ? Jó , bí ajéí biyi'di nidanil'inii bił bééhózin ?
PRED:	Do n't you know God 's mysterious plan ? Do n't you know the hearts of God ?
GOLD:	God would surely have known it , for he knows the secrets of every heart .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	índa Hor dine'é biDził Síyer hoolyéhígi t'áá <unk> jį' ; éí honoojí bíighahgi bik'eh dazdeesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	“ We have defeated the people of Seir , and they have defeated them in the wilderness of Seir .
GOLD:	and the Horites at Mount Seir , as far as El-paran at the edge of the wilderness .

ID:	2124
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Łóó' hadasoołtsoozígíí ła' nídoohjááh .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Take some of you , and put some of them on your side . ”
GOLD:	“ Bring some of the fish you 've just caught , ” Jesus said .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	áádóó Ííjip dine'é daasnáanii nináhideesh'ishgo kéyah bii' kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęjį' Páthras kéyah áajį' anídahizhdoo'nééł , áko ákwii bee óhólnííh doo bidziilgóó kééhojit'į́į doo .
PRED:	I will bring you back to Egypt , where I will live in Egypt , where I will live in Egypt , so that you will live in Egypt .
GOLD:	I will restore the prosperity of Egypt and bring its people back to the land of Pathros in southern Egypt from which they came . But Egypt will remain an unimportant , minor kingdom .

ID:	2126
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí ándahodii'aahii há néidiinilgo Bóhólníihii éí ándahodii'aahii nídaadleehii yił dahólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' , áko hweda'ana'í bits'ą́ąjį' ánihodii'aahii yisdáhwiiníiłgo yiiníłką́ ; Bóhólníihii łahgo át'éego hąąh tsíńdeezkééz , háálá hweda'ana'í hade ádahósingo bik'ee chaał nidahojiyiinííh nít'éé' áádóó hóda'ats'ihgo bik'ee ti'dahojiyooznii' .
PRED:	The judges the Lord and handed them over to the judges that the Lord had given to his disciples . He turned away from their enemies , and he turned them to their enemies , for they hated them because they were afraid of their enemies .
GOLD:	Whenever the Lord raised up a judge over Israel , he was with that judge and rescued the people from their enemies throughout the judge 's lifetime . For the Lord took pity on his people , who were burdened by oppression and suffering .

ID:	2127
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' bił nidahazt'i'ii t'áá ałtso , ats'íís yidánoolníinii , áádóó anáá' yidánoolníinii áádóó iiná bee ádaa hodzódlíii éí doo aTaa' bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ádaat'ée da , nidi nihokáá'dóó ádaat'é .
PRED:	For the world is the one who lives in the world , and the body of the body of the world is a faithful love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	For the world offers only a craving for physical pleasure , a craving for everything we see , and pride in our achievements and possessions . These are not from the Father , but are from this world .

ID:	2128
INPUT:	Ashdla' góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Ásher dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin .
PRED:	The boundary of Asher began to rule over the land of Asher .
GOLD:	The fifth allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Asher .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	Ákohgo Máíkah bi'e'elyaii áyiilaaígíí Dan kin haal'áagi dah sizį́įgo ádayiilaa ; Diyin God biníbaal bii' hodílzinii Sháíloh haz'ą́ągi si'ą́ yę́ędą́ą́' ákódayósin nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then Micah built a pagan shrine shrine prostitutes in the middle of the Tabernacle and set it apart for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	So Micah 's carved image was worshiped by the tribe of Dan as long as the Tabernacle of God remained at Shiloh .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	Áko Elkéínah náázhdi'yoołnihjį' anéíłkáahgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ Piinínah índa biyáázhké áádóó bich'é'éké t'áá ałtso éí náájiiłniihígíí łahjį' baa nízhdí'ááh ,
PRED:	Then Elkanah and his sons must present them to them , along with their wives and grandchildren .
GOLD:	On the days Elkanah presented his sacrifice , he would give portions of the meat to Peninnah and each of her children .

ID:	2131
INPUT:	Hodiists'ą́'ígíí éí dahináanii bit'a' ahidadii'áago deít'áhígíí éí íits'a' lá áádóó bąąs bíighah dah dadiit'a'ígíí éí ayóó át'éego dadiits'a' lá .
PRED:	The living beings heard the living beings , and the wheels of the wheels heard their wings .
GOLD:	It was the sound of the wings of the living beings as they brushed against each other and the rumbling of their wheels beneath them .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	Nidi nídiidáahgo yiizįįh , háálá shiiniłtsánígíí índa nił yit'íní ání'diish'įįh dooleełígíí bee shá nanil'a' doo , áádóó bee shá nahólne' doo . Éí biniyé nich'į' yit'íní í'diishyaa áádóó nándiiłtį́ .
PRED:	But go to me , for you have seen me , for I have told you what you have seen . I have told you what I have told you .
GOLD:	Now get to your feet ! For I have appeared to you to appoint you as my servant and witness . Tell people that you have seen me , and tell them what I will show you in the future .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	Nidi Lat hakéédę́ę́' hwe'asdzą́ą́ nát'ą́ą́' nídéét'į́į'go t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ tsé áshįįh nídzísdlį́į́' .
PRED:	But Lot returned from his wife and returned to his wife .
GOLD:	But Lot 's wife looked back as she was following behind him , and she turned into a pillar of salt .

ID:	2134
INPUT:	Ahíláłk'e dadołniihgo k'é béé'ahohjih . Christ dayoodláanii áłah nídaadleehii t'áá ałtso k'é danihiłní .
PRED:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss . Greet all the churches in Christ .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss . All the churches of Christ send you their greetings .

ID:	2135
INPUT:	Kót'ée nidi bee óhólníhígíí doo t'áá át'é nighahideesh<unk> da , nidi shá naal'a'í David yę́ę binahjį' áádóó Jerúsalem náhodii'ánígíí binahjį' Ízrel naakits'áadahgo dine'é danilíinii bitahdę́ę́' t'ááłá'í dine'égo éí niye' baa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	But I will not tell you the authority of your servant David , but I will give you the twelve tribes of Israel . I will give you twelve tribes of Israel , and I will give them the twelve tribes of Israel . ”
GOLD:	And even so , I will not take away the entire kingdom ; I will let him be king of one tribe , for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem , my chosen city . ”

ID:	2136
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é baa nahódóot'įįł
PRED:	A Message about Babylon
GOLD:	Prediction of Babylon 's Fall

ID:	2137
INPUT:	Deenásts'aa' bidee' naakigo yiniłtsáanii éí Míídiya índa Pérzha kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii át'į́ .
PRED:	“ Bring a young bull , a ram , and the king of Persia .
GOLD:	The two-horned ram represents the kings of Media and Persia .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	T'áá íídą́ą́' shaa náhást'įįdgoha'át'íísh biniyé t'áadoo biniyéhígóó naasdzil ?
PRED:	“ Why do n't you think about me ? Why have I done nothing for me ?
GOLD:	Whatever happens , I will be found guilty.So what 's the use of trying ?

ID:	2139
INPUT:	Nidi aninéédę́ę́' náá'di'yiijeeh bídéét'i'gi , Diyin God kóníigo yee nihich'į' haadzíi'iísh t'ah doo dayínółta' da ?
PRED:	But tell us , “ Do n't you understand the resurrection of God 's body ? ”
GOLD:	“ But now , as to whether there will be a resurrection of the dead — have n't you ever read about this in the Scriptures ? Long after Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had died , God said ,

ID:	2140
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso neheesdzíí' lá : ayáhígo ádaat'éii áádóó ayóó ádaat'éii , aye'ké áádóó atsi'ké danilíinii áádóó binaalye'é índa t'áadoo le'é deisná yę́ę t'áá át'é shónáyoost'e' lá .
PRED:	Then all the people of Israel said , “ They have taken away their wives and daughters and daughters . They have taken their wives and daughters . ”
GOLD:	Nothing was missing : small or great , son or daughter , nor anything else that had been taken . David brought everything back .

ID:	2141
INPUT:	Christ bíí' danohłínígíí biniinaa nihił nida'í'įįh nidi baa nihił dahózhǫ́ , háálá Níłch'i Diyinii ayóó át'éii , Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii , nihik'i hoole' . Danihódziih nidi Diyin God éí íiyisí dayódziih , nihíjígo nihee Diyin God baa ha'niih .
PRED:	And if you belong to Christ , it is the Holy Spirit , for we are faithful to God 's Spirit . For God 's Spirit is the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	If you are insulted because you bear the name of Christ , you will be blessed , for the glorious Spirit of God rests upon you .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii bich'į' náá'jii łniihígíí éí ak'áán nááhidoonihii éí ómer bee í'neel'ąąhí bee ak'áán t'ááłáhídi haaką́ągo éí kwáart bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsooígíí bíighahgo bee ak'ah haaką́ągo bił ałtahgo néidiyoołnih .
PRED:	On the day of the Lord will give two quarts of choice flour moistened with olive oil .
GOLD:	When you present these offerings , you must also give the Lord a grain offering of two quarts of choice flour mixed with one quart of olive oil .

ID:	2143
INPUT:	Áko Kaldíya dine'é bisiláo éí aláahgo naat'áanii baa dadeeyáago Jériko dzígaidi yíníjéé' , áko hasiláo t'áá át'é hats'ąą taozhjéé' .
PRED:	So the Babylonian army chased him out of Jericho , and they left Jericho and chased them away .
GOLD:	But the Babylonian troops chased the king and overtook him on the plains of Jericho , for his men had all deserted him and scattered .

ID:	2144
INPUT:	Mą'ii dootł'izhí yázhí éí ch'il na'atł'o'ii deíl'áágóó nidahwiiłchxǫǫhii bił nidahidiidił , háálá nihich'il na'atł'o'ii bílátah da'iigai .
PRED:	“ The grapevines will weep for the vineyards of the vineyards , for there is no grapes .
GOLD:	Catch all the foxes , those little foxes , before they ruin the vineyard of love , for the grapevines are blossoming !

ID:	2145
INPUT:	Dibé Yázhí nilíinii iiyehgo ada'niidą́ą'ii
PRED:	The Lamb of the Lamb
GOLD:	Songs of Victory in Heaven

ID:	2146
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Awéé' ałts'ánółgéeshgo ałníí'dóó díí asdzání baa nołteeh , áádóó łahjį'ígíí éí ła'ígíí baa nołteeh .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ Get up and take some of the other women and the rest of the Jordan River . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Cut the living child in two , and give half to one woman and half to the other ! ”

ID:	2147
INPUT:	Bee nahodoołtį́į́ł yę́ęgi nílóda haidiní'ą́ągo níló bee nááłtą́ áádóó bikéyah bikáá'góó ii'ni' dahodiiłtłah .
PRED:	He rained down the clouds of hail , and hail covered the earth with hail .
GOLD:	He sent them hail instead of rain , and lightning flashed over the land .

ID:	2148
INPUT:	T'áá áko Saul ni'jį' tsé'yaa ajíítłizhgo Sámuel bizaadígíí bik'ee t'áá íiyisí hoł yéé' hazlį́į́' áádóó hatah doo hwiina' da , háálá t'áadoo ajiyání i'íí'ą́ą́dóó yiską́ .
PRED:	When Saul heard that Samuel was afraid of Samuel , he was afraid of Samuel , and he was afraid of his life .
GOLD:	Saul fell full length on the ground , paralyzed with fright because of Samuel 's words . He was also faint with hunger , for he had eaten nothing all day and all night .

ID:	2149
INPUT:	Nídiidáahgo sis niteelí shóisíníłt'e'go ninázt'i'ígíí éí Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígóó dínáahgo áadi tsék'iz góne' nídíł'įįh .
PRED:	“ Get up and go to the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	“ Take the linen loincloth you are wearing , and go to the Euphrates River . Hide it there in a hole in the rocks . ”

ID:	2150
INPUT:	Áko ándahodii'aahii áyidííniid , Baa nidaahkaígíí doo t'áadoo baa áńda'áhodółt'íní , háálá dine'é éí doo bá ándahodiyoh'aah da , nidi Bóhólníihii bá ándahodiyoh'aah ; bí nihił hólǫ́ǫgo nidahodiyoh'aah .
PRED:	The apostles replied , “ Do n't be handed over to the people . Do n't worry about it , for you will do what the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	and he said to them , “ Always think carefully before pronouncing judgment . Remember that you do not judge to please people but to please the Lord . He will be with you when you render the verdict in each case .

ID:	2151
INPUT:	Háálá doo k'é dandzingo yádaałti' da , nidi t'áadoo íits'a'í kéédahat'íinii na'adlo' saad yee yindahagiz .
PRED:	For we do n't understand what you say , but you will not listen to your enemies .
GOLD:	They do n't talk of peace ; they plot against innocent people who mind their own business .

ID:	2152
INPUT:	Áko dabik'isóó áłah ádayiilaago hodiyingo ádadooldee'go yah eekai , áádóó Bóhólníihii yee has'áanii bik'ehgo aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédahojidlééh biniyé yah ajookai .
PRED:	Then they went to the Temple of the Lord and went to the Temple of the Lord . They said to the Lord , “ Go to the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	These men called together their fellow Levites , and they all purified themselves . Then they began to cleanse the Temple of the Lord , just as the king had commanded . They were careful to follow all the Lord 's instructions in their work .

ID:	2153
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bee bóhólníihgo bił nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá át'é naaltsoos yi'iisnii' ; éí aláahgo bee óhólnííh bił nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá bí ak'eda'ałchíhígíí bik'ehgo índa t'áá ałtso t'áá bí bizaad yee yádaałti'ii bik'ehgo yee ak'e'ashchį́ , áko diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bí dabighangóó yee bídahólníihgo t'áá bí bizaadígíí bik'ehgo ba'áłchíní yił dahalne' doo .
PRED:	And the king sent this message to the king : “ The decree is written in charge of all the provinces of the royal palace , and all the provinces of the royal family of the royal family will follow their own family . ”
GOLD:	He sent letters to all parts of the empire , to each province in its own script and language , proclaiming that every man should be the ruler of his own home and should say whatever he pleases .

ID:	2154
INPUT:	Áádóó hach'į' hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , Díí dine'é bich'į' ná'áhwiinít'į́'ígo áádóó bił dahoníshǫ́ǫgo índa saad yá'ádaat'éehii bee bich'į' hahídziih ládą́ą́' ná nidaal'a'í danilį́įgo ahool'áa doo .
PRED:	Then they said , “ This is what the Scriptures say : If you are good , you will speak to your servants and your servants , and your servants will be wise . ”
GOLD:	The older counselors replied , “ If you are good to these people and do your best to please them and give them a favorable answer , they will always be your loyal subjects . ”

ID:	2155
INPUT:	Áko ch'ikę́ę́h bizhą́ą́ naagháii bił hóshǫ́ áádóó hats'ą́ą́dóó ach'oha'né bee hazlį́į́' , áádóó t'áadoo le'é bee chin ádąąh yildééh dooígíí áádóó bikiiní baazhdiní'ą́ , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bił haz'ánídę́ę́' ch'ikéí nidaal'a'í tsosts'idgo , éí bee ájít'ée dooígíí áádóó ch'ikéí bizhą́ą́ nidaakaii yee ádaat'ée dooígíí nídii'nil índa agháago yá'áhoot'éehgo haz'ą́ągi bił niho'dee'nil .
PRED:	She gave birth to a young woman , a descendant of a woman , a descendant of a woman who had been ceremonially clean from the royal palace . And she gave birth to a young woman , young woman , and she gave her young woman to the king .
GOLD:	Hegai was very impressed with Esther and treated her kindly . He quickly ordered a special menu for her and provided her with beauty treatments . He also assigned her seven maids specially chosen from the king 's palace , and he moved her and her maids into the best place in the harem .

ID:	2156
INPUT:	Shibee aya'ayiiltsósí há nideeshkałgo biishdoogááł , áko Kaldíya dine'é bikéyahgóó Bábilan kin haal'áadi hodeesłóós ; azhą́ áadi dazdootsaał nidi , kéyah t'áadoo yizdoołtséeł da .
PRED:	“ Let me go to Babylon , ” says the king of Babylon . “ I will never die in the land of Babylon , but no one will die . ”
GOLD:	Then I will throw my net over him and capture him in my snare . I will bring him to Babylon , the land of the Babylonians , though he will never see it , and he will die there .

ID:	2157
INPUT:	Ákohgo náhidiitahgo yiizį'go dah diiyá , dah náníljį́įhgo yigááł , índa Diyin God yaa haniihgo kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' bił yah ajookai .
PRED:	As he stood among us , he went out to the Temple of God , and he went to the Temple of God .
GOLD:	He jumped up , stood on his feet , and began to walk ! Then , walking , leaping , and praising God , he went into the Temple with them .

ID:	2158
INPUT:	Áádóó hak'ídahidizheeh , áádóó éí lók'aatsoh yee hatsiits'iin nínádeidiiłhał .
PRED:	Then they beat him with their heads and beat him on his head .
GOLD:	And they spit on him and grabbed the stick and struck him on the head with it .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	Éí bąą tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' Jesus bił ada'soołkaal nít'éé' yę́ę Diyin God éí Bóhólníihii áádóó Christ nilį́įgo áyiilaa , díí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso t'áadoo naaki nilíní bił béédahózin le' .
PRED:	So you have been crucified with the cross of the cross of the Lord Jesus , the God of Israel , and all the people of Israel will know that the Lord Jesus Christ is with Israel .
GOLD:	“ So let everyone in Israel know for certain that God has made this Jesus , whom you crucified , to be both Lord and Messiah ! ”

ID:	2160
INPUT:	Yádiłhił biyi' di sǫ' yíl'áhígi át'éego bada'áłchíní ałdó' k'ee'ąą díníníłt'ą́ , índa kéyah hóó' dadooleeł biniyé biih dazhdoonéełgo dahazhé'é yę́ę baa dííní'áanii biih hwííní'eezh .
PRED:	For you gave the heavens to the stars in the middle of the sky . Then you brought them into the land of the earth to bring them back to their ancestors .
GOLD:	You made their descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and brought them into the land you had promised to their ancestors .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	Áádóó ákódzaago hananit'a'í be'asdzą́ą́ , Ninaal'a'í kóshiilaa , níigo yił hoolne' , áko yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yik'ee báhóóchįįd .
PRED:	When the master 's servant heard this , he said to his servant , “ Your servant was very angry . ”
GOLD:	Potiphar was furious when he heard his wife 's story about how Joseph had treated her .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	Naat'áanii ła' ádił adzisiihgo t'áadoo ádaa ákoznidziní Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii doo ádoolníił da , nínígíí doo bik'eh ádziidzaagóó bee ádihozhdiilt'i'go
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone die , ” says the Lord . “ The Lord your God 's commands will never fail to obey his commands .
GOLD:	“ If one of Israel 's leaders sins by violating one of the commands of the Lord his God but does n't realize it , he is still guilty .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá éí naal'a'í ch'íníyáago yił nidaal'a'ígíí ła' neeznádiin denériyas yąąh hayííł'áhígíí yik'íníyá , áko éí yisiłgo kóníigo yizák'íidiiníihgo yaa nídiidzá , Nąąh hááł'áhígíí shá niná'nídlé , yiłní .
PRED:	But when the servant came out and plundered the money , he sent some money to pay for thirty pieces , and he beat them up and left . Then he said , “ Come and help me . ”
GOLD:	“ But when the man left the king , he went to a fellow servant who owed him a few thousand dollars . He grabbed him by the throat and demanded instant payment .

ID:	2164
INPUT:	T'áá háiida ádee hadidzihgo diné haláahdi át'éii biniit'aa ádee hadidzih łeh , ákót'éego doo ałgha'dit'ááh nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	“ Anyone who is greater than a person is greater than a person is greater than a person .
GOLD:	Now when people take an oath , they call on someone greater than themselves to hold them to it . And without any question that oath is binding .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	Áádóó na'ałkǫ'ii dah adidooł<unk> biniyé t'áá ałch'ijí yee k'ídílchi'ígi át'éego bitahjį' t'áá ałch'ijí yee k'ídidoolchił , áádóó bee ádaa dahoji'niihii índa bee injilo'go ájoolíłígíí éí t'áá áłah Bóhólníihii hats'ą́ą́' naa'iidoołkał .
PRED:	He must carry out his feet into the fire and throw it into the hands of the Lord . He will break his fist against his people , and he will bow before the Lord .
GOLD:	God will push down Moab 's peopleas a swimmer pushes down water with his hands.He will end their prideand all their evil works .

ID:	2166
INPUT:	T'áá éí bitł'éé' t'áá ákwe'é hoolzhishgo bił dashdiikaigo bik'i nidzisk'ą́ yę́ęgóó bá táádzízgiz , t'áá áko haghandóó danilíinii t'áá ałtso t'áá bił tó bee daho'doolzį́į́' .
PRED:	As soon as the night they were at the night , it was a long time for a long time , and a water was covered with water .
GOLD:	Even at that hour of the night , the jailer cared for them and washed their wounds . Then he and everyone in his household were immediately baptized .

ID:	2167
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Kéínan dine'é bikéyah yiih nihíí'eezhgo éí nihich'į' áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzí'ígíí bik'ehgo , áádóó éí kéyah nihaidiní'ą́ągo
PRED:	The Lord brought you into the land of Canaan , and he swore to give you the land he had promised . He swore to give us his ancestors ,
GOLD:	“ This is what you must do when the Lord fulfills the promise he swore to you and to your ancestors . When he gives you the land where the Canaanites now live ,

ID:	2168
INPUT:	Nidi na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá índa badaa'ihii t'áá ałtso áádóó adáhonooní t'óó bee ha'doodzih nidi t'áadoo baa yádaałti'í , háálá éí Diyin God bidiyį́į́' danohłį́įgo doo niheełt'ée da .
PRED:	But do n't worry about sexual immorality or sexual immorality or sexual immorality or sexual immorality . Do n't be fooled by God 's holy people .
GOLD:	Let there be no sexual immorality , impurity , or greed among you . Such sins have no place among God 's people .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	Diyin God ádee hadoodzíi'ii bee Jesus náá'iiłniihii nilį́įgo baa ákohwiiniidzį́į́' .
PRED:	God has made a vow to Jesus , and he has made us right with God .
GOLD:	This new system was established with a solemn oath . Aaron 's descendants became priests without such an oath ,

ID:	2170
INPUT:	Háálá niná'á<unk> ą́ągo Filístiya diné yiyiisxį́ , háálá Bóhólníihii éí bee yisdá'iildéehii ayóó át'éii Ízrel dine'é yá áyoolííł . Éí yiniłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí baa nił hóózhǫǫd , áko ha'át'éegoshą' David t'áadoo baanígóó bini'niłhį́įgo doo ádąąh dahast'áanii bidił bits'ánílį́įgo áníléehgo bee ádił iilziih ?
PRED:	For this is what the Philistines happened when the Philistines learned that the Lord had killed the Philistines , for he was filled with great joy . “ How terrible it will you be killed ? ” David asked . “ How long will you die ? Why are you sinners ? ”
GOLD:	Have you forgotten about the time he risked his life to kill the Philistine giant and how the Lord brought a great victory to all Israel as a result ? You were certainly happy about it then . Why should you murder an innocent man like David ? There is no reason for it at all ! ”

ID:	2171
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii t'áadoo nihik'ijį' si'ą́ągo béénílniihí , nidi tsxį́įłgo nihaa a'ááh niizįįh , háálá t'áá íiyisí yínííł dasiidlį́į́' .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of our ancestors , for we are very angry . Be merciful to us , for we are very angry .
GOLD:	Do not hold us guilty for the sins of our ancestors ! Let your compassion quickly meet our needs , for we are on the brink of despair .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	Dinéésh ła' kǫ' ádíiyiiltsoodgo bi'éé' doo didoolił da ?
PRED:	Can a fire break his clothes ? Can a fire be bound by a fire ?
GOLD:	Can a man scoop a flame into his lapand not have his clothes catch on fire ?

ID:	2173
INPUT:	Áko ání , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , diyin nigi ánáánát'éii yá'ąąshdi índa nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo hólǫ́ǫ da ; ni t'éiyá ná nidaal'a'í éí aha'deet'áanii áádóó aa a'ááh hasinii bił hasht'eyínísinii ninááł deíkááh .
PRED:	Then he said , “ O God of Israel , O God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , who lives in heaven and on earth .
GOLD:	He prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven and earth . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	2174
INPUT:	Háálá doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ááníiłii baa jíínílíigo ádííníniid , Doo ła' shoo'íní da . Nibee hódzáanii áádóó nił ééhózinii éí nił náhásxizgo nijéí biyi'di ádííníniid , Shí honishłǫ́ áádóó doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For he said to them , “ You are not ashamed of me . Do n't have a miraculous sign from me , but I am not with you . I am not with you , and I am not with you . ”
GOLD:	“ You felt secure in your wickedness. ‘ No one sees me , ' you said.But your ‘ wisdom ' and ‘ knowledge ' have led you astray , and you said , ‘ I am the only one , and there is no other . '

ID:	2175
INPUT:	Mt . 12 : 9-14
PRED:	Jesus Chooses the Twelve Apostles
GOLD:	The Tree and Its Fruit

ID:	2176
INPUT:	Éí bąągo ííshją́ą́ ch'ozh áádóó na'ats'ǫǫsí éí kéyah dayííłchxǫ'ígíí ádá bééda'doohdlííł , áádóó Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God baa dahohniih ; eii shį́į́ áko Bóhólníihii bibee atí'él'íinii nihits'ą́ąjį' kwíidoolííł , índa nihidiyin danilíinii áádóó nihikédaayah ałdó' bits'ą́ąjį' kwíidoolííł .
PRED:	You will destroy the people of Israel and destroy the land you have shown them , and you will remember that the Lord your God has rescued us from the land of Israel .
GOLD:	Make these things to show honor to the God of Israel . Perhaps then he will stop afflicting you , your gods , and your land .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	Áko Féro éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Díkwíishą' ninááhai ?
PRED:	Then Jacob asked Jacob , “ What have you done ? ”
GOLD:	“ How old are you ? ” Pharaoh asked him .

ID:	2178
INPUT:	Ániid nidaakaii t'éí ch'ééh nídahidikah doo , índa nínádadíníkah doo , índa diné ániid nidaakaii t'áá aaníí bik'eh dahodidlį́į doo ,
PRED:	They replied , “ We will not find their lives , and they will follow their lives .
GOLD:	Even youths will become weak and tired , and young men will fall in exhaustion .

ID:	2179
INPUT:	Áko atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii biniyé dibé yázhí nidadoołtsił , áádóó ádadołdééh índa Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo danihik'is náádadi'yoołnih biniyé bá hasht'edadoohłííł .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the Passover festival , slaughter the Passover lamb and present them to the Lord , just as he commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Slaughter the Passover lambs , purify yourselves , and prepare to help those who come . Follow all the directions that the Lord gave through Moses . ”

ID:	2180
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , Níłch'i Diyinii k'ehgo dahináanii nanishtinígi át'éego nanihidínéeshtįįłígíí doo ts'ídá shił bohónéedzą́ą da , nidi ts'ísee k'ehgo dahináanii nanishtinígi át'éego nanihinétą́ą́' . Christ bee awéé'chí'í danohłį́įgo t'áá bééhózínígo nihich'į' yáshti' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Dear brothers , dear brothers and sisters , I do n't know that I am the Spirit of our sinful nature . I do n't know that I am with Christ .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when I was with you I could n't talk to you as I would to spiritual people . I had to talk as though you belonged to this world or as though you were infants in Christ .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	Áko David hadiltłish bił béésh éé' bee áká dzíszasgo ch'ééh dashdiighááh , háálá doo <unk> jooł'į́į da nít'éé' . Áádóó David éí Saul ábizhdííniid , Díí doo bee ákǫ́ǫ́ deesháał da , háálá doo bídínéeshnáa da . Áko David éí t'óó háidii'nil .
PRED:	David became very angry with the sword , for he refused to look for him . He said , “ I 'm not going to see David ! ” And David replied , “ I will never die ! ” So David replied , “ I will surely live . ”
GOLD:	David put it on , strapped the sword over it , and took a step or two to see what it was like , for he had never worn such things before. “ I ca n't go in these , ” he protested to Saul . “ I 'm not used to them. ” So David took them off again .

ID:	2182
INPUT:	Diyin God éí diné ayóó ádaat'éii t'áadoo baa hwiinít'íní niyiiłchxǫǫh , áádóó náánáła' yitsásk'ehjį' ayiinííł .
PRED:	Do n't let the glory of God , ” they say . “ Nothing is left . ”
GOLD:	He brings the mighty to ruin without asking anyone , and he sets up others in their place .

ID:	2183
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'áago biná'ástł'inígíí éí hastą́ą́h tsin sitą́ ; éí bijį́į́dóó , Bóhólníihii Áadi Hólǫ́ , wolyéego hahodoolzhish .
PRED:	On the day of the city , the city of the Lord will be called the Lord , and there will be a day for a day .
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	2184
INPUT:	Áko Jéthro ádííniid , Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih le' ; éí Ííjip dine'é índa Féro bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánihíínilígíí índa bidine'é éí Ííjip dine'é yiyaa sinildę́ę́' yisdábíínil lá .
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , ” the Lord said , “ for he rescued you from Egypt and rescued you from the Egyptians .
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , ” Jethro said , “ for he has rescued you from the Egyptians and from Pharaoh . Yes , he has rescued Israel from the powerful hand of Egypt !

ID:	2185
INPUT:	K'idadi'dohłéeł nidi , doo da'doohhish da áádóó áliv bineest'ą' bik'i nidoohkahgo bik'ah bąąh hadahidoohnihgo doo bee adadidoołtłah da índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii bik'i nidoohkah , nidi wáin doo dadoohdlį́įł da .
PRED:	“ You must not eat any fruit or olive oil or olive oil . You will not drink wine or wine or wine or wine .
GOLD:	You will plant cropsbut not harvest them.You will press your olivesbut not get enough oil to anoint yourselves.You will trample the grapesbut get no juice to make your wine .

ID:	2186
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jeremiah Remains in Judah

ID:	2187
INPUT:	áko t'áá shiTaa' éí bee shóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii sheidiní'ánígi át'éego shí ałdó'
PRED:	And the Father has given me my Father as my Father has given me .
GOLD:	And just as my Father has granted me a Kingdom , I now grant you the right

ID:	2188
INPUT:	Áko díí ał'ąą dine'é éí Bóhólníihii deidósin , áádóó eda'alyaii ałdó' yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' ; bada'áłchíní áádóó banááda'áłchíní éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ádáát'įįdígi át'éego díí jį́įjį' ałdó' ákódaat'į́ .
PRED:	They worshiped the Lord , and they worshiped the idols of worship idols . They also worshiped the Lord and their ancestors , just as they did .
GOLD:	So while these new residents worshiped the Lord , they also worshiped their idols . And to this day their descendants do the same .

ID:	2189
INPUT:	Kót'éego Ízrel dine'é nihaa nídeidiyii'aahígíí éí nihí neheleehígíí t'áá át'é ła' át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' bił dah nídi'diilnihgo nááhániihii át'éego náá'iiłniihii Éran baa dahohjáah doo .
PRED:	“ When the Israelites present a special gift to the Lord , you must present to the priest as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	You must present one-tenth of the tithe received from the Israelites as a sacred offering to the Lord . This is the Lord 's sacred portion , and you must present it to Aaron the priest .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	Índa Hínam biye' bihoníts'aa' hoolyéegi ha'áłchíní didlidgo náájiisnii' áádóó bee ééhózinii áádóó bee álílee áda'ooł'įįłii índa nidadilniihii choyooł'į́įgo ch'į́įdii yábiiłti'ii áádóó dadiłgąshii choyooł'į́ , áko t'áá íiyisí doo yá'ádaashóonii éí Bóhólníihii yinááł yaa naagháago yee yáhóółchįįd .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent this message to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , a descendant of Ben-Hinnom , a descendant of Ben-Hinnom , a descendant of Ben-Hinnom , and widows . He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Manasseh also sacrificed his own sons in the fire in the valley of Ben-Hinnom . He practiced sorcery , divination , and witchcraft , and he consulted with mediums and psychics . He did much that was evil in the Lord 's sight , arousing his anger .

ID:	2191
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá' t'áá ałtsoní daaht'į́įgo bee ák'idaahdláago tsi'nisoohkai . Na'atseed bijį́įjį' biniyé nihijéí hwiih danilį́įgo ádaahłaa .
PRED:	You have destroyed all the world , and you have filled your heart with violence .
GOLD:	You have spent your years on earth in luxury , satisfying your every desire . You have fattened yourselves for the day of slaughter .

ID:	2192
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání ánááhodoo'niid , Mesáíyah , Christ joolyéhígíí lá jígháahgo shił bééhózin ni , áko jiníyáago t'áá ałtsoní bee nihił hozhdoolnih .
PRED:	Then he said to the woman , “ I know that you know that he is in prison . I know that he will tell you everything I do . ”
GOLD:	The woman said , “ I know the Messiah is coming — the one who is called Christ . When he comes , he will explain everything to us . ”

ID:	2193
INPUT:	Jó , í'doołíłígíí t'áá ałtso nihich'į' bee haasdzíí' .
PRED:	Look , I have told you everything I told you .
GOLD:	“ At that time I gave you instructions about everything you were to do .

ID:	2194
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaagóó haz'ánígíí bich'é'étiingi dáádiníbaal dooígíí éí tádiin ké silá áníłnéez doo ; yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii biyi'jį' yistł'ǫ́ǫgo naashch'ąą'go ályaa doo ; bá adaaz'áa dooígíí dį́į́' índa bitł'ááh naaznil dooígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí ałdó' <unk> doo .
PRED:	The curtains of the Tabernacle were made of finely woven linen , and the curtains were made of finely woven linen . This made of finely woven linen embroidered with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ For the entrance to the courtyard , make a curtain that is 30 feet long . Make it from finely woven linen , and decorate it with beautiful embroidery in blue , purple , and scarlet thread . Support it with four posts , each securely set in its own base .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ ; t'áá éí shízhi' ; bee ayóó ánísht'éii doo náánáła' baa dideesh'áał da ; bee shaa ha'niihii doo eda'alyaii bich'į' kódeeshłíił da .
PRED:	I am the Lord , and I will not reject my name . I will never again again again break my covenant with them .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord ; that is my name ! I will not give my glory to anyone else , nor share my praise with carved idols .

ID:	2196
INPUT:	Áko Áízak haye' ábizhdííniid , Haaléit'éego t'áadoo hodina'í bik'ííníyá , shiye' ? Áko ájíní , Bóhólníihii niDiyin God shíká aalwodgo bik'íníyá .
PRED:	So Isaac said to him , “ Let 's get here ! ” So Isaac asked him , “ What do you want me to help me ? ” And the Lord helped me to help me .
GOLD:	Isaac asked , “ How did you find it so quickly , my son ? ” “ The Lord your God put it in my path ! ” Jacob replied .

ID:	2197
INPUT:	Háálá badahojoobá'íígíí t'áá áłahjį' nihitaa daakai , nidi shí éí doo t'áá áłahjį' nihitaasháa da .
PRED:	For I am giving you the poor , but I will not remain faithful to you .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , but you will not always have me .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	Jéthro éí Mózes haadaaní nilį́įgo biye'ké áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ bił honoojíigi Diyin God bidziłdi dah oonéełgo áadi Mózes baa jíkai .
PRED:	So Moses and his sons were born in the wilderness of God 's wives , and they went to the mountain of God .
GOLD:	Jethro , Moses ' father-in-law , now came to visit Moses in the wilderness . He brought Moses ' wife and two sons with him , and they arrived while Moses and the people were camped near the mountain of God .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	Áko táłts'á'ii'eełígi doo yá'át'éehgo hóhááh át'éégóó biniinaa diné aghá'ánéelą́ą'go , Fííniks hoolyéedi t'áá jókááh át'éé ládą́ą́' nihił dah náádi'doo'ołgo áadi danihidoohah , dadííniid . Éí Kríit bibąąhgi táłts'á'ii'eełgo shádi'ááh áádóó e'e'aah bita'gi ąą áhoot'é .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the sailors will be brought to the ship of the province of Asia . It will be called ‘ Stand up , ' says , ‘ We will open the coast of Crete , and we will open the coast of Crete . '
GOLD:	And since Fair Havens was an exposed harbor — a poor place to spend the winter — most of the crew wanted to go on to Phoenix , farther up the coast of Crete , and spend the winter there . Phoenix was a good harbor with only a southwest and northwest exposure .

ID:	2200
INPUT:	Niyót'ááh hiníláii nísh'į́įgo , níla' bee binishínílnishii , ooljéé' índa sǫ' ádaat'éii , dah dasínínilii baa nitséskeesgo
PRED:	I have seen your hand , O heavens , and the stars are my glorious arm .
GOLD:	When I look at the night sky and see the work of your fingers — the moon and the stars you set in place —

ID:	2201
INPUT:	k'ad hazhó'ó ííníłts'ą́ą'go díní'į́į́' , áko ná naal'a'í nishłíinii Ízrel dine'é bił nich'į' ádił nida'ayeelzíi'ii bee nił hashne'go Ízrel dine'é ná naal'a'í danilíinii k'ad t'áá ákwíí jį́ índa t'áá ákwíí tł'éé' bá nich'į' sonídíszįįhígíí yíísíníłts'ą́ą́' ; shí áádóó shizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii bił ádił nida'ayeelzíí' .
PRED:	When you heard this , your servant said , “ We have sinned against your servant , your servant , and you have heard that I have sinned against your servant , O Israel , and you have sinned against me .
GOLD:	listen to my prayer ! Look down and see me praying night and day for your people Israel . I confess that we have sinned against you . Yes , even my own family and I have sinned !

ID:	2202
INPUT:	Ánathath kin haal'áagi diné kéédahat'íinii doo yá'áshónígi ádahodeeshłíłígíí yihah góne' atíháshłéehgo t'ááłá'í nidi doo ła' jidoodzih da .
PRED:	I will not fight against the people of Anathoth in the land of Anathoth , but no one will stop them .
GOLD:	Not one of these plotters from Anathoth will survive , for I will bring disaster upon them when their time of punishment comes . ”

ID:	2203
INPUT:	Nidi éí bíni' bił ch'aa daashchį́ , háálá díí jį́įjį' , bee aha'deet'ą́ áłtséhígíí dayółta'go , t'áá shiidą́ą'dii bintsíkees bik'ída'asti' yę́ę doo nahgóó iil<unk> da , háálá éí Christ bee t'éiyá nahgóó adooltsos .
PRED:	But this is what I told you : ‘ I am the one who made me a covenant with the first beginning of my covenant , for it is not from the beginning of Christ . ' ”
GOLD:	But the people 's minds were hardened , and to this day whenever the old covenant is being read , the same veil covers their minds so they can not understand the truth . And this veil can be removed only by believing in Christ .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	Jéíkab éí hazhé'é kéyah Kéínan yiyi' tádííná yę́ęgi kééhojit'į́ .
PRED:	Jacob lived in Canaan .
GOLD:	So Jacob settled again in the land of Canaan , where his father had lived as a foreigner .

ID:	2205
INPUT:	Ha'át'íhída t'áá nant'inee bee nihił hashne'ii t'áadoo bahat'aadí baa dahołne' , áádóó ha'át'íhída bee nihijeeh náníshniihígíí kin bighą́ą́'dóó baa dahołne' .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of what I tell you about . Do n't be afraid of what I am saying , and I trust in your house .
GOLD:	What I tell you now in the darkness , shout abroad when daybreak comes . What I whisper in your ear , shout from the housetops for all to hear !

ID:	2206
INPUT:	Áko hane' yá'át'éehii yits'ą́ą́jí danilíinii t'áá shizááká bich'į' naasdzilgo dashoołtsą́ áádóó k'ad shaa dahodoohts'a'ígi át'éego nihí ałdó' t'áá nihizááká nidaałdzil .
PRED:	You have seen me in the Good News , and you have seen me as you have seen me .
GOLD:	We are in this struggle together . You have seen my struggle in the past , and you know that I am still in the midst of it .

ID:	2207
INPUT:	A'ohgo ádaat'éii yá'áhoot'ééhgóó yoo'ish , áádóó a'ohgo ádaat'éii hohonít'i'ii bínabizhniłtin .
PRED:	Teach the humble , and those who lead good ; teach good judgment to others .
GOLD:	He leads the humble in doing right , teaching them his way .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	Naalte' danohłíinii , nihokáa'gi nihinanit'a'í t'áá ałtsojį' bik'eh dahonoł'į́ . T'óó bináałgo bił hóshǫ́ t'éiyá biniyé ádaaht'į́įgo éí dooda , nidi nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Bóhólníihii dadíínóhsingo nihinanit'a'í bik'eh dahonoł'į́ .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to your master , you are careful to obey everything you do . But if you obey the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you will be careful to obey him .
GOLD:	Slaves , obey your earthly masters in everything you do . Try to please them all the time , not just when they are watching you . Serve them sincerely because of your reverent fear of the Lord .

ID:	2209
INPUT:	Éí bąą haa'íshą' bááh díík'ǫsh t'áá shiidą́ą'dii bił ályaii t'áadoo bił anída'iilzįįhgo ninádahwiidlaahí , háálá díík'ǫsh t'áá shiidą́ą'diígíí éí áká naat'á áádóó doo yá'áshóonii yaa halne' , nidi díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii éí t'áádóo nídí áádóó t'áá aaníinii yaa halne' , áko éigi át'éego ninádahwii<unk> doo .
PRED:	So why do n't you eat the bread made without yeast ? This cup is the bread made without yeast and bread made without yeast . This is the true bread made without yeast , and you will be made without yeast .
GOLD:	So let us celebrate the festival , not with the old bread of wickedness and evil , but with the new bread of sincerity and truth .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	Mózes dah nízdiidzá áádóó baadaaní jílíní Jéthro baa nidzídzáago ábizhdííniid , Baa nánooshkąąh , Ííjip kéyahdi shik'éí kéédahat'íinii bich'į' nídeeshdááł ; t'ah daats'í dahiná shił bééhodoozįįł . Áko Jéthro éí Mózes áyidííniid , Nílááh hózhǫ́ǫgo yínááł .
PRED:	So Moses and his father-in-law returned to Egypt and told him , “ I am sending you back to Egypt , but I will go to Egypt . ” So Moses told him , “ Yes , I 'll know that you are here in Egypt . ”
GOLD:	So Moses went back home to Jethro , his father-in-law . “ Please let me return to my relatives in Egypt , ” Moses said . “ I do n't even know if they are still alive. ” “ Go in peace , ” Jethro replied .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa áyidííniid , T'áadoo nił yé'í ; t'áadoo ádił nisindáhí ; nídiidáahgo diné nidaabaahii t'áá ałtso dah dii'éeshgo nihílááh , Éí'ai kin haal'áágóó dohkááh ; jó , Éí'ai dine'é áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í áádóó bidine'é áádóó bikin haal'áhígíí índa bikéyah nihílák'eidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid of the men of Ai , and go to the town of Ai . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do not be afraid or discouraged . Take all your fighting men and attack Ai , for I have given you the king of Ai , his people , his town , and his land .

ID:	2212
INPUT:	Diyin God doo yidósinii doo yá'áshóonii haidilts'i' , áádóó yee yáłti'ígíí kǫ' nahalingo hidiiltłáád .
PRED:	Pride leads to a fool ; a fool is like a flame of fire .
GOLD:	Scoundrels create trouble ; their words are a destructive blaze .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	Ła'da nanihídééłkidgo , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé k'e'oh'ad ? nihiłníigo , Jó , Bóhólníihii choidooł'įįł , bididoohniił .
PRED:	Do you ask , ‘ What are you doing ? ' If you want to know that the Lord is about ? '
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	2214
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalem yisnáajį' Jeremáíyah éí awáalyaa bich'éédą́ą'gi dzizdáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Jeremiah returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	And Jeremiah remained a prisoner in the courtyard of the guard until the day Jerusalem was captured .

ID:	2215
INPUT:	Bee aha'deet'áanii shinááł baa nidziskai yę́ę t'áadoo bida'jiilaagóó béégashii yáázh ahádajishgizhgo bita' gónaa ch'ídadziiskai yę́ędą́ą́' shibee aha'deetáanii k'ídadzizti'ígíí kóhodeeshłííł :
PRED:	“ You have defiled my covenant with my covenant with my people , and they have defiled my covenant . I will break my covenant with the people who were circumcised .
GOLD:	Because you have broken the terms of our covenant , I will cut you apart just as you cut apart the calf when you walked between its halves to solemnize your vows .

ID:	2216
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá tł'óó'dę́ę́' sínízį́įgo nikwá'ásiní bąąh ni'ííníláhígíí nich'į' ch'éidoodlééł .
PRED:	But if you have been released from your own home , you will have sex with us .
GOLD:	You must wait outside while he goes in and brings it out to you .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	Áádóó ch'íhoní'eezhgo áhodííniid , Nílááh , yisdádoohkahígíí biniyé tsį́įłgo dah doohjeeh ; t'áadoo nát'ą́ą́' nídadóht'į́'í ; halgaigi nidi t'áadoo nida'áhodołziidí ; dził <unk> jeeh ; t'áadoo ádaohdzaagóó éí ádadoohdįįł .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Go out to the wilderness , and do n't let them go into the field . Do n't let the mountains go into the field . Do n't let the mountains go into the field . ”
GOLD:	When they were safely out of the city , one of the angels ordered , “ Run for your lives ! And do n't look back or stop anywhere in the valley ! Escape to the mountains , or you will be swept away ! ”

ID:	2218
INPUT:	Áko ákwii áhooníiłii ayóó át'éii doo baa nijóya' át'ée da , nidi diné bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí t'áá díkwíí t'éí bik'i dah dahizhdilníihgo nááhizhdiiłjéé' .
PRED:	There was no sound for a great crowd , but no one could have enough to survive .
GOLD:	And because of their unbelief , he could n't do any miracles among them except to place his hands on a few sick people and heal them .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	Áko David éí Saul bich'į' ádee hazdoodzíi'go Saul hooghangóó dah nídiidzá , nidi David áádóó diné bił nijikaígíí éí bidziilgo nahont'in nahaz'ą́ą́góó bił dah nízhdiikai .
PRED:	So David made Saul swear to Saul , but David went to his home with David and his men .
GOLD:	So David promised this to Saul with an oath . Then Saul went home , but David and his men went back to their stronghold .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Offerings for the Passover

ID:	2221
INPUT:	Diné bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ , háálá á nidahwii'aahii bidááhdę́ę́' nidanihidiyoo'ish , áádóó kin yii' áłah nídaadleehí naaznilgóó ninihída<unk> <unk> doo ,
PRED:	Be careful to stand in front of your judges , for you will stand in front of the synagogues and in the synagogues .
GOLD:	But beware ! For you will be handed over to the courts and will be flogged with whips in the synagogues .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	Asdzání ádee hadahadziihgo bá bee haz'áanii
PRED:	A Call to Return to the Law
GOLD:	Laws concerning Vows

ID:	2223
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Revolt against Athaliah

ID:	2224
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God yá naal'a'í hach'į' báhóóchįįdgo ání , Ashdladi , doodaii' hastą́ądi <unk> dííłt'oh nít'éé' , ákohgo Síriya dine'é ałtso ádííłdįįłjį' atídíílííł nít'éé' , nidi k'ad Síriya dine'é t'áá tá'ídi atídíílííł .
PRED:	But God was angry with his servant , and he said to the man of Aram , “ You will destroy the valley of Aram , but you will destroy the Arameans . ”
GOLD:	But the man of God was angry with him . “ You should have struck the ground five or six times ! ” he exclaimed . “ Then you would have beaten Aram until it was entirely destroyed . Now you will be victorious only three times . ”

ID:	2225
INPUT:	Peter ánáázhdoo'niid , Shik'isóó , t'áadoo bich'į' ni' nishłíní nihizhé'é David yę́ę binahjį' nihich'į' hadeesdzih , éí daaztsą́ áádóó yóó'ábi'diilyaa , áádóó díí jį́įjį' tséní'ootséél góne' abi'dooltínígi t'ahdii bik'eh haz'ą́ .
PRED:	Then Peter said , “ My dear brothers and sisters , I am sending you out of my father , David , and then I will be buried in the tomb of David . ”
GOLD:	“ Dear brothers , think about this ! You can be sure that the patriarch David was n't referring to himself , for he died and was buried , and his tomb is still here among us .

ID:	2226
INPUT:	Jó , ats'íís bee hadilyaii lą'í nidi ats'íís éí t'ááłá'í .
PRED:	For many body has many parts , but each body is body .
GOLD:	Yes , there are many parts , but only one body .

ID:	2227
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalem kin haal'áadi níyáago łahgo shił bééhoozin , Iiláíyashib éí nihiDiyin God bikin góne' łahgo haz'ą́ Tobáíyah yá hasht'ehoolaaígíí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįd da lá .
PRED:	So I went to Jerusalem to rebuild the city of God . I did n't know what God had happened to rebuild the Temple of God .
GOLD:	When I arrived back in Jerusalem , I learned about Eliashib 's evil deed in providing Tobiah with a room in the courtyards of the Temple of God .

ID:	2228
INPUT:	Áko Gídiyan éí diyingo naal'a'í ábizhdííniid , Bóhonishníihii nílíinii , Bóhólníihii nihił hólǫ́ǫgo ha'át'íí biniyé díí t'áá ałtso bee kónihi'dool'įįd ? Áko álílee yee ááníłígíí danihizhé'é yę́ę ákót'éego yee nihił dahoolne'go ádaaní , Da' doósh Bóhólníihii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezh da ? Nidi k'ad Bóhólníihii yóó'anihidíí'ą́ągo Mídiyan dine'é yílák'ee nihidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	Then Gideon said to the angel , “ O Lord , why are you doing this ? ” And the Lord said , “ You have brought us out of Egypt , but you have brought us out of Egypt ? ” But the Lord said , “ Do n't you have brought us out of Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	“ Sir , ” Gideon replied , “ if the Lord is with us , why has all this happened to us ? And where are all the miracles our ancestors told us about ? Did n't they say , ‘ The Lord brought us up out of Egypt ' ? But now the Lord has abandoned us and handed us over to the Midianites . ”

ID:	2229
INPUT:	áádóó Jóseph ádííniidígi át'éego dahodichingo tsosts'id nídoohahígíí baa hoolzhiizh . Áko kédaayahgóó t'áá ałtsogi dahodííchįįd , nidi Ííjip kéyahgi t'éiyá t'áá át'éé nít'éé' ch'iyáán hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Joseph was a severe famine in Egypt , and there was seven years old when he became a severe famine in Egypt . But the famine was severe throughout the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the seven years of famine began , just as Joseph had predicted . The famine also struck all the surrounding countries , but throughout Egypt there was plenty of food .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	Áko Jesus ch'il hooshahii hach'ah áádóó éé' tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bee joogáałgo áádę́ę́' ch'ízhníyá . Áko Páílat éí diné áłah silį́'ígíí áyidííniid , Jó , kǫ́ǫ́ dzizį́ .
PRED:	As Jesus was walking on his head , he sat on his head and sat on his head . Then Pilate said to Pilate , “ Look , ” Pilate replied .
GOLD:	Then Jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe . And Pilate said , “ Look , here is the man ! ”

ID:	2231
INPUT:	níbaal bii' hodílzinii áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí binaa haz'ánígi nídadilbałígíí áádóó bich'éédą́ą'gi dáádiníbaal ałdó' áádóó dabitł'óól áádóó yee yininádaalnishígíí t'áá át'é índa níbaal bee háádiil'įįhígíí t'áá át'é nideiyée doo ; díí bindaanishgo nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	The altar of the Tabernacle will be its utensils , and the entrance of the Tabernacle will be given to the Tabernacle . They will be given to the Tabernacle , and they will serve me .
GOLD:	They are also to carry the curtains for the courtyard walls that surround the Tabernacle and altar , the curtain across the courtyard entrance , the ropes , and all the equipment related to their use . The Gershonites are responsible for all these items .

ID:	2232
INPUT:	K'ad díí Ízrel dine'é bee bił hodíílnih , Bíni' diné índa asdzání t'ááłá'í jinítínígo hoł kééhat'íinii t'áadoo le'é béésh łigaii índa óola bee yódí ádaalyaii bídeízhdóokił .
PRED:	“ Now tell the people of Israel what you say , ‘ Do n't make a gold jewelry or gold , 'or gold .
GOLD:	Tell all the Israelite men and women to ask their Egyptian neighbors for articles of silver and gold . ”

ID:	2233
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee adziilii yit'íní ályaa
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Job Responds to the

ID:	2234
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Edom Refuses Israel Passage

ID:	2235
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God k'ehgo yínííł daniidlį́įgo éí łahgo át'éego Diyin God bich'į' tsínánihidiiłkosgo bee yisdá'iildéehii yaa nihii'éésh , áko éí doo bik'édí daniidlį́į da , nidi nihokáá'jí k'ehgo yínííł danilį́įgo éí aniné t'éiyá nánídlį́ .
PRED:	For if we pray for God , let us save us from God 's grace and save us . We do n't want to save us , but we do n't want to follow God .
GOLD:	For the kind of sorrow God wants us to experience leads us away from sin and results in salvation . There 's no regret for that kind of sorrow . But worldly sorrow , which lacks repentance , results in spiritual death .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	Áádóó Mó'ab kéyah nidzisgaigi éí Jériko binaashiijí Jórdan tooh nílíní ha'a'aahjigo haz'ánígi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	So Moses left Jericho and camped beside the Jordan River beside the Jordan River . Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2237
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné dį́lt'éego diné bitah doo nahwii'náa da léi' hach'į' dayíłtsóós .
PRED:	One day a man who had n't been paralyzed and began to live .
GOLD:	four men arrived carrying a paralyzed man on a mat .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God éí diné t'áadoo biniyéhígóó nidaakaii yééhósin ; doo ákwii é'ét'éii ałdó' yiyiiłtséehgo yiníł'į́ . Da' éísh doo yaa nitsíkees da doo ?
PRED:	But God knows what is happening to the wicked , and how can he see ? Do n't you see what you see ?
GOLD:	For he knows those who are false , and he takes note of all their sins .

ID:	2239
INPUT:	Diné éí níłch'i t'ą́ą́' jótą' dooleełígíí doo bíjíighah da , áádóó dazdootsaałígíí bijį́ doo dadeestsaał da dzinízin , nidi doo bízhneel'ą́ą da ; anaa' baa na'aldeehdę́ę́' doo hwéé'doolnih da , doodaii' doo yá'áshóonii baa ázhdeet'ánígíí doo bits'áhodi'dooltéeł da .
PRED:	The Spirit will not die in the wilderness , and no one will die in the desert . They will be able to fight against them , but no one will rescue them from war .
GOLD:	None of us can hold back our spirit from departing . None of us has the power to prevent the day of our death . There is no escaping that obligation , that dark battle . And in the face of death , wickedness will certainly not rescue the wicked .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	and a male goat for a sin offering .
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáahgi naaki íí'áhígíí béésh łitsoii bee ályaii áádóó béésh łitsoii bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ánígíí éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin dabiyi'ígíí Kaldíya dine'é nidayiizti'go éí béésh łitsoii Bábilangóó adayiizyį́ .
PRED:	He also made two bronze bronze bronze bronze basin in the Temple of the Lord , and he put them in bronze bronze bronze chains for the Babylonians .
GOLD:	The Babylonians broke up the bronze pillars in front of the Lord 's Temple , the bronze water carts , and the great bronze basin called the Sea , and they carried all the bronze away to Babylon .

ID:	2242
INPUT:	Áádóó neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii naadeesh'niłígíí tsits'aa' dílzinii biih dadoohnił .
PRED:	I will break the Ark of the Covenant , and I will enter the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	When the Ark is finished , place inside it the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , which I will give to you .

ID:	2243
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í índa Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiiháshafat éí bi'éénééz yiih yí'áazhgo Samériya dań'dítį́įhgi t'áá bíni' haz'ą́ą́ léi'gi t'áá ał'ąą bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah siké , áko náás áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii t'áá ałtso hadááhdóó dahoolne' .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel took the royal line of King Jehoshaphat of Judah and King Jehoshaphat of Judah to sit on the throne of Samaria . Then they will sit in front of Ahab 's throne .
GOLD:	King Ahab of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah , dressed in their royal robes , were sitting on thrones at the threshing floor near the gate of Samaria . All of Ahab 's prophets were prophesying there in front of them .

ID:	2244
INPUT:	Áko Jesus baa dziiskaigo diné níłch'i bida'iiníziinii lą'í bii' hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę bi'éé' hólǫ́ǫgo áádóó bintsékees yá'át'éehgo índa hasht'edít'éego ákwii sidáago dajiiłtsą́ , áko t'áá ádzíłtso t'óó hayadahodeesyiz .
PRED:	When Jesus returned to the crowd , he saw many evil spirits that had been healed , and he sat down in the tomb of the crowd and wept .
GOLD:	A crowd soon gathered around Jesus , and they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons . He was sitting there fully clothed and perfectly sane , and they were all afraid .

ID:	2245
INPUT:	HaDiyin God bibááh níjídį́įh doo ; aláahgo dadiyinígíí áádóó dadiyingoígíí t'áá áłah jiyą́ą doo .
PRED:	May God eat the bread of God and eat it .
GOLD:	However , he may eat from the food offered to God , including the holy offerings and the most holy offerings .

ID:	2246
INPUT:	Áádóó da'oo'ínígíí dabináá' doo ádaadįįł da doo áádóó dadiits'a'ígíí bijaa' yee da'íists'ą́ą' doo .
PRED:	They will not listen to their eyes , and they will not listen to their ears .
GOLD:	Then everyone who has eyes will be able to see the truth , and everyone who has ears will be able to hear it .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Náás da'ahíínółchííhgóó danihi'éé' bibąąhdi bijánil áńdaał'įįh doo , áádóó bijánil bikáa'gi tł'óół yá nahalingo dootł'izh danít'i'go áńdaał'įįh doo ,
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : Go to generation to generation to generation , but they have given you a piece of honey .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : Throughout the generations to come you must make tassels for the hems of your clothing and attach them with a blue cord .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	Ííhad bik'ai' nish'náájí diltłish bąąh ní'áhígíí nishtł'ají yee yił háádéelgo habid góne' yaa ayííłgeed .
PRED:	Ehud put a sword in his right thigh , and the stomach with a leather coat .
GOLD:	Ehud reached with his left hand , pulled out the dagger strapped to his right thigh , and plunged it into the king 's belly .

ID:	2249
INPUT:	Áko éí hatahgóó Éídar yiziłígíí binih dį́į́'ts'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo índa ashdla'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh ts'ídá ákódaat'į́į dooleeł .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the fourteenth day of the fourteenth day of the fourteenth day of the month .
GOLD:	calling on them to celebrate an annual festival on these two days .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Land Division East of the Jordan

ID:	2251
INPUT:	Be'ek'id bąąhgi Jesus nínáázhdí'níitą́ą́' . Áko diné t'óó ahayóí haa áłah silį́į́' , éí bąą tsinaa'eeł biih jííyáago bii'dóó dah dzineezdá , áko diné áłah silį́'ígíí t'áá át'é tábąąhgóó yíl'á .
PRED:	Jesus went to the shore of the lake , and he went into the boat to the boat with many people . So the crowd gathered the shore of the boat with the crowd .
GOLD:	Once again Jesus began teaching by the lakeshore . A very large crowd soon gathered around him , so he got into a boat . Then he sat in the boat while all the people remained on the shore .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ayóó át'éego ádeínóhsin ! Bidził dílzinii si'ą́ądi bich'į' nidahohłá , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hó jidiyin !
PRED:	You must fear the Lord your God , for he is holy to worship the holy mountain of worship .
GOLD:	Exalt the Lord our God , and worship at his holy mountain in Jerusalem , for the Lord our God is holy !

ID:	2253
INPUT:	Ak'eh honíł'ínígíí bee naa jóshłíigo , ándishnínígíi nidi biláahgo ádííníiłgo shił bééhózingo nich'į' ak'e'ashchí .
PRED:	I am writing to you , but I know you are writing to you , but I am writing to you .
GOLD:	I am confident as I write this letter that you will do what I ask and even more !

ID:	2254
INPUT:	Jéshuwa áádóó biye'ké áádóó bik'isóó danilíinii áádóó Ho<unk> yah ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ła' Kádmiyel ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii índa Hénadad biye'kéhígíí dabiye'ké áádóó dabik'isóó éí Líívai dine'é danilíiniida yił deizį'go Diyin God bikin ałtso bini'doonishígíí díí diné nidaalnishii bił nidajishnish .
PRED:	These are the descendants of Jeshua and Levites : The descendants of Jeshua and Levites who were descendants of Jeshua and families of Jeshua and Levites who were descendants of Jeshua and Levites .
GOLD:	The workers at the Temple of God were supervised by Jeshua with his sons and relatives , and Kadmiel and his sons , all descendants of Hodaviah . They were helped in this task by the Levites of the family of Henadad .

ID:	2255
INPUT:	Jóseph éí Matatháíyas biye' , Matatháíyas éí Éímas biye' , Éímas éí Néíham biye' , Néíham éí <unk> biye' , <unk> éí Néígeiyai biye' ,
PRED:	descendants of Joseph , son of Bani , was leader of the family of Bani . This was the son of Makir 's son .
GOLD:	Joseph was the son of Mattathias.Mattathias was the son of Amos.Amos was the son of Nahum.Nahum was the son of Esli.Esli was the son of Naggai .

ID:	2256
INPUT:	Áádóó Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígóó níyá , áadi sis niteelí nídéł'į́į́' yę́ędóó hanéígeedgo nídiilá . Nít'éé' , sis niteelí yę́ę doo chonáánáot'įįh át'éégóó yíchxǫ' lá , jó'akon .
PRED:	He went to the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River , where he hid it in the middle of the Euphrates River . He said , “ Look , your brother 's grandson . ”
GOLD:	So I went to the Euphrates and dug it out of the hole where I had hidden it . But now it was rotting and falling apart . The loincloth was good for nothing .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	T'áá háiida doo danihinízinígíí éí bee hwéédahózin doo biniyé kin haal'áádóó dah náádahidoohkáahgo nihikee' łeezh bąąh nidahinołdéeh doo .
PRED:	If you do n't know that you will be holy , you will be defiled by the dust of the earth .
GOLD:	And if a town refuses to welcome you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	2258
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehdi daneest'áanii nááda<unk> jooł ; diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bich'il na'atł'o'ii nínéiniłt'į́hígi nidahodikai .
PRED:	“ The fig tree has never been allowed to eat , but the grapevines have no grapes .
GOLD:	They harvest a field they do not own , and they glean in the vineyards of the wicked .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Pekahiah Rules in Israel

ID:	2260
INPUT:	Áko hach'į' hádaasdzíí' , Diné ditł'oii léi' akałsis biníí' gónaa yee ákászaaz . Áko Eihazáíyah ání , Éí lá Tíshbeh dine'é Iiláíjah át'į́ ni .
PRED:	So a man named Elijah , a man who was wearing a man named Elijah . He said , “ He is the heir to Elijah . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ He was a hairy man , and he wore a leather belt around his waist. ” “ Elijah from Tishbe ! ” the king exclaimed .

ID:	2261
INPUT:	Áádóó Jésii éí bááh áádóó tó abid bee wáin áádóó tł'ízí yázhí ałdó' éí télii béédzíiztł'ingo haye' David éí Saul yich'į' ayíílóóz .
PRED:	Then Jesse brought the young goats and the wine of the young goats , and he brought Saul to Saul .
GOLD:	Jesse responded by sending David to Saul , along with a young goat , a donkey loaded with bread , and a wineskin full of wine .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	Áko Gídiyan éí Jórdan toohdi jiníyáago tsé'naa nizhníyá , hó áádóó diné táadi neeznádiin hoł naakaígíí bił ch'ééh dzideeskai nidi t'áá bikéé' dajíbááh .
PRED:	When Gideon arrived at the Jordan River , he went out to the Jordan River and found fifty men with him .
GOLD:	Gideon then crossed the Jordan River with his 300 men , and though exhausted , they continued to chase the enemy .

ID:	2263
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread

ID:	2264
INPUT:	Éí bąą Diyin God ba'áłchíní háá'áyį́į́h t'ahdii bá hólǫ́ .
PRED:	That is why God 's children , for there is no rest for the Sabbath .
GOLD:	So there is a special rest still waiting for the people of God .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ábsalam ádííniid , Árkadóó dine'é Húshai ałdó' k'ad hágo bidohní , Haa'íshą' ha'át'íí didooniiłígíí hazhó'ó deídíilts'įįł .
PRED:	“ Oh , ” Absalom replied , “ let 's get up ! ”
GOLD:	But then Absalom said , “ Bring in Hushai the Arkite . Let 's see what he thinks about this . ”

ID:	2266
INPUT:	Áko Éísaf ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii dahataałii t'áá nideidzįįhígi naazį́ ; David yę́ę áádóó Éísaf yę́ę áádóó Hííman yę́ę índa Jedúthan éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá náásgóó áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii nilį́įgo ádííniidii yik'ehgo naazį́ , áko dáń'da'ditį́į́h yaa ádahalyánígíí dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó naazį́ , éí bindaanishígíí doo ni' kódeilééhgóó ; jó , dahak'is Líívai dine'é há ch'iyáán hasht'éédayiil'įįh .
PRED:	When the singers of the family of Asaph , they stood up and stood at the gates of David and Asaph , the gatekeepers who were standing in the gates of David . They said to the priests , “ Let 's go to the gates . ”
GOLD:	The musicians , descendants of Asaph , were in their assigned places , following the commands that had been given by David , Asaph , Heman , and Jeduthun , the king 's seer . The gatekeepers guarded the gates and did not need to leave their posts of duty , for their Passover offerings were prepared for them by their fellow Levites .

ID:	2267
INPUT:	Háálá diné t'áadoo nilíní da nidi ayóó ánísht'é nízinii , éí ádina'adlo'go át'é .
PRED:	For I am not a proud person ; it is a proud person who lives .
GOLD:	If you think you are too important to help someone , you are only fooling yourself . You are not that important .

ID:	2268
INPUT:	Háishą' éí bá nidahołt'i' ? Háishą' bich'į' nihizéé' nidahołts'ǫǫdgo nihitsoo' háádaołgo' ? Ts'ídá bee haz'áanii doo yik'eh hół'íinii índa t'óó áhodil'íinii ba'áłchíní danohłį́ .
PRED:	“ Who is your tongue ? Who is your words ? Who is your mouth ? For you are the law of your children and obey your instructions ?
GOLD:	Whom do you mock , making faces and sticking out your tongues ? You children of sinners and liars !

ID:	2269
INPUT:	Áko díí yee nanihinitin , díí nihokáa'gi doo Diyin God k'ehgo iináanii índa ts'ísee k'ehgo adáhonooníinii yóó'adahidiit'aah , áádóó hazhó'ó ádaa ádahwiilyą́ągo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego índa Diyin God k'ehgo dahinii'náago ánihósingo
PRED:	And if we are living in God 's sight , we will follow God 's commandments and obey God 's commands , just as we live .
GOLD:	And we are instructed to turn from godless living and sinful pleasures . We should live in this evil world with wisdom , righteousness , and devotion to God ,

ID:	2270
INPUT:	Díí t'áá íiyisí doo yá'át'éhígi ádaoht'ínígíí danohsingo doo danihíísíilts'ą́ą' da doo ; éí asdzání dé'éyóní danilíinii bił ahánda'ohgehgo Diyin God bich'į' bee haz'áanii k'ídahohtíih doo .
PRED:	“ You must not listen to what you have done . You must not listen to the foreigners living God 's law .
GOLD:	How could you even think of committing this sinful deed and acting unfaithfully toward God by marrying foreign women ? ”

ID:	2271
INPUT:	Kót'éego hadeesdzih , dííniidgo , jó , na'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii binisílo' doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then I said , “ I will answer you , for you have been counted as slaves . ”
GOLD:	If I had really spoken this way to others , I would have been a traitor to your people .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	Ákohgo shádi'ááhdę́ę'go yah a'atiindę́ę́' shił yah íí'áazhgo wóne'di ahééhool'áhíjį' shił niní'áázh , áádóó shádi'áahjigo yah a'atiinígíí yí'nééł'ąąd , nít'éé' t'áá ła' áníłtsooígi áníłtso lá ;
PRED:	Then I went to the south side of the south side of the south gateway and measured it into the gateway .
GOLD:	Then the man took me to the south gateway leading into the inner courtyard . He measured it , and it had the same measurements as the other gateways .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é yíníłta' ; éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii áádóó ahii' háá'ahoolchíiłii bik'ehgo ashiiké t'ááłá'í bee nídadeezidóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso deídííłtah .
PRED:	“ Give the Levites to the families of Levi , and twenty years old or older .
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	2274
INPUT:	Áádóó ła'da alį́į́' ła' jiisxį́įgo t'áá alį́į́' ła' ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	“ If someone kills another person 's owner , it must pay a thief .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who kills another person 's animal must pay for it in full — a live animal for the animal that was killed .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	Áko ádííniid , Ákódeeshníłígíí t'áá íiyisí doo óoshne' át'ée da . Bee adlání bits'ą́ą́' hanáát'ánígíí éí shinaalte' jílį́į doo . Áko nihí t'éiyá nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihizhé'é bich'į' nídoohkah .
PRED:	“ No , ” he said . “ I 'll tell you the truth . You will be my master 's slave , and you will be my father . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” Joseph said . “ I would never do such a thing ! Only the man who stole the cup will be my slave . The rest of you may go back to your father in peace . ”

ID:	2276
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní Christ yik'eh dahół'į́į doo biniyé yik'i dées'eezgo yee yíhoosníí' . Nidi , T'áá ałtsoní yee hóhoosníí' , ha'níigo , t'áá ałtsoní nínígíí éí Diyin God doo atahgo ááhyiłníi da . Diyin God yee' Christ t'áá ałtsoní yee yíhoosníí' .
PRED:	For God of Heaven 's Armies says , “ He is the way to obey all his ways , but he does n't obey all his ways . He is the way of Christ .
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ God has put all things under his authority. ” ( Of course , when it says “ all things are under his authority , ” that does not include God himself , who gave Christ his authority . )

ID:	2277
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí tsé shá nilį́ , índa bine' adziihii shá nilį́ , áádóó yisdáshiiłteehii nilį́ ; shiDiyin God éí bee shidziilii nilį́įgo bine' ahinishchééh ; shinaage' índa adziil bee yisdáhásháahii nilį́įgo bikáá' nehesdzíihii nilį́ .
PRED:	The Lord is my rock , and my fortress is my fortress , my fortress is my fortress , my fortress , and my shield is my shield .
GOLD:	The Lord is my rock , my fortress , and my savior ; my God is my rock , in whom I find protection.He is my shield , the power that saves me , and my place of safety .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	Záker , Sheriibáíyah , Shebanáíyah ,
PRED:	Shemaiah , Bani ,
GOLD:	Zaccur , Sherebiah , Shebaniah ,

ID:	2279
INPUT:	Diyin God be'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' nihíni' danilį́į le' . Níłch'i Diyinii aidii'aahii ałdó' hádaaht'į́įgo Diyin God bá dahołne' dooígíí éí agháago hádaaht'į́ .
PRED:	May God 's love be kind of love , and be the Holy Spirit of God .
GOLD:	Let love be your highest goal ! But you should also desire the special abilities the Spirit gives — especially the ability to prophesy .

ID:	2280
INPUT:	Éí bąą Ízrel dine'é bíí' dadooleełii doo bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'dzíłk'iiz da ; Bóhólníihii t'éí hóó' dooleełii nilį́įgo hach'į' ádee hadoodzíí' .
PRED:	“ Therefore , the tribe of Israel will not share the land allotted to the Lord .
GOLD:	They will have no land of their own among the Israelites . The Lord himself is their special possession , just as he promised them .

ID:	2281
INPUT:	Yiską́ągo kóhoodzaago diné ła' naa deesh'aałígíí éí dinéhígíí Bénjamin dine'é bikéyahdę́ę́' naaghá , áko ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo ats'ádííłtéełgo shidine'é Ízrel yinant'áa doo . Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' shidine'é yisdéidoonił , háálá shidine'é bich'į' nidahwii'nánígíí nish'į́įgo shich'į' daachago diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	“ On the third day I will give you victory over Benjamin , ” says the king of Benjamin . “ He will rescue me from the tribe of Benjamin , and he will rescue me from my enemies . ”
GOLD:	“ About this time tomorrow I will send you a man from the land of Benjamin . Anoint him to be the leader of my people , Israel . He will rescue them from the Philistines , for I have looked down on my people in mercy and have heard their cry . ”

ID:	2282
INPUT:	Íílah nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Shelah Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Elah Rules in Israel

ID:	2283
INPUT:	Nidi Jónah dah diiyáago Társhish kin haal'áajigo Bóhólníihii bits'ąą yóó'ajilyeedgo Jápa kin haal'áá góyaa ajííyá áádóó Társhishgóó tsinaa'eeł deez'éél léi' bik'ízhníyá , áko bik'é nazh'níláago biih jííyáago Társhish kin haal'áajigo atah hoł dah adii'éelgo Bóhólníihii hólǫ́ǫ́dóó yóó'ajilyeed .
PRED:	But when he returned to the city of Tarshish , he said , “ You are afraid of the Lord , ” he said . So he went to the towns of Tarshish and went to the towns of the Lord .
GOLD:	But Jonah got up and went in the opposite direction to get away from the Lord . He went down to the port of Joppa , where he found a ship leaving for Tarshish . He bought a ticket and went on board , hoping to escape from the Lord by sailing to Tarshish .

ID:	2284
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áii binahjį' sin
PRED:	Parable of the Vineyard Seed
GOLD:	A Song about the

ID:	2285
INPUT:	áádóó doo chin bąąh hólóonii ch'il hísap wolyéii tó yiih yidoołjołgo níbaal áádóó łeets'aa' t'áá át'é áádóó ákóne' naháaztáanii índa tsinda , doodaii' seesyíinii , doodaii' daaztsáanii , doodaii' jishcháá' yíhidéé'ná'ígíí bik'ízhdoołtah ,
PRED:	“ You must not plant a hyssop branch , a hyssop branch , a hyssop branch , a hyssop branch , and a hyssop branch .
GOLD:	Then someone who is ceremonially clean must take a hyssop branch and dip it into the water . That person must sprinkle the water on the tent , on all the furnishings in the tent , and on the people who were in the tent ; also on the person who touched a human bone , or touched someone who was killed or who died naturally , or touched a grave .

ID:	2286
INPUT:	Nidi díí bee haasdzí'ígíí t'áadoo dasidoots'ą́ą́'góogo , t'áá shí ádee hadisdziihgo ádíshní , Díí aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bił haz'ą́ągi doo yidoolaałí da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But if I listen to this , I will not listen to the king . This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what I am going to do . '
GOLD:	But if you refuse to pay attention to this warning , I swear by my own name , says the Lord , that this palace will become a pile of rubble . ' ”

ID:	2287
INPUT:	Díí ni'góó nidaa'na'ii ła' bee t'ááká baa'ihgo áda'doołnééh lágo , doodaii' t'ááká éí bee doo bi'didéehii áda'doołnééh lágo , jó , éí nihidoołchxǫǫł .
PRED:	“ Do not defile yourselves by touching a small animal that is ceremonially unclean . Do not defile yourselves , for you will not defile yourselves .
GOLD:	Do not defile yourselves by touching them . You must not make yourselves ceremonially unclean because of them .

ID:	2288
INPUT:	Nidi bikáa'gi hosh índa ch'il deeníní hanoot'ą́ągo , éí doo ílį́į́góó baa nitsáhákees , índa doolchxǫǫłgo bá ha'doodzihgi bich'į' hoolzhish , áko t'óó kǫ' bee adidoolk'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	But there is no light in the desert , and it is no good to eat or drink it . It will be a fire that day of fire will be thrown into fire . ”
GOLD:	But if a field bears thorns and thistles , it is useless . The farmer will soon condemn that field and burn it .

ID:	2289
INPUT:	Áko ádííniid , Shibóhólníihii , díishą' ha'át'íí ádaat'é ? Nít'éé' diyingo naal'a'í áshidííniidgo áshíłní , Díí ádaat'éhígíí hazhó'ó nił bééhodeesįįł .
PRED:	“ What are you doing ? ” the angel asked . “ What are you doing ? ” And he said , “ I 'll know these things ! ”
GOLD:	I asked the angel who was talking with me , “ My lord , what do these horses mean ? ” “ I will show you , ” the angel replied .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	Dahasnáanii t'áá ałtso haa a'ááh danízingo áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made his unfailing love for mercy , and he restored them .
GOLD:	He even caused their captorsto treat them with kindness .

ID:	2291
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'áanii adinídíinii yii' dayíkáah doo , áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'dóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii yee ayóó ádaat'éii yił , yah adahakáah dooleeł .
PRED:	These are the kings of the world , and the kings of the earth will enter the glory of the earth .
GOLD:	The nations will walk in its light , and the kings of the world will enter the city in all their glory .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	Shoo , Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdígíí yee diltłi'go áádóó bilid diłhił nahalingo nízaadę́ę́' honíle' ; báháchį'go yáłti' áádóó bitsoo' kǫ' ó'oołdįįłii nahalin ,
PRED:	Look , the fierce anger of the Lord is like a burning burning burning fire . It is like a whirlwind of fire .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord is coming from far away , burning with anger , surrounded by thick , rising smoke.His lips are filled with fury ; his words consume like fire .

ID:	2293
INPUT:	Áko David áádóó diné hoł naakaígíí hastą́ądi neeznádiin daats'í yilt'éego nídiijée'go Kii'áílah kin haal'áádóó t'áá ooleełjigo aheeskai . Áko David éí Kii'áílahdóó dah náázdiidzáago Saul bił hóone'go t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ deeyáa da .
PRED:	So David and his men returned to Keilah . So David went to Keilah and went to Keilah to Keilah . But David did n't want to go to Keilah .
GOLD:	So David and his men — about 600 of them now — left Keilah and began roaming the countryside . Word soon reached Saul that David had escaped , so he did n't go to Keilah after all .

ID:	2294
INPUT:	Éí Ííjip kéyahdi áádóó díí jį́įjį' Ízrel dine'é bitahgóó índa náánáła' dadine'é bitahgóó bee éédahózinii áádóó t'óó bik'e'ayóigo ádahooníiłii yaa naayá . Áko díí jį́ át'éhígi át'éego nízhi' bee ch'índit'áahgo í'diinilyaa ,
PRED:	“ On that day , today , the people of Israel and the miraculous signs and wonders among the people of Israel , along with the miraculous signs and wonders in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	You performed miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt — things still remembered to this day ! And you have continued to do great miracles in Israel and all around the world . You have made your name famous to this day .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Mózes éí Biizáliyel áádóó Ahóliyab yíká ádííniid , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí diné náádaała' bíni' bíighahgo iichįįhgo át'é hwiindzin bii' hólǫ́ǫgo áyiilaaígíí t'áá éí adiih ádaat'į́įgo atah nideeshnish daniizį́'ígíí ałdó' Mózes háká ádííniidgo
PRED:	Then Moses said to Bezalel and Oholiab , “ The Lord has given you a chance to help the people of the Lord . I will put an end to those who do with you . ”
GOLD:	So Moses summoned Bezalel and Oholiab and all the others who were specially gifted by the Lord and were eager to get to work .

ID:	2296
INPUT:	Díí Sálaman binaanish naat'i'gi aląąjį' naazį́įgo bídahólnííh nít'éé' ; éí ashdladi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin ánéelą́ą'go diné nidaalnishígíí yindant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	These were the leaders of Solomon 's work , and the leaders of the guard were registered troops .
GOLD:	Solomon appointed 550 of them to supervise the people working on his various projects .

ID:	2297
INPUT:	Ch'į́įdiitah kéédahat'ínígíí nidááh dookahgo hideesnáá' ; daneeznáanii t' áá éí nihokáá'góó aghádahideezíinii nayiisnáá' , áko ał'ąą dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso yikáá'dóó nidaha'áii yikáá'dóó nídahidiikai .
PRED:	The grave will go out to the grave , and the earth has become a desolate ruin of every nation . And all the kingdoms of the earth came to the earth .
GOLD:	“ In the place of the dead there is excitementover your arrival.The spirits of world leaders and mighty kings long deadstand up to see you .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	Naaki góne'ígíí áádóó náá'ákéédę́'ígíí áádóó t'áá ałtso ałkéé' da'néełkaadígíí ałdó' ákódabizhdidooniił , Íísa bidááh noohkaigo kót'éego bił nidahodoołnih ,
PRED:	Then the second brother and the second group of prophets will come to meet him . Then he will tell them , ‘ This is what happened . '
GOLD:	Jacob gave the same instructions to the second and third herdsmen and to all who followed behind the herds : “ You must say the same thing to Esau when you meet him .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	nidi nahasdzáán bits'ą́ą́dóó áhí hááshígishgo ni' t'áá át'é nít'éé' nínéíłtłoh .
PRED:	But when I arrived at the ends of the earth , I brought you out of the earth .
GOLD:	Instead , springs came up from the ground and watered all the land .

ID:	2300
INPUT:	Háálá doo ákwii áát'įįdii shik'i diilkǫ' ; hééł nahalingo shide áníłdáás .
PRED:	For I am overwhelmed by fire , and my enemies are like fire .
GOLD:	My guilt overwhelms me — it is a burden too heavy to bear .

ID:	2301
INPUT:	Áko Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í háká aalwodgo Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Damáskas kin haal'á góde aní'eezhgo yisná , áádóó diné deisnáago Ker hoolyéégóó adayiizh'eezh , áko Ríízin dayiisxį́ .
PRED:	When the king of Assyria attacked the king of Assyria , he led his people into the city of Damascus and led them to the city of Damascus .
GOLD:	So the king of Assyria attacked the Aramean capital of Damascus and led its population away as captives , resettling them in Kir . He also killed King Rezin .

ID:	2302
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Filístiya dine'é áádóó Iithiyópiya dine'é bikéyah nahós'a'dóó Árab dine'é éí bádahachį'go Jiihóram yich'į' néidíníiłkaad .
PRED:	So the Philistines captured the land of the Lord and attacked the land of the Philistines . The Philistines then attacked the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Then the Lord stirred up the Philistines and the Arabs , who lived near the Ethiopians , to attack Jehoram .

ID:	2303
INPUT:	Háálá bá naal'a'í Éíbraham yich'į' diyingo yee nihoní'áanii yénáálnii' .
PRED:	For he remembered the angel of Abraham 's promise , and he remembered his promise .
GOLD:	For he remembered his sacred promiseto his servant Abraham .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	Áko haa'íshą' éí háá'áyį́į́h biih dahidiikahgi t'áá awołí bee ádeiit'į́į doo , ła' doo ak'eh dahół'į́į́góó biniinaa ch'ééh ádáát'įįd yę́ęgi át'éego éí dooda .
PRED:	So why do n't let us enter the Sabbath , for we have not obeyed God 's law .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	2305
INPUT:	Ool<unk> gi índa wáin bąąh haha'níihgi t'áá bíni'ídi doo ha'doołtsoł da ; wáin ániidíii ałdó' bá ádin doo .
PRED:	The glory of the moon will no longer be accompanied by wine , but no one will produce new wine .
GOLD:	So now your harvests will be too small to feed you.There will be no grapes for making new wine .

ID:	2306
INPUT:	Dahazhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God Bóhólníihii yóó'azhdíí'ą́ ; Bóhólníihii t'áadoo yik'ehgo naayáa da .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord their God , for he did not abandon his ancestors .
GOLD:	He abandoned the Lord , the God of his ancestors , and he refused to follow the Lord 's ways .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	Áko Saul áhodííniid , Kót'éego David bich'į' hadahidoohdzih , Aláahgo naat'áanii éí doogehii doo yinízin da , nidi t'áá hazhó'ó Filístiya dine'é bicho' bílátahgi bicho'azis ahénálgizhígíí neeznádiingo ní'doojih nízin , áko aláahgo naat'áanii jílíinii éí bee hwe'ana'í k'éézhdidoodlííł . Nidi Saul íinízin , David éí Filístiya dine'é ts'ídá t'áá dahodiyoołhéłí .
PRED:	Then Saul said to David , “ Do n't be afraid of the Philistines ! You must not be taken away from the Philistines , but you will be killed by the Philistines . ” But David told David , “ The Philistines will certainly kill the Philistines . ”
GOLD:	he told them , “ Tell David that all I want for the bride price is 100 Philistine foreskins ! Vengeance on my enemies is all I really want. ” But what Saul had in mind was that David would be killed in the fight .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	Mózes áádóó Éran índa Ízrel dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii éí Líívai dine'é dabi'déélta'ígíí t'áá ałtso ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłgo dabizhé'é yę́ę ya'áłchíní danilį́įgo dajííłta' ;
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron listed the Levites in charge of the community of Israel . These were the clans of the tribe of Moses and the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	So Moses , Aaron , and the leaders of Israel listed all the Levites by their clans and families .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	Kót'éego Iiláísha haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo díísh jį́įjį' tó doo bąąhígóó ánályaa .
PRED:	So Elisha did as Elisha had commanded .
GOLD:	And the water has remained pure ever since , just as Elisha said .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	Nít'éé' naal'a'í nitsidinígo'go binanit'a'í náyookąąhgo ííłní , Shinanit'a'í , ha'íínílní , t'áadoo tsį́į́ł shíł'íní , t'áá ná niná'deeshdléełgo át'é .
PRED:	Then he cried out to his master , “ Do n't pay attention to my master , my master , my master , and I will pay you back . ”
GOLD:	“ But the man fell down before his master and begged him , ‘ Please , be patient with me , and I will pay it all . '

ID:	2311
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihó'ahaz biye' Jiihó'ash daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jó'ash biye' Amazáíyah hináago ashdla'áadah nínáánááhai .
PRED:	Jehoahaz son of Jehoash began to rule over Israel in the death of King Joash 's reign in Judah . He reigned in sixteen years .
GOLD:	King Amaziah of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of King Jehoash of Israel .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasin bíká sohodizin
PRED:	unfailing love for His faithful
GOLD:	Prayer for Restoration

ID:	2313
INPUT:	Jerúsalem bich'é'é nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bił aheníłt'éego naa ch'íhodeesh'ááł ? Záíyan bich'ikę́ę́h nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bił ahąąh nindeeshniłgo handi'yeeshnih lá ? Tónteel áníłtélígi át'éego nich'į' ayééchǫ'go háísh hadaałt'é ánándoodlííł ?
PRED:	O Jerusalem , what will I bring you out of Jerusalem ? I will give you the daughter of Jerusalem , O daughter of Jerusalem , for I will give you a prostitute to the depths of the sea ?
GOLD:	What can I say about you ? Who has ever seen such sorrow ? O daughter of Jerusalem , to what can I compare your anguish ? O virgin daughter of Zion , how can I comfort you ? For your wound is as deep as the sea.Who can heal you ?

ID:	2314
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' t' óó shi'dizhchį́ yę́ędą́ą́' t'áadoo dasétsą́ą da ? Ha'át'éegoshą' t'óó háítłizh yę́ędą́ą́' shii' sizíinii t'áadoo shii' haalwod da ?
PRED:	Why have I been born ? Why did I ever see that I was born ?
GOLD:	“ Why was n't I born dead ? Why did n't I die as I came from the womb ?

ID:	2315
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nik'ehgo ádahoot'éii shił bééhonísįįh ; nik'ehgo da'nítiinii bínashiníłtin .
PRED:	O Lord , teach me your ways ; teach me what is right .
GOLD:	Show me the right path , O Lord ; point out the road for me to follow .

ID:	2316
INPUT:	Ákohgo diyingo naal'a'í tsosts'id góne'ígíí bidilní yee ádííniidgo , yá'ąąshdi ayóó át'éego iinéé' dadiists'ą́ą'go kódadííniid , Nihokáá' bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí nihiBóhólníihii índa biChrist bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii silį́į́' , éí hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áágóó yinant'áa doo .
PRED:	Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet in heaven and said , “ There is a great message that the Lord has given us the kingdom of heaven , and he will rule over the kingdom of the earth . ”
GOLD:	Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet , and there were loud voices shouting in heaven : “ The world has now become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ , and he will reign forever and ever . ”

ID:	2317
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidiyoołnih ; kót'éego náá'iiłniihii éí há k'ééhodoołdǫǫł índa ho'didéeh doo .
PRED:	Then the priest will purify the burnt offering and grain offering , along with the grain offering and grain offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the priest .
GOLD:	and offer it on the altar along with the grain offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the person who was healed , and the person will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	2318
INPUT:	Héshban kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił , Jéízer kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił ; éí t'áá ałtsogo dį́į'go kin hadaas'áii hóó' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	These were the towns with their pasturelands : The towns of Heshbon , four towns with their pasturelands .
GOLD:	Heshbon , and Jazer — four towns .

ID:	2319
INPUT:	Bił dahózhóonii bił nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ le' , yínííł nidaakaii bił daahcha .
PRED:	May your joy be filled with joy , for joy is your joy .
GOLD:	Be happy with those who are happy , and weep with those who weep .

ID:	2320
INPUT:	Íífreiyim yájíłti'go diné bitah dahoditłid nít'éé' ; Ízrel dine'é bitahgi t'áá bí ayóó át'éii í'díl'į́ , nidi Béíyal bich'į' nahojiłáago ádił adzisiihgo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	But if the people of Israel heard this , the people of Israel quaked because of their sins , they died in the worship of Baal .
GOLD:	When the tribe of Ephraim spoke , the people shook with fear , for that tribe was important in Israel.But the people of Ephraim sinned by worshiping Baaland thus sealed their destruction .

ID:	2321
INPUT:	Áádóó nihikéyahdóó kin hadaas'áii nahjį' kódadeeshłííł índa niłdzilgo bine' na'adzi' bił nahaz'áanii ałtso naa'ahideeshtł'ił .
PRED:	I will break down the land of your cities , and I will destroy it with your decrees .
GOLD:	I will tear down your wallsand demolish your defenses .

ID:	2322
INPUT:	Diyin God bízhi' áádóó bina'nitin doo baa'ihgo bá ha'doodzih da biniyé , da'oodlání naalte' danilíinii t'áá ałtso binanit'a'í t'áá ałtsojį' ił ídlį́ yą́ą́h danilį́įgo ádayósin doo .
PRED:	And if we are not worthy of God 's name , we will say , ‘ We are always worthy of honor and honor . '
GOLD:	All slaves should show full respect for their masters so they will not bring shame on the name of God and his teaching .

ID:	2323
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin góne' binda'anishii
PRED:	The Dedication of the Temple
GOLD:	The Prince , Levites , and Priests

ID:	2324
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání ła' nááhoołtsą́ągo ákǫ́ǫ́ naazínígíí ánéidoo'niid , Díí éí ła' át'į́ .
PRED:	Then one of the woman said , “ Here is one of these things ! ”
GOLD:	When the servant girl saw him standing there , she began telling the others , “ This man is definitely one of them ! ”

ID:	2325
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel hadzistihgo haye'ké éí Ízrel dine'é yá nihodiyii'aahii danilį́įgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	Then Samuel left the tribe of Israel , and the Israelites served as a priest .
GOLD:	As Samuel grew old , he appointed his sons to be judges over Israel .

ID:	2326
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin diyingo nideet'ą́
PRED:	Dedication of the Temple
GOLD:	Solomon Praises the

ID:	2327
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdahidookosgo áádóó bibąąhági ádaat'éii bá yóó'iididoo'áałgo bá ashja'ósin dooleeł biniyé Jesus , Aląąjį' Sizíinii índa Yisdá'iiníiłii nilį́į dooleełgo Diyin God binish'náájí dah yineesdá .
PRED:	He will turn your sins and turn to God , and he will forgive the sins of the sins of the Lord Jesus Christ , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then God put him in the place of honor at his right hand as Prince and Savior . He did this so the people of Israel would repent of their sins and be forgiven .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Háadish naaghá ? Áádóó Záíba éí aláahgo naat'áanii áyidííniid , Shoo , Ló-dííbar kin shijaa'di Ámiyel biye' Méíkir yighandi sidá .
PRED:	“ Where are you looking for me ? ” the king asked. “ I am watching , ” he said .
GOLD:	“ Where is he ? ” the king asked. “ In Lo-debar , ” Ziba told him , “ at the home of Makir son of Ammiel . ”

ID:	2329
INPUT:	Áko Paul éí diné yił dah diikaigo , biiskání doo ąąh chin dooleełjí nahaghá há ádaalyaa . Áádóó doo hąąh chinígóó í'dazhdilnéehgo bíighah adooleełgi , t'ááłá'í jinítínígo há náádahidoonihígíí hazhó'ó baa hozhdoolnih biniyé kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah ajííyá .
PRED:	The next day Paul went to the next day and said , “ If we are hungry , we must prepare the Passover meal for us . ” So they went to the Temple and preached the Temple .
GOLD:	So Paul went to the Temple the next day with the other men . They had already started the purification ritual , so he publicly announced the date when their vows would end and sacrifices would be offered for each of them .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í David biniinaa ak'ah bik'i yeiniziidgo yínísį́į'ii nits'ą́ąjį' doo habidínííłniił da .
PRED:	You have anointed your servant David with your anointed king , and you will never deny him .
GOLD:	For the sake of your servant David , do not reject the king you have anointed .

ID:	2331
INPUT:	Shí , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' danohłį́ yę́ędóó háánihíí'eezhii ásht'į́ .
PRED:	“ I am the Lord your God , who rescued you from slavery in Egypt .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord your God , who rescued you from the land of Egypt , the place of your slavery .

ID:	2332
INPUT:	Áko mána éí ch'il <unk> yander bílástsii' nahalin áádóó tsé déliyam wolyéhígíí nahalingo łigai .
PRED:	The grass withers and the flowers flowers flowers flowers are like a field .
GOLD:	The manna looked like small coriander seeds , and it was pale yellow like gum resin .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	Áko Léíban éí Jéíkab bízhníłná . Jéíkab éí dziłdi biníbaal nideiznil ; Léíban áádóó hak'isóó Dził Gíliyadi haníbaal nidadziznil .
PRED:	So Jacob took Jacob back the hill country of Jacob , and he took Jacob to the hill country of Gilead .
GOLD:	Laban caught up with Jacob as he was camped in the hill country of Gilead , and he set up his camp not far from Jacob 's .

ID:	2334
INPUT:	nidi nahasdzáán bikáa'gi bee da'iináanii baa nitsáhákees , áádóó at'į́ hodíní'ah , índa t'áá ałtso bidáhoneení ghadahodiit'aahgo éí saad yę́ę deighą́ , áko doo bineest'ą' dahaleeh da .
PRED:	But if they are living in the world , they are trying to get it into the world , and they say , ‘ We will never eat the fruit of the world . '
GOLD:	but all too quickly the message is crowded out by the worries of this life , the lure of wealth , and the desire for other things , so no fruit is produced .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	Nida'ayeeldįįdjį' nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo áádóó nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ dooleełígíí biniyé abíínígo aa a'ááh nínízinii bee hwiih daniidlį́įgo ánihílééh .
PRED:	Let us be filled with joy , and let us enjoy your unfailing love .
GOLD:	Satisfy us each morning with your unfailing love , so we may sing for joy to the end of our lives .

ID:	2336
INPUT:	T'ááká Níłch'i Diyinii noołtł'ááh yíila' .
PRED:	Do not keep your hands into the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Do not stifle the Holy Spirit .

ID:	2337
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán éí Bóhólníihii bí áádóó bee hadít'éii ałdó' t'áá ałtso bí ; nahasdzáán índa yikáá' kéédahat'íinii ałdó' bíí' danilį́ ,
PRED:	The earth is the Lord , and he is the one who gives his inheritance to the earth .
GOLD:	The earth is the Lord 's , and everything in it.The world and all its people belong to him .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Curses the Fig Tree

ID:	2339
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł t'áá nináhááh bik'eh nída'ohdį́įh doogo Bóhólníihii náhodidoo'áałgi nihí índa nihada'áłchíní bił ákódaaht'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ You must eat the crops of the Lord your God is giving you . Then you will live in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Instead , you and your family must eat these animals in the presence of the Lord your God each year at the place he chooses .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí eda'alyaii yich'į' nidahałáii baa hwiinít'į́
PRED:	A Warning to the People
GOLD:	Sinful Leaders Condemned

ID:	2341
INPUT:	Jesus índa bídahooł'aahii iigehjį' hágo bi'doo'niid .
PRED:	Jesus told his disciples , “ He is ready to be prepared . ”
GOLD:	and Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the celebration .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	Kódzaadóó bik'ijį' Job bi'dizhchínígíí yiyéédzíí' .
PRED:	When Job had finished speaking , he remembered his children .
GOLD:	At last Job spoke , and he cursed the day of his birth .

ID:	2343
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shaa jiiníbaah , háálá doo shidziil da yishłeeł ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , náshíłdziih , háálá shits'in daneezgai .
PRED:	Have mercy on me , O Lord , for I am weak and weak .
GOLD:	Have compassion on me , Lord , for I am weak.Heal me , Lord , for my bones are in agony .

ID:	2344
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í éí asdzání yich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago áyidííniid , Jó , doo ałchíhí nílį́įgo na'áłchíní t'ah doo haleeh da , ákondi i'dí'nííltsąął , índa ashkii dííłchííł .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to the angel of the Lord , “ You will have little little little little children , but you will have little little little little little little children . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord appeared to Manoah 's wife and said , “ Even though you have been unable to have children , you will soon become pregnant and give birth to a son .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	Áko t'áá nihiyi'ídi doo kódidoohniił da , T'áá shí shibee adziilii índa t'áá shí shíla' bee shidziilii bee jit'íinii <unk> t'įįd .
PRED:	And you will say to me , ‘ This is what I have done to you . '
GOLD:	He did all this so you would never say to yourself , ‘ I have achieved this wealth with my own strength and energy . '

ID:	2346
INPUT:	Áádóó asdzání éí tsin bineest'ą' ch'iyáán yá'át'éehii át'éego áádóó bik'izhníghalgo hoł yá'íít'éehgo índa tsin la' t'áá hojíyą́ áhóle'ígi át'é dziniizį́į'go bineest'ą' ła' nizhdii'ą́ągo jííyą́ą́' , áádóó hahastiin ałdó' ła' baazhní'ą́ągo yiyííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	When the woman saw the fruit trees , he ate the good tree and ate it . He ate it and ate it and ate it . Then he ate it and ate it and ate it .
GOLD:	The woman was convinced . She saw that the tree was beautiful and its fruit looked delicious , and she wanted the wisdom it would give her . So she took some of the fruit and ate it . Then she gave some to her husband , who was with her , and he ate it , too .

ID:	2347
INPUT:	nidi nináá' doo yá'át'ééhgóó nits'íís t'áá át'é bił chahałheeł doo . Áko éí bąągo niyi'di adinídíín dooleeł yę́ę éí t'áá át'é chahałheeł nilį́įgo dooládó' chahałheeł da doo !
PRED:	But the light of your eyes will never disappear , but the darkness will never disappear . But the darkness will never be darkness .
GOLD:	But when your eye is unhealthy , your whole body is filled with darkness . And if the light you think you have is actually darkness , how deep that darkness is !

ID:	2348
INPUT:	Ákohgo Mídiyan dine'é áádóó Ámalek dine'é índa ha'a'aahdóó dine'é t'áá ałtso t'áá ła' bizhi'ee áłah daazlį́į'go Jórdan tooh ha'naadi Jézriyel kin shijaa'gi yíldzis góyaa dah yinééł .
PRED:	Then Gideon and the army of Midian , the army of Midian , and all the people of the Jordan returned to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Soon afterward the armies of Midian , Amalek , and the people of the east formed an alliance against Israel and crossed the Jordan , camping in the valley of Jezreel .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	Áko yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó diyingo kin haal'áii , Jerúsalem ániidíii , bá'iigehii bahastiin yiba' hasht'e'ádiilyaagi át'éego hasht'e'ádiilyaago hadahooleełgo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Then I saw the angel of God from heaven , who was sitting in the holy city of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	And I saw the holy city , the new Jerusalem , coming down from God out of heaven like a bride beautifully dressed for her husband .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nilį́įgo náhást'éíts'áadah náhááh góne' , ashdla' nídízííd binih , neeznáá yoołkááł góne' , aláahgo naat'áanii yá naal'a'í léi' éí siláo yinanit'a'í nilíinii Nébuzar'éídan Jerúsalemjį' níyá .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , during the fifth year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , a captain of the guard .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	2351
INPUT:	Naalte' éí binanit'a'í doo yilááh át'ée da , nihidishníigo saad bee nihich'į' haasdzíi'ii béédaałniih . Atídashiilaago , nihí ałdó' atídanihidoolííł ; shizaad yik'eh dahół'į́įgo , nihí ałdó' nihizaad yik'eh dahół'į́į doo .
PRED:	I tell you , ‘ Go to your master , and do n't obey my commands .
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	2352
INPUT:	Áádóó jį́honaa'éí t'ááłáhígi si'ą́ silį́į́' índa tł'éhonaa'éí t'áá ákwe'é si'ą́ silį́į́' ; Ízrel dine'é bi'ana'í k'éédeidiidlaajį' ákódzaa . Da' díísh doo Jáshar binaaltsoos biyi' bee ak'e'ashchį́į da ? Jį́honaa'éí yá ałníi'gi si'ą́ągo doo hah i'íí'ą́ą da nidi k'asdą́ą́' ła'a jį́ bíighah náá'ásdlį́į'go índa i'íí'ą́ .
PRED:	The sun was in the sun , the sun , the sun , the sun , and the sun was conquered . The people of Israel did n't say , “ The day is here in the evening . ”
GOLD:	So the sun stood still and the moon stayed in place until the nation of Israel had defeated its enemies.Is this event not recorded in The Book of Jashar ? The sun stayed in the middle of the sky , and it did not set as on a normal day .

ID:	2353
INPUT:	Áko díí éí łe'hasin biniyé bee haz'áanii át'é ; éí e'asdzą́ą́ jílíinii hahastiin t'ah bíhojółníihgo bits'ą́ą́' dashdiiyáago ázhdoolchxǫ'go ,
PRED:	So I was a jealous of all these things , a man who had sexual relations with her husband , and she left her husband .
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law for dealing with suspicion . If a woman goes astray and defiles herself while under her husband 's authority ,

ID:	2354
INPUT:	T'áá adadziiskaigóó ał'ąą dine'é baa dadziiskaidi shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó ádajiilaago diné ádaaní , Díí dine'é Bóhólníihii bidine'é ádaat'į́ , ákondi Bóhólníihii bikéyahdóó nahjį' hadadziizná , dahałní .
PRED:	But when they returned to their own name , they said , “ This is what the Lord says : The people of the nations have abandoned them , but the Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	But when they were scattered among the nations , they brought shame on my holy name . For the nations said , ‘ These are the people of the Lord , but he could n't keep them safe in his own land ! '

ID:	2355
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Saul éí bee na'abaahí há neijaahii ábijiní , Nidiltłish handzį́įsgo shighá níłgééd . Áko díí doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhii t'ááká ákódashóle'go shá nidahółt'i' lágo . Nidi bee na'abaahí há neijaahii doo íinízin da , háálá t'áá íiyisí yináldzid . Éí bąą Saul t'áá hó hadiltłish hadzíídzį́įzgo bik'ijį' tsé'yaa ízh'doolgo'go haghá níjilgo dadzistsą́ .
PRED:	Saul said to his armor bearer , “ Get up ! Get out of the sword ! Do n't be afraid of me ? ” But Saul said , “ You are afraid of me , but you are not afraid of me ! You are afraid of me ! ”
GOLD:	Saul groaned to his armor bearer , “ Take your sword and kill me before these pagan Philistines come to run me through and taunt and torture me. ” But his armor bearer was afraid and would not do it . So Saul took his own sword and fell on it .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	Mídiyan dine'é íinilaa yę́ęgi ánílééh áádóó Kíshan tooh nílį́įgi Sísera áádóó Jéíbin íinilaa yę́ęgi ánílééh ,
PRED:	Show us victory over Midian , as you did as you did .
GOLD:	Do to them as you did to the Midianitesand as you did to Sisera and Jabin at the Kishon River .

ID:	2357
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é bikéyah łahjį' Símiyan dine'é bikéyah silį́į́' , háálá Júdah dine'é t'áá áchą́hwíídéeni'go baa deet'ą́ ; éí bąą Símiyan dine'é kéyah íí' dooleełii Júdah dine'é bikéyah łahjį' baa hodeet'ą́ .
PRED:	The following allotment of land was given to Simeon , for the tribe of Judah had been given to the tribe of Judah . The tribe of Simeon was given to the tribe of Judah .
GOLD:	Their allocation of land came from part of what had been given to Judah because Judah 's territory was too large for them . So the tribe of Simeon received an allocation within the territory of Judah .

ID:	2358
INPUT:	óola łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo shékel wolyéii neeznáá dah hidiidloh bíighahgo éí bii' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadeezbingo ,
PRED:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .
GOLD:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .

ID:	2359
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath

ID:	2360
INPUT:	Atsoo'ígíí éí kǫ' nahalin . Atsoo' éí íiyisí doo yá'át'éehii nilį́įgo nihits'íís yee hadít'éii yitah hólǫ́ , nihits'íís t'áá át'é niyiiłchxǫǫh . Hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'ą́ądi hodook'ą́łígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó nihił hoolzhishígíí yidiiłtłi' .
PRED:	The words of the fire is like a fire ; the words of the fire will disappear like a flame , but the body of death will disappear like a dead body .
GOLD:	And among all the parts of the body , the tongue is a flame of fire . It is a whole world of wickedness , corrupting your entire body . It can set your whole life on fire , for it is set on fire by hell itself .

ID:	2361
INPUT:	Áko Mózes ádííniid , Jó , nits'ą́ą́' ch'ééníshdááh áádóó Bóhólníihii néideeshkąąłgo tsé'édǫ́'ii éí Féro áádóó bá nidaal'a'í índa bidine'é bits'ą́ąjį' yiską́ągo yóó'anídooldah , nidi t'ááká Féro nihináá'dóleehgo t'áadoo Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' nááda'ayółniih da lágo .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ Listen to me , and I will send Pharaoh to Pharaoh and his officials . The Lord will not let Pharaoh leave Pharaoh and his servants and his officials , and he will never again destroy Pharaoh . ”
GOLD:	Moses answered , “ As soon as I leave you , I will pray to the Lord , and tomorrow the swarms of flies will disappear from you and your officials and all your people . But I am warning you , Pharaoh , do n't lie to us again and refuse to let the people go to sacrifice to the Lord . ”

ID:	2362
INPUT:	K'os tó yadayiinil ; yá bits'ą́ą́dóó dahodiists'ą́ą́' ; nik'a' ałdó' t'áá ałtsogóó adahal<unk> .
PRED:	He made the roar of clouds , and he will throw his arrows into his hands .
GOLD:	The clouds poured down rain ; the thunder rumbled in the sky.Your arrows of lightning flashed .

ID:	2363
INPUT:	Kéínan éí Íínas biye' , Íínas éí Seth biye' , Seth éí Ádam biye' , Ádam éí Diyin God biye' .
PRED:	Seth was the son of Noah , son of Seth , whose son was the son of Noah .
GOLD:	Kenan was the son of Enosh.Enosh was the son of Seth.Seth was the son of Adam.Adam was the son of God .

ID:	2364
INPUT:	Áko Máíkal éí e'elyaii néidiiłtį́įgo tsásk'eh yikáá' niiníłtį́ , áádóó tł'ízí bighaa' tsii'ááł bits'iiyah nizníłtsoozgo bik'ídzísti' .
PRED:	So Michal took a knife and put it on the goat 's head , and he put it on his head .
GOLD:	Then she took an idol and put it in his bed , covered it with blankets , and put a cushion of goat 's hair at its head .

ID:	2365
INPUT:	Áko nínéidiiłtį́įgo bił hózhǫ́ǫgo biwosgi dah yidoołtéełgo ,
PRED:	Then he took his hand and placed it on his shoulders and placed it on his shoulders .
GOLD:	And when he has found it , he will joyfully carry it home on his shoulders .

ID:	2366
INPUT:	Saul yę́ę biye' éí diné naaki bá naal'a'go siláo binanit'a'í nilį́ : ła' Béíyanah wolyé , náánáła'ígíí éí Rííkab wolyé , t'áá áłah Ríman biye' nilį́įgo Biyérath kin shijaa'dóó Bénjamin dine'é nilį́ . ( Jó , Biyérath kin shijaa'ígíí Bénjamin dine'é bíí' át'é ,
PRED:	One day Saul sent two men to fight the troops of Israel , one of the tribe of Benjamin . The tribe of Benjamin was the tribe of Benjamin . The tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Now there were two brothers , Baanah and Recab , who were captains of Ishbosheth 's raiding parties . They were sons of Rimmon , a member of the tribe of Benjamin who lived in Beeroth . The town of Beeroth is now part of Benjamin 's territory

ID:	2367
INPUT:	Daniel éí Nébukadnézzar yaa nayiizyeelii ááhyiłníinii yaa halne'
PRED:	Daniel 's Vision of Nebuchadnezzar
GOLD:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Dream

ID:	2368
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul ájíní , Shí áádóó shiye' Jánathan nihita'gi yáá'iilt'e' ánílééh . Nít'éé' Jánathan bik'i hodiit'ą́ .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Saul replied . “ Get up and prepare the case of Jonathan and Jonathan . ” So Jonathan took Jonathan to Jonathan and Jonathan .
GOLD:	Then Saul said , “ Now cast lots again and choose between me and Jonathan. ” And Jonathan was shown to be the guilty one .

ID:	2369
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii sikaadii nishłį́ , nihí t'éí ats'áda'iitł'óohii danohłį́ . Shii' hojílóonii , áádóó shí hwii' honishłóonii , ts'ídá éí aneest'ą' lą'í hats'ą́ą́dóó náhoodleeł , háálá t'áá shídingo t'áadoo bídanooł'ání da .
PRED:	You are my vineyard , and I am a tree . You are my helper , and I ca n't have any fruit .
GOLD:	“ Yes , I am the vine ; you are the branches . Those who remain in me , and I in them , will produce much fruit . For apart from me you can do nothing .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	Índa bikáá' adání bikáa'gi bááh nááhániihii niná'niłígíí éí na'at'ą́hí t'áá át'é yá nahalingo dootł'izhgo bik'ínáltih doo áádóó łeets'aa't'ą́hída , béésh adee'da , łeets'aa' nímazída áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihii bee naakáhígíida bikáa'gi niná'nił doo . Bááh nááhániihii t'áá áłahjį' ákwii sinilgo óolzin doo .
PRED:	You must also sacrifice the Bread of the Presence on the altar of burnt offering , as a pleasing aroma to the priest . It must be accompanied by its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	“ Next they must spread a blue cloth over the table where the Bread of the Presence is displayed , and on the cloth they will place the bowls , ladles , jars , pitchers , and the special bread .

ID:	2371
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ni t'éí níká shił chohoo'į́ ; ni lą́ą , Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God nílíinii , ni éí shich'į' ééhodíísįįł .
PRED:	O Lord , you are my hope , O Lord , for you are my hope .
GOLD:	For I am waiting for you , O Lord.You must answer for me , O Lord my God .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	Da' há naal'a'ísh ábizhdííniidígi ádzaaígíí biniyé ahé<unk> bijiníi doo ? Dooda !
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that he has done for us ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	And does the master thank the servant for doing what he was told to do ? Of course not .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí Zéídak áyidííniid , Nílááh , Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii kin haal'áágóó nídóh'aah . Shich'oha'néego Bóhólníihii shąąh tsídeezkéezgo shił nihéédoot'ash , áko bitsits'aa' dílzinii índa bí hólǫ́ǫgi shił ííshjání íidoolííł .
PRED:	Then Zadok said to Zadok , “ Go back to the Ark of God , and I will show you the Ark of the Lord , and I will show you the Ark of the Covenant . ”
GOLD:	Then the king instructed Zadok to take the Ark of God back into the city . “ If the Lord sees fit , ” David said , “ he will bring me back to see the Ark and the Tabernacle again .

ID:	2374
INPUT:	Jerúsalemgi jíkaigo da'oodlání áłah nádleehii índa daal'aadii áádóó da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii bił dajílį́įgo baa jíkai , áko Diyin God hanahjį' yaa naayáhígíí t'áá ałtso baa nidahodzisne' .
PRED:	Then they went to Jerusalem and preached the church in Jerusalem to the church in Jerusalem and all the elders of the church .
GOLD:	When they arrived in Jerusalem , Barnabas and Paul were welcomed by the whole church , including the apostles and elders . They reported everything God had done through them .

ID:	2375
INPUT:	Obadáíyah joogááł nít'éé' , shoo , Iiláíjah hadááh níyá , áko bééhodzoosįįdgo ni'jį' yaa ádziidzaago ájíní , Da' niísh ánít'į́ , shinanit'a'í Iiláíjah ?
PRED:	So Obadiah went to meet him and went to meet him . “ Are you Elijah ? ” he asked . “ Are you Elijah ? ”
GOLD:	As Obadiah was walking along , he suddenly saw Elijah coming toward him . Obadiah recognized him at once and bowed low to the ground before him . “ Is it really you , my lord Elijah ? ” he asked .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Shelemáíyah biye' Hananáíyah áádóó Zéí<unk> biye' hastą́ą́h góne' naagháhígíí Héínan wolyéii łahgo tsé néíztł'in áádóó haghą́ąhjį' Berakáíyah biye' Miishálam t'áá bí bighan bíighahjį' tsé néíztł'in .
PRED:	Here is another message from Zadok son of Zadok son of Zadok and grandson of Zadok son of Zadok son of Meshullam .
GOLD:	Next Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun , the sixth son of Zalaph , repaired another section , while Meshullam son of Berekiah rebuilt the wall across from where he lived .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	Lístragi Paul bił nidzílne'
PRED:	Paul Preaches in Iconium
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas in Lystra and Derbe

ID:	2378
INPUT:	Áko ánáádazhdoo'niid , Haa'íshą' kin haal'áago áádóó kin wót'ááh yí'áago yá bich'į' niní'áago ádadiilnííł , kót'éego yízhí ayóó át'éii bee nihi'dójíigo ádadiilnííł , áko nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo da'níłts'ą́ą́'góó nihiidiildah da .
PRED:	Then they said , “ Let us enter the city of the heavens and the city of the city , and we will not listen to us . We will not listen to the glory of the earth . ”
GOLD:	Then they said , “ Come , let 's build a great city for ourselves with a tower that reaches into the sky . This will make us famous and keep us from being scattered all over the world . ”

ID:	2379
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes díí hach'į' yee haadzíi'go ání , T'áá tsosts'id nínáhahgo hodílzingo ééhidichííd baa náhálzhishgo áádóó chadaha'ohgi hodílzingo áłah nída'adleeh nídeit'aahgo
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ Get up early the seventh year of the festival and begin to celebrate the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	Then Moses gave them this command : “ At the end of every seventh year , the Year of Release , during the Festival of Shelters ,

ID:	2380
INPUT:	Éí t'áá bí ádeinízingo Diyin God bidiyį́į́' yíká ííjéé' . Jó , éí t'áá aaníí bąąh hadaaz'áii danilį́ , háálá Jew dine'é danilíinii Níłch'i Diyinii bee ak'ihojidlíii éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'jíłk'iiz hazlį́į́' , áko doo Jew dine'é dajílíinii ałdó' hanaalye'é bee hak'ihodzisdli'ígíí ła' t'áá ákónéehee bee Jew dine'é bíká anízhdoojah .
PRED:	For God 's holy people are called for his holy ones , for he has been faithful to the Gentiles . He is the Spirit of the Jews , and he has been given to the Gentiles . He has been given to the Gentiles , and he has given us the Gentiles .
GOLD:	They were glad to do this because they feel they owe a real debt to them . Since the Gentiles received the spiritual blessings of the Good News from the believers in Jerusalem , they feel the least they can do in return is to help them financially .

ID:	2381
INPUT:	Sádjusii danilíinii ła' haa yíkai , éí aninéédę́ę́' doo náá'di'yiijeeh da daaní ,
PRED:	Some of the Sadducees — no resurrection of the Sadducees —
GOLD:	Then Jesus was approached by some Sadducees — religious leaders who say there is no resurrection from the dead .

ID:	2382
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , díí diné éí eda'alyaii dabijéí yídayółtą'ii áádóó doo ákwii ádaat'éii yik'ee dadidoogohii ádá nidayiisnil . Bíni'diísh nidashídíłkid ?
PRED:	“ Son of man , why do you want to know what you have done to idols ? Why do you want me to ask me ?
GOLD:	“ Son of man , these leaders have set up idols in their hearts . They have embraced things that will make them fall into sin . Why should I listen to their requests ?

ID:	2383
INPUT:	Léímek hwíídíiską́ą́dóó tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan tsosts'id honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	Lamech lived 82 years old , and he died .
GOLD:	Lamech lived 777 years , and then he died .

ID:	2384
INPUT:	Áko nidziih doo , háálá ná chohoo'į́ hólǫ́ ; t'áá aaníí ánaagóó ha'ísíid doo índa hasih haz'ą́ągi háánílyį́įh doo .
PRED:	But you will be confident , for you will live in peace , for you will rest in rest .
GOLD:	Having hope will give you courage.You will be protected and will rest in safety .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	Díí Jéíkab ba'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii baa hane' . Jóseph tsosts'idts'áadah binááhaigo bínaaíké yił nida'niłkaad , áko hazhé'é be'asdzą́ą́ yíł'íní Bílhah índa Zílpah biyáázhké bił tázhdíkááh , áko bąąhági ádajit'į́įgo Jóseph éí bizhé'é yee yił hoolne' .
PRED:	These were the clans of Jacob 's sons , Joseph 's sons , and he gave them their wives . So they took their wives to their father , Bilhah , and gave them their wives to their ancestors .
GOLD:	This is the account of Jacob and his family . When Joseph was seventeen years old , he often tended his father 's flocks . He worked for his half brothers , the sons of his father 's wives Bilhah and Zilpah . But Joseph reported to his father some of the bad things his brothers were doing .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádzíłtso doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádajooníiłii éí adinídíín nilíinii dajijoołá , áko doo yit'íní í'dazhdi'doolníłígíí biniyé doo ła' adinídíinjį' ch'ídajíkáah da .
PRED:	For those who do evil are evil , and those who do evil will never enter the light of the light .
GOLD:	All who do evil hate the light and refuse to go near it for fear their sins will be exposed .

ID:	2387
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip kéyahgi Jóseph yę́ę doo yééhósinii aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	When Joseph learned that Joseph was there , he became king in Egypt .
GOLD:	Eventually , a new king came to power in Egypt who knew nothing about Joseph or what he had done .

ID:	2388
INPUT:	T'óó bíighah dahidikáhígíí , éí t'áá ákóne' deíkáahii yich'į' áníi łeh ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who say , ‘ Those who are long . '
GOLD:	She calls out to men going bywho are minding their own business .

ID:	2389
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii nahalne'
PRED:	John the Baptist Foretold
GOLD:	John the Baptist Prepares the Way

ID:	2390
INPUT:	Háálá nihokáá' dine'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii biniinaa atíidoolííł biniyéBóhólníihii bił haz'ą́ą́dóó ch'íníyá , jó'akon ; nihokáá' dine'é bidił bits'ádaazlį́įgo ádeile'iiyidooltsééł áádóó nidadzistseedii doo nínáádazhdidooł'į́įł da .
PRED:	For the Lord will destroy the nations of the earth , and you will see the sins of the earth . You will see the sins of the Lord .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord is coming from heavento punish the people of the earth for their sins.The earth will no longer hide those who have been killed.They will be brought out for all to see .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	áko nił yá'áhoot'éeh doo , índa nízaadgóó ni' bikáa'gi hinínáa doo .
PRED:	And if you do what is right , it will be good , and it will live .
GOLD:	If you honor your father and mother , “ things will go well for you , and you will have a long life on the earth . ”

ID:	2392
INPUT:	Háálá díí ał'ąą ana'í ch'ídahidínóołkałígíí éí áhodooníiłii neiłkaahii áádóó nidadilniihii dayíists'ą́ą́' nít'éé' , nidi nihí éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God díí doo bidazhdoolíił da , nihó'ní .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ If you refuse to listen to your enemies , you will not listen to what the Lord your God has done . ”
GOLD:	The nations you are about to displace consult sorcerers and fortune-tellers , but the Lord your God forbids you to do such things . ”

ID:	2393
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham t'áá íiyisí abínígo nízhdii'na'go hatélii bik'i dah adziznil áádóó hatsíłkéí naaki ádíjii'nil ; haye' Áízak ałdó' bił bee adidlidgo náá'iiniih biniyé chizh ahizhdííłkaal . Diyin God doohkah hałní<unk> góó dashdiikai .
PRED:	So Abraham saddled his donkey , and he put two donkeys on his donkey 's donkey . So Isaac 's sons , too , went out to the altar of God .
GOLD:	The next morning Abraham got up early . He saddled his donkey and took two of his servants with him , along with his son , Isaac . Then he chopped wood for a fire for a burnt offering and set out for the place God had told him about .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	Kóshíłní , Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é nidaalteehii bich'į' nidéł'a' ; éí shich'į' nidaalteeh ; díí jį́įjį' bí áádóó dabizhé'é yę́ę shich'į' ádił nida'iiszíí' .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to me , my people of Israel , and they rebelled against me .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ I am sending you to the nation of Israel , a rebellious nation that has rebelled against me . They and their ancestors have been rebelling against me to this very day .

ID:	2395
INPUT:	Ádahodooníiłii yaa halne'go yoołkááł góne' doo nahałtingóó íidoolííł biniyé yá yidádi'doołkałgo bee óhólníihii bee hólǫ́ , áádóó tó dił íidoolíiłgo , índa t'áá ánéiniidzįįh bik'eh bee ach'į' nidahwiilnáanii t'áá ałtso nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ánáyoodlíiłgo bee óhólníihii bee hólǫ́ .
PRED:	He will teach them to teach them to teach them the truth , and he will send them into the trap of the earth . He will make us right with all the kingdoms of the earth , and he will rule over the earth .
GOLD:	They have power to shut the sky so that no rain will fall for as long as they prophesy . And they have the power to turn the rivers and oceans into blood , and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they wish .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	Ákohgo álíleego áda'ooł'įįłii éí Féro ádeidííniid , Díí Diyin God bíla' yee át'į́į́ lá , nidi Féro bijéí yítł'isgo doo hwíists'ą́ą' da ; Bóhólníihii ádííniidígi áhoodzaa .
PRED:	So Pharaoh said to Pharaoh , “ This is what the Lord says : Because Pharaoh had predicted , he refused to listen to Pharaoh , but Pharaoh refused to listen to Pharaoh . ”
GOLD:	“ This is the finger of God ! ” the magicians exclaimed to Pharaoh . But Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He would n't listen to them , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	2397
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee haz'áanii yóó'adeidii'aahii éí diné doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa dahaniih , nidi Diyin God bibee haz'áanii yik'eh dahół'íinii hoł ahaa naakai .
PRED:	They love the law of God , but they obey the law of God .
GOLD:	To reject the law is to praise the wicked ; to obey the law is to fight them .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	Nít'éé' tádiingo aląąjį' naazíinii dajílínígíí tájílt'éego dashdiikaigo da'agizhjį' ahoolzhiizhgo tsé'áán Adálam hoolyéejį' David baa jíkai , áko Filístiya bisiláo dah deínéehii éí Réfeiyim honíteelgi dah yinééł .
PRED:	So the elders of the town went to the valley of Eshcol and headed for the valley of David , across the valley of Eshcol and ran across the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	Once during the harvest , when David was at the cave of Adullam , the Philistine army was camped in the valley of Rephaim . The Three ( who were among the Thirty — an elite group among David 's fighting men ) went down to meet him there .

ID:	2399
INPUT:	Bíni'dii da'alzhishgo ásaa' yigádígíí índa tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii yee nidaanéego bízhi' yaa dahaniih le' !
PRED:	Let the harp praise of the Lord , let the harp praise of the harp .
GOLD:	Praise his name with dancing , accompanied by tambourine and harp .

ID:	2400
INPUT:	Áko ánáádí'ní , Danizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God ásht'į́ : Éíbraham biDiyin God áádóó Áízak biDiyin God índa Jéíkab biDiyin God nishłį́ . Áko Mózes hanii' bich'ą́ą́h nizhdeelnii' , háálá Diyin God bik'izhdooghał yę́ę béédzísdzííd .
PRED:	But he said , “ I am the God of Abraham , Abraham , the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had compassion on the ground . I was afraid of the God of Jacob . ”
GOLD:	I am the God of your father — the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob. ” When Moses heard this , he covered his face because he was afraid to look at God .

ID:	2401
INPUT:	Ámah kin haal'áii ałdó' , áádóó Éífek kin haal'áii índa Rííhob kin shijaa' ; bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił naadiin naakigo kin hadaas'áhígíí Ásher dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	The towns of Ramah , Beeroth , and Rehob — twelve towns with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Ummah , Aphek , and Rehob — twenty-two towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éego ó'oo'níiłii doo ła' yókeed da índa t'áá aaníinii doo yee agha'dit'áah da ; t'áadoo nídandlíinii yaa dadzólí áádóó dabiyooch'ííd ; ádílááh yééda'niiltsąąhgo doo ákwii é'ét'éii nidayiiłchííh .
PRED:	Do n't give justice to those who are right with integrity ? They give birth to lies , and they give birth to lies .
GOLD:	No one cares about being fair and honest.The people 's lawsuits are based on lies.They conceive evil deedsand then give birth to sin .

ID:	2403
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman éí Ííjip kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Féro iigeh binahjį' yił aha'deet'ą́ągo Féro bitsi' yił ahaa yít'áázh , áádóó David bikin haal'áagi bił ajíí'áazhgo t'áá hó haghan áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inígíí ájíléhígíí ałtso ájiilaajį' ákwii bił haghan .
PRED:	So Solomon took the king of Egypt and took him to Pharaoh 's daughter , and he brought him to Pharaoh and his daughter . He took him to the Temple of the Lord 's Temple and to the Lord .
GOLD:	Solomon made an alliance with Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and married one of his daughters . He brought her to live in the City of David until he could finish building his palace and the Temple of the Lord and the wall around the city .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	Áko Íífreiyim dine'é Zíkrai éí diné ayóó át'éé léi' nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii Éíhaz biye' Méíyasíyah áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bee bóhólníhígíí Ázrikam índa aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá yikéé' góne' sizínígíí Elkéínah yił neistseed .
PRED:	So the king of Ephraim , who killed the king of Ephraim , including the king of Judah and Benjamin 's palace . He also killed the king 's palace and killed them .
GOLD:	Then Zicri , a warrior from Ephraim , killed Maaseiah , the king 's son ; Azrikam , the king 's palace commander ; and Elkanah , the king 's second-in-command .

ID:	2405
INPUT:	Chahałheełgóó naałniihii índa ałné'é'áahgo até'éł'į́įgo nida'ałtseedii doo bééníldzid da doo .
PRED:	You will be afraid of the darkness and gloom ; you will be afraid of the darkness .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	2406
INPUT:	Shoo , shí éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdę́ę́' nihik'isóó Líívai dine'é nídiinil ; Bóhólníihii bá aa yílyáii át'éego nihaa diní'ą́ , áko níbaal bii' dahozdísinii yindaal'a' doo .
PRED:	“ Look , I am giving you the Levites from among the Levites who belong to the Lord , the Levites who serve the Lord .
GOLD:	I myself have chosen your fellow Levites from among the Israelites to be your special assistants . They are a gift to you , dedicated to the Lord for service in the Tabernacle .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , lą'ídi nihaa deeshááł niizį́į́' , nidi shidi'níltł'ago kǫ́ǫ́ hoolzhishígíí nihił béédahózin dooleeł nihósh'ní . Doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó ła' da'oosdląądígi át'éego nihí ałdó' nihitahdóó ła' da'iidoodląął nisin .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , you know that I am writing to you , dear brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	I want you to know , dear brothers and sisters , that I planned many times to visit you , but I was prevented until now . I want to work among you and see spiritual fruit , just as I have seen among other Gentiles .

ID:	2408
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> gi nihił aní'éelgo ákwe'é táá' danihiiską́ .
PRED:	We arrived at the port of the lake , where we stayed there .
GOLD:	Our first stop was Syracuse , where we stayed three days .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , aa a'ááh nínízinii bik' ehgo shaa jiiníbaah ; bee aa a'ááh nínízinii t'óó ahayóígíí bik'ehgo bee haz'áanii héti'ii shá k'éé'íłchxǫǫh .
PRED:	O God , do n't abandon me ; do n't abandon me because of your unfailing love .
GOLD:	Have mercy on me , O God , because of your unfailing love.Because of your great compassion , blot out the stain of my sins .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo Bábilan nahós'a'gi náás yideeznil .
PRED:	So Shadrach , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , and Abednego to be held in the land of Babylon .
GOLD:	Then the king promoted Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego to even higher positions in the province of Babylon .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	índa dízdiingo béésh łigaii biih dahasdzą́ągo tsin neheeshjíí' bitł'ááh naaznil doo biniyé ałdó' ánááyiidlaa ; tsin neheeshjíí' t'ááłá'ígo bitł'ááh sinilii naakigo biih dahasdzánígíí t'áá ahedaałt'éego ánááyiidlaa .
PRED:	He made fifty silver bases for forty bases , and he made two bases under each frame . He also made two bases for two bases .
GOLD:	with their forty silver bases , two bases under each frame .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	Kéyahgi dine'é éí bee haz'áanii nidayiitíihgo binanit'a'í t'óó ahayóí yileeh łeh , nidi naat'áanii bee ak'i'diitįįhii áádóó ił ééhózin bee hólóonii bik'ehgo diné t'áá kééhat'ínígi át'éego yá'át'éehgo náás yildah doo .
PRED:	The people of the land will know that many people of Israel are filled with knowledge and knowledge .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	2413
INPUT:	Bik'é niná'doodléełgo háábidoo'niłii ayóó ábóodziil ; éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii wolyé . Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó k'é náhodoołeeł áádóó Bábilan kéyahgi naho'digháahgo íidoolííł biniyé t'áá niná'deet'įįdjį' bidine'é yá na'ak'íyádoołtih .
PRED:	They will pay it up for a great treasure , and it will be given to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . He will bring her back to Babylon , and he will bring her back to Babylon .
GOLD:	But the one who redeems them is strong.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.He will defend themand give them rest again in Israel.But for the people of Babylonthere will be no rest !

ID:	2414
INPUT:	Áádóó ałtso nida'azhnishgo béeso ch'ínééłna'ígíí aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Jiihóíyada yich'į' deizhjaa' ; éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' beedí chodao'íinii ádayiilaa ; t'áá éí didlidgo náá'iiniihgi áádóó dilidgo łikání halchingo náá'iiniihgi chodao'ínígíí índa kin bii' sohodizin góne' chodao'íinii náádaała' béésh łigaii áádóó óola bee ádaalyaa . Áko nááda'iiłniihgo didlidgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' t'áá áłahjį' Jiihóíyada náá'iiłniihgo nibíiníłką́ .
PRED:	Then Jehoiada took the money and brought them out of the Temple of the Lord . He brought them to Jehoiada the Temple of the Lord , the priests , the priests , and all its utensils in the Temple of the Lord . He also brought them to Jehoiada the priests and the priests .
GOLD:	When all the repairs were finished , they brought the remaining money to the king and Jehoiada . It was used to make various articles for the Temple of the Lord — articles for worship services and for burnt offerings , including ladles and other articles made of gold and silver . And the burnt offerings were sacrificed continually in the Temple of the Lord during the lifetime of Jehoiada the priest .

ID:	2415
INPUT:	Dooda , t'áá aaníí bi'dódziihgo daotsa' doo laanaa nisingo doo bee ádił iisiihgo haasdziih da .
PRED:	“ Oh , that if you have sinned , it will be punishment for sin .
GOLD:	No , I have never sinned by cursing anyoneor by asking for revenge .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	shíhígíí t'áá ałtso ni , índa nihígíí t'áá ałtso shí , áko éí hwee ayóó ánísht'éego áshi'diilyaa .
PRED:	All you are mine , and I have given you everything I have done .
GOLD:	All who are mine belong to you , and you have given them to me , so they bring me glory .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	<unk> . 1 : <unk>
PRED:	The Birth of Jesus
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2418
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , Diyin God nílíinii , díldzííł ; dah didiilnííh ; a'ohgo ádaat'éii baa yóónééh lágo .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , O God.Pay close attention to the wicked .
GOLD:	Arise , O Lord ! Punish the wicked , O God ! Do not ignore the helpless !

ID:	2419
INPUT:	Áko níyol bidáahjį' łeezhgi át'é daazlį́į'jį' bik'ída'iisíłhaal ; kintah nida'aztiingi łeezh nahjį' ajii łkaad nahalingo nahjį' ahéłkaad .
PRED:	So the wind poured out the wind into the middle of the sky , and the dust fell on the ground . As they fell on the ground , they threw the dust into the town .
GOLD:	I ground them as fine as dust in the wind.I swept them into the gutter like dirt .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	Áko naakigo kin haal'áádóó , doodaii' táa'go kin haal'áádóó éí t'ááłáhígo kin haal'áhígóó tó doodlį́įłii yiniyé yah dadikai nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo tó yee hwiih daazlį́į' da , ákondi t'áadoo shich'į' nináhisoohkai da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ No one of the city or three cities or three cities , or the city will be filled with water or water . But you did n't have enough enough to drink , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	People staggered from town to town looking for water , but there was never enough.But still you would not return to me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	Háálá Sálaman éí béésh łitsoii bee wódahdi dah náhást'ą́ągo áyiilaa éí náásee'go tsosts'idóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá áádóó naaniigo tsosts'idóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá índa dego éí dį́į́'dóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá , áko tł'óo'jigo nááhást'ánígíí nahaníi'gi niiní'ą́ ; éí yikáá'dóó yiizį' áádóó Ízrel dine'é áłah nilínígíí t'áá ałtso binááł nitsidinígo'go yá'ąąshjigo dah didiilnii' .
PRED:	For Solomon made the bronze basin 30 feet high , 30 feet high , 30 feet high and 27 feet high . He stood up to the front of the altar , and the entire community of Israel stood before him .
GOLD:	Now Solomon had made a bronze platform 71/2 feet long , 71/2 feet wide , and 41/2 feet high and had placed it at the center of the Temple 's outer courtyard . He stood on the platform , and then he knelt in front of the entire community of Israel and lifted his hands toward heaven .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' doo yá'áshónígi ánáádáát'įįdgo Béíyalda , Ásh<unk> da , áádóó Síriya dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii , Sáídan dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii , Mó'ab dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii , Áman dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii índa Filístiya dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' . Áko Bóhólníihii éí doo deiniizį́į́'góó doo nidi yich'į' nidahałáa da nít'éé' .
PRED:	The people of Israel did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , so they could not worship the gods of Moab . Instead , they worshiped the Lord , the God of Moab , and the god of Moab . They worshiped the gods of Moab .
GOLD:	Again the Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight . They served the images of Baal and Ashtoreth , and the gods of Aram , Sidon , Moab , Ammon , and Philistia . They abandoned the Lord and no longer served him at all .

ID:	2423
INPUT:	ákondi yiską́ągo kwe'é nahalzhiishgo shá nidaal'a'í nich'į' deesh'aałgo nighan góne' índa ná nidaal'a'í dabighan góne' nida'dooch'ił , áko kót'ée doo , t'áá ha'át'íí shį́į́ ílį́įgo síníłnilígíí éí nits'ą́ą́' nídeididooniłgo adeidoojih .
PRED:	But I will send you out to my officials and your officials at the Temple of my enemies , and you will hear what you have done .
GOLD:	But about this time tomorrow I will send my officials to search your palace and the homes of your officials . They will take away everything you consider valuable ! ' ”

ID:	2424
INPUT:	2
PRED:	Jesus before the Council
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	2425
INPUT:	Chahałheeł bii' yisháałgo áshiilaa , adinídíinjį' éí dooda .
PRED:	He has made me darkness into darkness , and he has made me light .
GOLD:	He has led me into darkness , shutting out all light .

ID:	2426
INPUT:	Áko éí deenásts'aa' nihidííłgishgo bitsą́ siláii índa bijáád ałdó' táádadíígis , áádóó nihíníłgizhígíí índa bitsii' t'áá bił t'ááłáhígi nidííniłgo
PRED:	Then you must wash the ram 's fat and washed it with water . Then you must wash his hair and bathe yourself with water .
GOLD:	Cut the ram into pieces , and wash off the internal organs and the legs . Set them alongside the head and the other pieces of the body ,

ID:	2427
INPUT:	Ha'áłchíní éí diné baa dahojoobá'íígíí yił dahóshǫ́ǫ doo biniyébich'į' hanaalye'é ninádeidiyoodleeł .
PRED:	He has given the poor to the poor , and he has given them his wealth .
GOLD:	Their children will beg from the poor , for they must give back their stolen riches .

ID:	2428
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádahodííniid , Aoo' , t'óó nida'diitł'óołgo bílák'ee dandidiit'ááł . Doo dandiyiilyéeł da . Ákohgo tł'óół ániidígíí naakigo yee hweda'aztł'ǫ́ǫgo tségiizhdę́ę́' ch'ídahazlóóz .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” they said , “ let 's be tied up ! Do n't be tied up ! ” So he led his cloak into a window .
GOLD:	“ We will only tie you up and hand you over to the Philistines , ” they replied . “ We wo n't kill you. ” So they tied him up with two new ropes and brought him up from the rock .

ID:	2429
INPUT:	Áádóó béégashii tsosts'idgo dabits'iinígíí índa danichxǫ́ǫ́'ígíí náábíkéédę́ę́' hanáánáskai yę́ę tsosts'id nídoohah lá , áádóó ałdó' tł'oh naadą́ą́' bineest'ą' tsosts'id daniiłna'go ha'a'aahdę́ę́' níyol bíí<unk> zígíí éí hodichingo tsosts'id nídoohah , níigo ání .
PRED:	On the seventh day the seven cows come up from the seven times , and seven cows are seven heads of wheat , and the seventh year of the harvest is seven years old . The harvest is seven years old .
GOLD:	The seven thin , scrawny cows that came up later and the seven thin heads of grain , withered by the east wind , represent seven years of famine .

ID:	2430
INPUT:	Shijéí bohoníłdzil , Diyin God nílíinii , shijéí bohoníłdzil . Naa hashniihgo nich'į' hashtaał doo .
PRED:	O God , I will praise you , O God.Your heart will sing your praises .
GOLD:	My heart is confident in you , O God ; my heart is confident.No wonder I can sing your praises !

ID:	2431
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ájíshóonii éí diné doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó yáłti'ii ayóo jíists'ą́ą́' , áádóó hayooch'íidii éí diné bee ádíláahgo yáłti'ii ayóo jíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The wicked listen to the wicked , and the words of the wicked listen to the mouth of the wicked .
GOLD:	Wrongdoers eagerly listen to gossip ; liars pay close attention to slander .

ID:	2432
INPUT:	Shikágí shits'íís bik'i nííníłkaad , áádóó ts'in bee ahą́ą́h dashidínínilgo ats'id bee ahídadiniłkad .
PRED:	My body has broken my bones with my bones , and my bones can not destroy my bones .
GOLD:	You clothed me with skin and flesh , and you knit my bones and sinews together .

ID:	2433
INPUT:	Áádóó Ítayai éí aláahgo naat'áanii ánéidoo'niidgo ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii hiná áádóó bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii hiná ; ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá tádígháahgi , dadootsaałgi , doodaii' hináagi , ákwii ałdó' ná naal'a'í nishłíinii honishłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Then he called the king , “ As surely as surely as the Lord lives , I will die in the place of the Lord . As surely as I live , I will be with you . ”
GOLD:	But Ittai said to the king , “ I vow by the Lord and by your own life that I will go wherever my lord the king goes , no matter what happens — whether it means life or death . ”

ID:	2434
INPUT:	Kéyahgi Ízrel dine'é nilį́įgo ho'dizhchíinii índa nihitahgi dé'éyóní éí bee haz'áanii t'ááłá'íígíí bik'ehgo hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh níjiil'aah doo .
PRED:	“ These are the foreigners living among you and foreigners living among the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	This instruction applies to everyone , whether a native-born Israelite or a foreigner living among you . ”

ID:	2435
INPUT:	Diné ła' bikwá'ásiní éí Ízrel dine'é ła' hanaalte' biniyé jini'įįhgo , doodaii' naalte' biniyé naalyéhígi át'éego haa nahaniihgo éí azhni'įįhígíí hodi'yoolyééł . Kót'éego nihitahdóó doo yá'áshóonii nahjį' kódaoł'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ If any of the people of Israel 's slaves or free , you must be put to death , and you will be put to death . This is what you have done .
GOLD:	“ If anyone kidnaps a fellow Israelite and treats him as a slave or sells him , the kidnapper must die . In this way , you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Mó'ab dine'é neeznáadi mííl nideistseed ; éí t'áá ałtso ayóó ádabóodziilii índa ayóó ádaaltahii danilį́į nidi t'áadoo ła' yisdááyáhí da .
PRED:	So Moab killed all the people of Moab , and the mighty heroes have no power to save them .
GOLD:	They attacked the Moabites and killed about 10,000 of their strongest and most able-bodied warriors . Not one of them escaped .

ID:	2437
INPUT:	Nidi bitah dahoneezgai yę́ędą́ą́' shí éiyá baa yínííł naasháago tł'oh yishbizhii shi'éé' nít'éé' ; shii' sizíinii ádaa hojoolbá'ígo doo ashą́ą́góó í'diishyaa . Nidi bá sodiszinii t'áadoo násdlį́'ígóó t'óó shik'ijį' t'ą́ą́' nináhádleeh ,
PRED:	But when I was in the morning , I was deeply troubled by the pain of my knees . But if I were praying , I would not listen to my knees , but I would not turn away from their hearts .
GOLD:	Yet when they were ill , I grieved for them.I denied myself by fasting for them , but my prayers returned unanswered .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	Azhą́ Éíbraham doo nihééhósin da áádóó Ízrel wolyéii doo nihaa ákonízin da nidi , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ni nihiTaa' nílį́ ; nihik'é niná'ídláii nílį́ ; nízhi' hool'áádę́ę́' hólǫ́ .
PRED:	But Abraham did not know the Lord , and he is the Holy One of Israel . You are the one who lives from you , and you are the one who lives from your name forever .
GOLD:	Surely you are still our Father ! Even if Abraham and Jacob would disown us , Lord , you would still be our Father.You are our Redeemer from ages past .

ID:	2439
INPUT:	Háálá niDiyin God bee yisdá'iildéehii beisínínah áádóó Tsé bine' ahiníchéehii doo béénílniih da ; éí bąą k'idíléii ayóó ánóolningo k'idííníláago ch'il t'áá sahdii át'éii bił k'idíínílá ;
PRED:	For you are my salvation , O God , and you will remember what you have seen , and you will be filled with integrity .
GOLD:	Why ? Because you have turned from the God who can save you.You have forgotten the Rock who can hide you.So you may plant the finest grapevinesand import the most expensive seedlings .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , hoz wót'áahdi naat'a'ii , ákohgo nídoot'ahígíí bił bééhózin , áádóó hasbídí índa hoz nahalinii tsídii índa táshjizhii , ákohgo nát'ą́ą́' ninádahidoot'ahígíí bił béédahózin , nidi shidine'é éí Bóhólníihii yee nihodii'aahii doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	When they saw that they were led by the Ark of the Lord , they said , “ They will know what they are saying , and they will know what the Lord had said to me . ”
GOLD:	Even the stork that flies across the skyknows the time of her migration , as do the turtledove , the swallow , and the crane.They all return at the proper time each year.But not my people ! They do not know the Lord 's laws .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Pasíyah biye' Jiihóíyada áádóó Besodíyah biye' Miishálam ałk'idą́ą́' dáń'dítį́hí hasht'éyiidlaa ; áah sitáán <unk> deiztsih áádóó dáádílkał ałdó' yąąh dah ni<unk> nil ; bee dáń'dadilkałígíí ałdó' áádóó dáádílkał bich'ą́ą́h dah nídaatį́hígíí ninádeiztsih .
PRED:	He also tore down the doors of the Temple , tore down the doors of the Temple , and put it on the doors of the Temple . He rebuilt the doors of the Temple .
GOLD:	The Old City Gate was repaired by Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah . They laid the beams , set up its doors , and installed its bolts and bars .

ID:	2442
INPUT:	áádóó níníł'į́įgo bijéí ba'ahódlíigo nił bééhoozin áádóó bił aha'díínít'ą́ągo Kéínan dine'é , Het dine'é , Ámor dine'é , Píírez dine'é , Jííbas dine'é áádóó <unk> dine'é dabikéyah ha'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii baa didíí'áałgo bee hwiinił'a' índa ádííníniidígi át'éego íinidzaa , háálá t'áá ákogi áánííł .
PRED:	You know how you know that you are going to know that the Canaanites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	When he had proved himself faithful , you made a covenant with him to give him and his descendants the land of the Canaanites , Hittites , Amorites , Perizzites , Jebusites , and Girgashites . And you have done what you promised , for you are always true to your word .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	Nidi diné ła'da díí bee ak'e'ashchíhígíí doo yaa ákonízin dago , éí bíni'dii doo haa ákohwiindzin da doo .
PRED:	But if someone claims to say , “ If you do n't want to understand what I am saying . ”
GOLD:	But if you do not recognize this , you yourself will not be recognized .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	Hó éí iiná ná náás joołt'ih doo ; t'áá hasínítihjį' na'ałtso' doo , háálá nizháá'áád ayóó'ánó'níinii niyáázh tsosts'id dooígíí biláahgo ná yá'át'éehii ashchį́ .
PRED:	He will give birth to his wife , for he will give you an inheritance for seven years .
GOLD:	May he restore your youth and care for you in your old age . For he is the son of your daughter-in-law who loves you and has been better to you than seven sons ! ”

ID:	2445
INPUT:	Diyin God éí áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii yiTaa' nilį́ áádóó hodiyingo kééhat'į́įgi asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii yá ánihwii'aahii nilį́ .
PRED:	For God is the father of Levi , and he is the Holy Spirit . He is a widow of widows .
GOLD:	Father to the fatherless , defender of widows — this is God , whose dwelling is holy .

ID:	2446
INPUT:	Éí bikáa'gi deenásts'aa' bikágí daaldzą́ągo deilchii'go táá' góne' atis ahííkaadígíí áyiilaa ; náábíkáa'di índa nahashch'id bikágí daaldzą́ągo dį́į́' góne' atis ahííkaadígíí ánááyiidlaa .
PRED:	He made the basket of fine goatskin leather , and he overlaid it with a goatskin leather . He overlaid it with a second piece of fine goatskin leather .
GOLD:	He completed the tent covering with a layer of tanned ram skins and a layer of fine goatskin leather .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	Éíman biye' Josáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' táá'ts'áadah náhááh góne' Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	Josiah son of Josiah began to rule over Judah in the third year of King Josiah 's reign in Judah .
GOLD:	The Lord first gave messages to Jeremiah during the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah son of Amon , king of Judah .

ID:	2448
INPUT:	Áádóó dashdiiyáago Piinúwel hoolyéhígíí baazhníyáago éí dine'é bich'į' t'áá ákót'éego hanáádzoodzíí' , áko Sákath dine'é ádahodííniidígi át'éego Piinúwel dine'é hanáádaasdzíí' .
PRED:	So he went to Peniel and told the people what he had happened . He said to the people of Bethel , “ We have said to the people of Succoth . ”
GOLD:	From there Gideon went up to Peniel and again asked for food , but he got the same answer .

ID:	2449
INPUT:	nidi ádadííniid , Hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh góne' éí dooda , háálá ákódeiidzaago diné hadahodínóołchał .
PRED:	But they said , “ The Festival of Shelters , for we have plenty to harvest the Passover meal . ”
GOLD:	“ But not during the Passover celebration , ” they agreed , “ or the people may riot . ”

ID:	2450
INPUT:	Bisiláo yinéełii shich'į' yiyííł'aad . Łeeyi' da'deezgeedgo ách'ą́ą́h daní'áago ádayiilaa , áádóó shiníbaal yinaagóó nidahaazná .
PRED:	He sent me into the battle , and he released me in the wilderness .
GOLD:	His troops advance.They build up roads to attack me.They camp all around my tent .

ID:	2451
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii díí ał'ąą ana'í yidziihgo áyiilaa ; éí bee Ízrel dine'é hwééhózíní áhodoolíiłgo na<unk> taah ; Kéínan kéyahgi Ízrel dine'é ła' anaa' baa nida'asdee'ígíí doo bił béédahózin da .
PRED:	This is what the Lord commanded through the nations of Israel : “ The people of Israel will know that no one could cross the Jordan River . ”
GOLD:	These are the nations that the Lord left in the land to test those Israelites who had not experienced the wars of Canaan .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Nihijéí doo binídahaz'áhígíí biniinaa niheda'asdzą́ą́ yóó'adahidoh'aahgo Mózes t'áá yee nihá has'ą́ą́ nít'éé' , nidi hodeeyáádę́ę́' éí doo ákót'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You have not forgiven us because of our hearts , but you were not from the east side of our husbands . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Moses permitted divorce only as a concession to your hard hearts , but it was not what God had originally intended .

ID:	2453
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Háíram éí Sálaman haadzí'ígíí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí yaa bił nihoozhǫǫhgo ání , Díí jį́ Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih le' ; éí David yę́ę biye' hóyą́ągo yizhchíinii bidine'é ayóó ánéelą́ą'ii yinant'áa doo biniyé beíltį́ .
PRED:	When Hiram heard this , he said to Solomon , “ This is what the Lord says : Today I am the one who has given him a great leader of the tribe of David . ”
GOLD:	When Hiram received Solomon 's message , he was very pleased and said , “ Praise the Lord today for giving David a wise son to be king of the great nation of Israel . ”

ID:	2454
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béésh łigaii da'asaa' áádóó kǫ' bee niltsésí áádóó łeets'aa' áádóó béésh dilní bee í'dílzoołí índa t'áá ha'át'íhída béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaaígíí , doodaii' óola bee ádaalyaaígíí éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béeso yah aajaa'ígíí doo bee nidahaaznii' da ,
PRED:	But the Ark of the Lord 's Temple was filled with silver and gold , silver , silver , and gold , silver , silver , gold , silver , gold , and gold .
GOLD:	The money brought to the Temple was not used for making silver bowls , lamp snuffers , basins , trumpets , or other articles of gold or silver for the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Herod 's Confusion

ID:	2456
INPUT:	Áko David éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii David bikin haal'áajį' doo doot'áał da nízin , nidi David bíniik'ehgo Gathdóó dine'é Óbed-íídam bighanjį' yít'ą́ .
PRED:	So David took the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant and hurried out to the city of the Lord .
GOLD:	So David decided not to move the Ark of the Lord into the City of David . Instead , he took it to the house of Obed-edom of Gath .

ID:	2457
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Jó , k'ad t'áá shí shíniik'ehgo Bóhólníihii bich'į' hanáánásdziih . Naadiin yik'íníyáagoshą' ? Áko ánáádoo'niid , Naadiin jilt'éego biniinaa doo áhodeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	“ But now , ” he said , “ I will speak to the Lord for seventy years ? ” And the Lord replied , “ why should I die ? ” So he replied , “ I will never die . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham said , “ Since I have dared to speak to the Lord , let me continue — suppose there are only twenty ? ” And the Lord replied , “ Then I will not destroy it for the sake of the twenty . ”

ID:	2458
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bizaad k'ee'ąą dínéesą́ , áádóó Jerúsalemgi ídahooł'aahii t'áá íiyisí k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizh índa nááda'iiłniihii t'óó ahayóí na'nitin woodláanii yik'eh dahół'íinii daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	Then God said to his disciples , “ I will put up many nations in Jerusalem , and many nations have received the message of the leading priests .
GOLD:	So God 's message continued to spread . The number of believers greatly increased in Jerusalem , and many of the Jewish priests were converted , too .

ID:	2459
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Sálaman bá kin ádeił'íinii índa Háíram bá kin ádeił'íinii áádóó Gííbal kin haal'áádóó dine'é éí kin ádoolnííł biniyé tsin dantsxaazígíí índa tsé hasht'e'niyída'aztséél .
PRED:	These were the same size of Solomon 's Temple , the City of Solomon , and the walls of the city were laid in the City of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Men from the city of Gebal helped Solomon 's and Hiram 's builders prepare the timber and stone for the Temple .

ID:	2460
INPUT:	Tsásk'eh bik'ídaasti'í ; éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idígíí nidaashch'ąą'ii shibikáá' dah antéhí bik'ídasíłti' , na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idígíí bik'ídasíłti' .
PRED:	“ Do n't say to me , ‘ Like a linen robe in Egypt , I put my clothes in a field . ' ”
GOLD:	My bed is spread with beautiful blankets , with colored sheets of Egyptian linen .

ID:	2461
INPUT:	Nidi niyee' iishch'id biyi'dę́ę́' hashííníłtį́ ; shimá yisht'o'dą́ą́' shił chohoo'į́įgo áshiinilaa .
PRED:	But you have made me a baby from my mother 's womb .
GOLD:	Yet you brought me safely from my mother 's womband led me to trust you at my mother 's breast .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii kóníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2463
INPUT:	Áko Peter biinéé' yééhoosįįdgo bił hóózhǫǫdgo biniinaa dáádílkał t'áadoo ąą ííléhí yah anáálwodgo , Peter tł'óó'dę́ę́' sizį́ , níigo yaa hoolne' .
PRED:	When Peter heard him , he hurried out to the door of the Temple and opened Peter 's doors .
GOLD:	When she recognized Peter 's voice , she was so overjoyed that , instead of opening the door , she ran back inside and told everyone , “ Peter is standing at the door ! ”

ID:	2464
INPUT:	Áko da'iinohdlą́ągo t'áá ha'át'íhída dayínóhkeedgo sodadołzingo , éí nihaa dahalyée doo .
PRED:	And pray for you , and pray for you . Pray that you will be called the Messiah .
GOLD:	You can pray for anything , and if you have faith , you will receive it . ”

ID:	2465
INPUT:	Dabizhé'é yę́ę dabíla' deíníshtą'go Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íní'eezh yę́ędą́ą́' bił ahada'dinisht'áanii éí doo bik'ehgo da . Azhą́ hahastiin nishłį́į nidi , éí hoł ahada'dinisht'áanii k'ídadzizti' , ní Bóhólníihii ,
PRED:	But when I led them out of Egypt , I led them out of Egypt to bring them out of Egypt , but I am the Lord .
GOLD:	This covenant will not be like the one I made with their ancestors when I took them by the hand and brought them out of the land of Egypt . They broke that covenant , though I loved them as a husband loves his wife , ” says the Lord .

ID:	2466
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Jáshowa áyidííniid , Diné bitah híláahgo nílááh Ámalek dine'é bił da'ahohgą́ ; yiską́ągo shí éí Diyin God bigish dah yishtį́įłgo wók'ą́ągi dah sézį́į doo .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Joshua , “ Go and stand in front of the army of the Amalekites , and I will put your hand on a flame . ”
GOLD:	Moses commanded Joshua , “ Choose some men to go out and fight the army of Amalek for us . Tomorrow , I will stand at the top of the hill , holding the staff of God in my hand . ”

ID:	2467
INPUT:	Bikin bii' sohodizindę́ę́' níká oolyeed , índa Záíyandę́ę́' nidziilgo ánóle' !
PRED:	Let her cry for help , O Zion ; let her flee from Zion .
GOLD:	May he send you help from his sanctuaryand strengthen you from Jerusalem .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádaat'įįhgo doo yildinii ádaat'é , háálá t'áá ákogi át'éii bee bikáá'dóó nahat'áii bikáá'dóó hoot'áłígíí bohoníłdzilgo ályaa .
PRED:	Do n't be wicked , for your throne will be made right with justice , for your throne is made right .
GOLD:	A king detests wrongdoing , for his rule is built on justice .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	<unk> , nínígíí díí ááhyiłní : bee níhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí Míídiya dine'é índa Pérzha dine'é bá ałts'ádoodzohgo baa didoot'ááł .
PRED:	“ Tell them , ‘ This is what the meaning of the Kingdom of Persia , and the kingdom of Persia will be divided . '
GOLD:	Parsin means ‘ divided ' — your kingdom has been divided and given to the Medes and Persians . ”

ID:	2470
INPUT:	Férisii nilíinii índa tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé sidáii
PRED:	Parable of the Pharisees and the Baptist
GOLD:	Parable of the Pharisee and Tax Collector

ID:	2471
INPUT:	Rúfas , éí Bóhólníihii yee alááh hidíízíinii , áádóó bimá , t'áá éí shí ałdó' shimá bidishnínígíí shá k'é bijiniih .
PRED:	“ Go to the Lord , ” he said , “ and give my mother to my mother .
GOLD:	Greet Rufus , whom the Lord picked out to be his very own ; and also his dear mother , who has been a mother to me .

ID:	2472
INPUT:	Ííziyan-gíí<unk> dah náádii'náago Zin honoojí nahós'a'gi t'áá ákwii Kéídesh hoolyéego ákwii ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left Kadesh and camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of Kadesh .
GOLD:	They left Ezion-geber and camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	Áko átsé nídízííd binih ła'a jį́į́ góne' diné t'áá ałtso dé'éyóní hweda'asdzą́ą́ daazlį́į'ii ałtso bits'ádajiiskai .
PRED:	On the first day of the first month of the first month of all the men of the community .
GOLD:	By March 27 , the first day of the new year , they had finished dealing with all the men who had married pagan wives .

ID:	2474
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ągo náá'iiłniihii náádoodáałgo kin néidínóoł'įįł ; jó , hont'ahgóó naałniih k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizhgo
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest will return to the house of the priest .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest must return for another inspection . If he finds that the mildew on the walls of the house has spread ,

ID:	2475
INPUT:	Siláo binanit'a'í éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Siiréíyah áádóó bikéé' góne' náá'iiłniihii Zefanáíyah áádóó diné táa'go dáádílkał yaa ádahalyánígíí dah yidii'eezh .
PRED:	The captain of the guard , took him to the priest , and put him on the gates of the high priest .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took with him as prisoners Seraiah the high priest , Zephaniah the priest of the second rank , and the three chief gatekeepers .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	Áádóó ádíshní , Shoo , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ts'ídá la' t'ah doo kót'éego t'óó shaa'ihgo í' díshnéeh da ; t'áá bíni' daaztsáanii áádóó naaldlooshii nibiizhnizhii índa atsį' doo dílzinii éí ashiiké nishłį́į́dą́ą́'dóó díí jį́įjį' ts'ídá t'ah doo ła' yishą́ą da .
PRED:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , the God of God says : You have not sinned , but we have not been defiled by eating and wild animals . They have never been taken away from this day . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , must I be defiled by using human dung ? For I have never been defiled before . From the time I was a child until now I have never eaten any animal that died of sickness or was killed by other animals . I have never eaten any meat forbidden by the law . ”

ID:	2477
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'í
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The

ID:	2478
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí diné nidilt'éego kéyah hayíísidígíí ábizhdííniid , Nihílááh , asdzání ałjiłnii bighan góne' yah ooh'aashgo áádę́ę́' bił ch'ínóhkááh ; bik'éí t'áá ałtso t'áá bił bich'į' bee ádee hadoohdzí'ígíí bi'ohłééh .
PRED:	So Joshua told the men , “ Go back to the land of the land and carry out the prostitute 's house , and take it back to the house of the man who has given you . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joshua said to the two spies , “ Keep your promise . Go to the prostitute 's house and bring her out , along with all her family . ”

ID:	2479
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad , Bóhólníihii binááł nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo shidił doonah da , háálá dziłghą́ą́'góó dééłdánii hazhnitáhígi át'éego Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí łééchąą'í biya' haintá nahalingo shíkantá .
PRED:	“ Now , Lord , do n't let me be afraid of the earth , for my people are looking for the dogs .
GOLD:	Must I die on foreign soil , far from the presence of the Lord ? Why has the king of Israel come out to search for a single flea ? Why does he hunt me down like a partridge on the mountains ? ”

ID:	2480
INPUT:	T'ah doo naa nahaniih yę́ędą́ą́' , éí ni nít'éé' ya' ? Naa nahaaznii'dóó bik'ijį' béeso ałdó' bee níhólnííh nít'éé' ya' ? Ha'át'íí biniyé díí íinidzaaígíí bee nijéí bii' bąąh tsídíníkééz ? Doo diné nííní'aa' da , nidi Diyin God nííní'aa' .
PRED:	“ Why did you remember that you were ? Why did you lift your money to your money ? Why did you have n't you rebelled ? Why have you put your hearts into the hearts of God ? ”
GOLD:	The property was yours to sell or not sell , as you wished . And after selling it , the money was also yours to give away . How could you do a thing like this ? You were n't lying to us but to God ! ”

ID:	2481
INPUT:	Nihí ats'íís k'ehgo t'éiyá ándahoyoh'aah , shí éí diné doo ła' bá nihwiish'aah da .
PRED:	I am telling you the body of your body , and I will never judge you .
GOLD:	You judge me by human standards , but I do not judge anyone .

ID:	2482
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bikéyah atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihgo nahadlá doo ła' ákót'éego álnééhgóó Diyin God yá halne'ii Sámuel bíiniiłką́ áádóó Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii t'áadoo ła' ákó'iilaa da ; Josáíyah áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é índa Ízrel dine'é ákwii nidaakaígíí áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí ákóda'iilaa .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the Passover celebration , one of the people of Israel went to worship the Passover celebration and the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , and the priests of Judah .
GOLD:	Never since the time of the prophet Samuel had there been such a Passover . None of the kings of Israel had ever kept a Passover as Josiah did , involving all the priests and Levites , all the people of Jerusalem , and people from all over Judah and Israel .

ID:	2483
INPUT:	Jeremáíyah éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' saad hółǫ́
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Complaint
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Complaint

ID:	2484
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diyin dabidi'níinii doo ła' nigi át'ée da , índa naanish danilíinii doo ła' ninaanishígi ádaat'ée da .
PRED:	O Lord , we do not worship other gods , O Lord , and there is no other works .
GOLD:	No pagan god is like you , O Lord.None can do what you do !

ID:	2485
INPUT:	Shibikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' ch'iyáán dááchǫ'ígíí náádahoołnii' lá . Índa ádadohní , Haash yit'éego daniilchxǫ' ? Bóhólníihii bibikáá' adání bá nahat'i' , dadohníigo ádaaht'į́į́ lá .
PRED:	“ You have defiled my altar , ” says the Lord . “ How long will you destroy the altar ? ”
GOLD:	“ You have shown contempt by offering defiled sacrifices on my altar. “ Then you ask , ‘ How have we defiled the sacrifices ? ' “ You defile them by saying the altar of the Lord deserves no respect .

ID:	2486
INPUT:	Naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii átséhígíí bee bóhólníhígíí t'áá binááł t'áá ałtso yee ádínááhólníihgo yaa naaghá . Naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii átséhígíí t'áá bidiyoołhéełgo k'áák'eh nít'ée'go náádzí'ígíí nahasdzáán índa bikáa'gi kéédahat'íinii bich'į' nidahałáago áyósin .
PRED:	The first beast was given to the beast that the beast was given to all the kingdoms of the beast . The first beast was given to the beast that the beast had been given to the beast and the earth .
GOLD:	He exercised all the authority of the first beast . And he required all the earth and its people to worship the first beast , whose fatal wound had been healed .

ID:	2487
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' David hoos'įįdgo nízhdii'na'go , Bóhólníihii t'áá bí bizaad yee haadzíi'go éí Géed halne'ii nilíinii , t'áá éí David yá náásgóó halne'ii nilį́įgo áyidííniid ,
PRED:	So David got up early the next morning and told David what the Lord had said to David ,
GOLD:	The next morning the word of the Lord came to the prophet Gad , who was David 's seer . This was the message :

ID:	2488
INPUT:	Áádóó ła' Béthel hoolyéegi yiyiisį' áádóó náánáła' Dan hoolyéegi yiyiisį' .
PRED:	He made a covenant with the people of Bethel , and he made a covenant with them in Bethel .
GOLD:	He placed these calf idols in Bethel and in Dan — at either end of his kingdom .

ID:	2489
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí kwe'é diné índa naaldlooshiida doo ła' naagháágóó t'óó dzígaigo haz'ánígi áádóó kin hadaas'áágóó t'áá ałtso ákǫ́ǫ́ dibé yaa ádahalyáanii bilį́į́' háádaalyį́įhgo kénáádahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The people will live in the wilderness , and all its flocks will live in the fields .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : This land — though it is now desolate and has no people and animals — will once more have pastures where shepherds can lead their flocks .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii Riihobówam éí Adóram wolyéii naanish bí'nílchééh yinanit'a'í nilíinii ayííł'a'go Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso tsé yee nídahoneesne'go hoł nidadzisne' , nidi aláahgo naat'áanii Riihobówam bitsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí tsxį́įłgo yiih yíyáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áágóó anííchą́ą́' .
PRED:	When King Rehoboam sent this message to King Rehoboam , he sent all the kings of Israel , and he fled to Jerusalem . When the king of Israel arrived in Jerusalem , he fled to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam sent Adoniram , who was in charge of forced labor , to restore order , but the people of Israel stoned him to death . When this news reached King Rehoboam , he quickly jumped into his chariot and fled to Jerusalem .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	Jó , diné éí asdzání doo bá ályaa da , nidi asdzání éí diné bá ályaa .
PRED:	For the man was made right with a woman , but the woman made a woman with a woman .
GOLD:	And man was not made for woman , but woman was made for man .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ą́dóó ayóogo bídahólníihii éí Ízrel dadine'é t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ą́dóó ádaat'į́įgo Diyin God bidine'é danilį́įgo t'áá bí t'ááłáhígi áłah nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; diltłish yee nidaabaahii dį́įdi neeznádiindi mííl .
PRED:	So all the people of Israel were united with the sword of the Lord . The men of Israel were killed by the sword of the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	The leaders of all the people and all the tribes of Israel — 400,000 warriors armed with swords — took their positions in the assembly of the people of God .

ID:	2493
INPUT:	Doo dabidziilii éí dabidziilgo t'áadoo áńdaohdlaa da ; ka deíkáahii éí t'áadoo hadaałt'é áńdaohdlaa da ; nida'niłhodígíí éí azee' yee nídoodzihii t'áadoo bąąh ádaohłaago bá bik'ída'doodiz da ; yóó'adabidi'niiskaadii t'áadoo ninádahishoo'eezh da ; yóó'adahaaskaii éí t'áadoo hadasinootą́ą' da , nidi bída'nołkadgo índa t'áá na'níle'dii bindanoht'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	You have broken the strength of those who have broken their strength , but you have not turned away from evil desires . You have not abandoned them , but you have not abandoned them . You have not abandoned them , but you will not commit adultery .
GOLD:	You have not taken care of the weak . You have not tended the sick or bound up the injured . You have not gone looking for those who have wandered away and are lost . Instead , you have ruled them with harshness and cruelty .

ID:	2494
INPUT:	Shich'į' nááhániihii bidił éí t'ááká díík'ǫsh bił bááh ályaii bił náádahołniih lágo ; shich'į' nááhániihígíí bik'ah abíníjį' doo ła' t'áá sinil da doo .
PRED:	“ You must not offer any yeast of my sin offering to me . You must not offer any yeast .
GOLD:	“ You must not offer the blood of my sacrificial offerings together with any baked goods containing yeast . And do not leave the fat from the festival offerings until the next morning .

ID:	2495
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii áhodííniid , Ha'át'íísh dah yítį́į́ł ? Áko ázhdííniid , Gish át'é .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ What do you want ? ” And the Lord said ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord asked him , “ What is that in your hand ? ” “ A shepherd 's staff , ” Moses replied .

ID:	2496
INPUT:	áko jó'akon , diné ła' łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ą́ą́ léi' haa níyá , áádóó hach'į' nahasáago ání , Bóhólníihii , íinínízin ládą́ą́' nááshididííłááł .
PRED:	“ Look , a man who healed a leprosy leprosy leprosy leprosy leprosy leprosy , ” the man said , “ if you are willing to heal me and heal me . ”
GOLD:	Suddenly , a man with leprosy approached him and knelt before him . “ Lord , ” the man said , “ if you are willing , you can heal me and make me clean . ”

ID:	2497
INPUT:	Áko Jéíkab t'áá íiyisí azdeest'įįd ; halį́į́' áádóó asdzání há nidaalte' áádóó diné há nidaalte' áádóó ghą́ą́'ask'idii índa télii t'óó ahóóyóí .
PRED:	So Jacob became very old and female servants . He had been camels , male and female servants , donkeys , camels , camels , and camels .
GOLD:	As a result , Jacob became very wealthy , with large flocks of sheep and goats , female and male servants , and many camels and donkeys .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	Áko Jew dine'é bihasht'ehodi'nééh bijínígíí áádóó tséní'ootséél t'áá áyídígo ałdó' biniinaa ákóne' Jesus yóó'ájiilaa .
PRED:	So the Jewish leaders took their tomb and buried him in the tomb he had buried him in his tomb .
GOLD:	And so , because it was the day of preparation for the Jewish Passover and since the tomb was close at hand , they laid Jesus there .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binááł éí kéyahgi kéédahat'ínígíí bik'eh dasidoohdlį́į'go índa nídoohkah , áádóó Bóhólníihii índa Ízrel dine'é binááł doo nihihodiit'i' da doo , áko Bóhólníihii binááł díí kéyah danihíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	When you enter the presence of the Lord , you will enter the land of Israel , and you will enter the presence of the Lord . This is what the Lord says .
GOLD:	then you may return when the Lord has conquered the land . You will have fulfilled your duty to the Lord and to the rest of the people of Israel . And the land on the east side of the Jordan will be your property from the Lord .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jiihó'ash éí dabizhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazhgo Samériyagi Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áádóó haye' Jerobówam hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	When Joash died , he was buried in Samaria , and his son Jehoash became the next king of Israel . He was buried in Samaria .
GOLD:	When Jehoash died , he was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel . And his son Jeroboam II became the next king .

ID:	2501
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Nímshai binálí Jiiháshafat biye' Jííhu éí Jóram yik'ijį' hodeez'ą́ . ( Íídą́ą́' Jóram éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yił Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Házeiyel biniinaa Réímath-gíliyad kin haal'áagi hééshjéé' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat son of Joram began to fight against King Jehoshaphat of Israel . When he had defeated Joram son of Joram , King Joram of Aram was wounded in Ramoth-gilead .
GOLD:	So Jehu son of Jehoshaphat , son of Nimshi , led a conspiracy against King Joram . ( Now Joram had been with the army at Ramoth-gilead , defending Israel against the forces of King Hazael of Aram .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	Hágo , łahgo át'éego tsídóhkees , hodoo'niid
PRED:	When he heard him , he said ,
GOLD:	Unfaithful Jerusalem

ID:	2503
INPUT:	Diné bił hadlee'ii bik'ihojidlíi doo , háálá badahojoobá'íii ya'ałtso' .
PRED:	I will bless the poor , for he will bless the poor .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who are generous , because they feed the poor .

ID:	2504
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh danízinii bich'į' aa a'ááh nínízingo í'díínílzin ; t'áá ákóne' ádaat'į́įgo deíkáahii bich'į' t'áá ákóne' ánít'į́įgo í'díínílzin .
PRED:	Be merciful to your unfailing love , for you are faithful to your faithful love .
GOLD:	To the faithful you show yourself faithful ; to those with integrity you show integrity .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	Sámlah daaztsą́ągo bitsásk'ehgi Saul éí Riihóbath tooh bibąąhdóó naagháago aláahgo naat'áanii náánídlį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Saul died , he became king , and he reigned in the river .
GOLD:	When Samlah died , Shaul from the city of Rehoboth-on-the-River became king in his place .

ID:	2506
INPUT:	Ch'il hanoot'ánígíigi át'éego náás níít'į́įłgo ániishłaa , áko dínínísą́ągo níneez sínílį́į́' áádóó asdzání ániid naagháago baa dzólníinii sínílį́į́' ; nibe' hadzíí'á silį́į́' índa nitsii' nineez silį́į́' , nidi t'áá łiníchí'í áádóó t'áadoo nik'ésti'ígóó nanináá nít'éé' .
PRED:	I will make you like a bird in the wilderness , and you will have enough to grow in the wilderness . You have been very beautiful and beautiful , and your hair are as beautiful as beautiful as you did .
GOLD:	And I helped you to thrive like a plant in the field . You grew up and became a beautiful jewel . Your breasts became full , and your body hair grew , but you were still naked .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	Diné doo ak'eh hóół'įįd da
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	The Man and Woman Sin

ID:	2508
INPUT:	Háálá Sádjusii danilíinii , Da'neeznáádę́ę́' doo náádi'yiijeeh da , áádóó diyingo naal'a'í ádin , índa níłch'i danilínígíí ałdó' ádin , daaní , nidi Férisii danilíinii éí , T'áá aaníí éí dahólǫ́ , daaní .
PRED:	For the resurrection of the Pharisees , the resurrection of the resurrection of the Pharisees , the Pharisees , the Pharisees , and Pharisees replied , “ He is not a Pharisee ! ”
GOLD:	for the Sadducees say there is no resurrection or angels or spirits , but the Pharisees believe in all of these .

ID:	2509
INPUT:	Díí kódajíít'įįdígíí biniinaa ts'ídá atídahodeeshłííł . Dine'é kót'éii shii' sizíinii t'áá aaníí k'ééhodidoodlííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will punish them for doing this , ” says the Lord. “ Yes , I will repay them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Should I not punish them for this ? ” says the Lord. “ Should I not avenge myself against such a nation ?

ID:	2510
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí kin haal'áhígíí baa yáníłti'go ádííníniid yę́ę k'ad Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii yaa yáłti'go kóní , Diltłish bee áádóó hodidoochįįłígíí bee índa naałniih bee éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í baa didoot'ááł .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ This is what the God of Israel , says : The sword of the Lord , the God of Israel , says : The king of Babylon will be put to Babylon .
GOLD:	“ Now I want to say something more about this city . You have been saying , ‘ It will fall to the king of Babylon through war , famine , and disease . ' But this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says :

ID:	2511
INPUT:	Ákwe'é táá' nihee nídeezidóó bik'ijį' éí kéyah táyi' si'ánígi Alezáandriyadę́ę́' tsinaa'eeł ła' ákwe'é bééhai léi' Naakií bidi'nínígíí be'elyaago bidáahjigo dah noot'ááł léi' nihił dah dii'éél .
PRED:	There was three months later , a man named Simon ( which means “ There was a man named Simon ( which means “ There was two months . )
GOLD:	It was three months after the shipwreck that we set sail on another ship that had wintered at the island — an Alexandrian ship with the twin gods as its figurehead .

ID:	2512
INPUT:	Áko David éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go , íídą́ą́' díí saad bee sin ályaaígíí bee bich'į' hojitaałgo hwe'ana'í t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ąjį' índa Saul yę́ę bits'ą́ąjį' Bóhólníihii yisdáhóółtį́ .
PRED:	Then David spoke to the Lord , and he rescued Saul from the community of Saul and his enemies from Saul .
GOLD:	David sang this song to the Lord on the day the Lord rescued him from all his enemies and from Saul .

ID:	2513
INPUT:	Áádóó tó háálį́į́góó ííyáago áadi áshįįh yiih yiyííłkaadgo ání , Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí tó hadaazlínígíí doo bąąhígóó ánáshdlaa ; éí bits'ą́ą́dóó aniné doo nááhódlǫ́ǫ da doo , índa kéyah doo nínáhodiniichii' da doo .
PRED:	He went into the water and threw it into a spring . He said , “ This is what the Lord says : I am innocent , and there is no water for all the people who live in the land . ”
GOLD:	Then he went out to the spring that supplied the town with water and threw the salt into it . And he said , “ This is what the Lord says : I have purified this water . It will no longer cause death or infertility . ”

ID:	2514
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí á bee k'ééhodoodǫǫłii doo t'áá ákójínééhgóó ádił adzisiihii há néidiyoołnihgo doo t'áá ákójínééhgóó ádił adzisiihígíí Bóhólníihii binááł há bee k'ééhoodǫǫłii há nááhidoonihgo ádił adzisiihígíí há yóó'anídidoot'ááł .
PRED:	Then the priest will purify the priest , making them right with the blood of the Lord , and he will purify you from making you right with the blood of the Lord , making you right with the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will sacrifice it to purify the guilty person before the Lord , and that person will be forgiven .

ID:	2515
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Parable of the Lamp

ID:	2516
INPUT:	Ákohgo <unk> dooléłígíí halą́ąjį' danéelkaad ; hó éí oonéłígíí t'áá ákwe'é bił dahwiiską́ .
PRED:	So they took care of the money and gave it to the people .
GOLD:	So the gifts were sent on ahead , while Jacob himself spent that night in the camp .

ID:	2517
INPUT:	T'áá ákwii oolkiłígíí biyi' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii hodi'dooltsoł ch'ééh daniizį́į́' , nidi diné yéédaaldzid , háálá éí hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' bí baa níjít'į́įgo bee hadzoodzíi'go yaa ákodaniizį́į́' .
PRED:	About that time some time later some teachers of religious law were trying to arrest the leading priests and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	The teachers of religious law and the leading priests wanted to arrest Jesus immediately because they realized he was telling the story against them — they were the wicked farmers . But they were afraid of the people 's reaction .

ID:	2518
INPUT:	Bíízeiyai ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' .
PRED:	The family of Hazael
GOLD:	The family of Bezai323

ID:	2519
INPUT:	Áádóó tsits'aa' dílzinii tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí éí ch'íní'áago biniinaa wóniidi ts'ídá aláahgo diyingo haz'ánígíí bidááhjígo hodiyingo haz'ánídóó yit'į́ , nidi tł'óó'dę́ę'go éí doo yit'į́į da . Áko éí dííshjį́įjį' t'áá ákót'é .
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant must not be used in front of the Most Holy Place until the Most Holy Place is not greater than the Most High .
GOLD:	These poles were so long that their ends could be seen from the Holy Place , which is in front of the Most Holy Place , but not from the outside . They are still there to this day .

ID:	2520
INPUT:	Nidi diltłish bits'ąą yóó'ádahidínóochéłígíí éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' hááhidoolwołgo Júdah kéyah yiih náhidookahígíí t'áá díkwílt'éhí doo ; áadi índa Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí ádaaníinii daats'í , doodaii' shí ádíshníinii daats'í bohodoolníiłgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	But the sword will turn away from the land of Egypt , for there will be a few of the people of Judah and Judah , a few nations will know that I am sending them out of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Only a small number will escape death and return to Judah from Egypt . Then all those who came to Egypt will find out whose words are true — mine or theirs !

ID:	2521
INPUT:	Áko Nóah éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' náázhdi'yoołnih biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí ájiilaa , áádóó alį́į́' daadáanii ła' , áádóó nidaat'a'ii daadáanii ła' éí didlidgo nááhániihii bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' náádziisnii' .
PRED:	Then Noah built another altar to the Lord , and he sacrificed another burnt offering to the Lord . He built another burnt offering and a burnt offering on the altar .
GOLD:	Then Noah built an altar to the Lord , and there he sacrificed as burnt offerings the animals and birds that had been approved for that purpose .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	Jesus diyoolyéełgo binahast'ą́
PRED:	The Plot against Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Anointed at Bethany

ID:	2523
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , á nidahodii'aahii éí Ízrel dine'é yá nidahodii'aahgo bídeiníłkánígíí áádóó Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é yinanit'a'í nídaadleełii bídeiníłkánígíí biyi' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii ákót'éhígíí t'áadoo dayiił'a' da .
PRED:	“ These are the leaders of Israel , ” they said . “ These are the Passover and the Passover celebration and the Passover celebration . ”
GOLD:	There had not been a Passover celebration like that since the time when the judges ruled in Israel , nor throughout all the years of the kings of Israel and Judah .

ID:	2524
INPUT:	Áádóó ádííniid , Da' diné shígi át'éiísh yóó'adínóochééł ? Áko diné shígi át'éiísh yisdádínóochééł biniyé hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah adoogááł ? Shí doo yah adeesháał da .
PRED:	“ Do n't you turn from me ? ” the angel asked . “ I will go out to the house of the sanctuary . ”
GOLD:	But I replied , “ Should someone in my position run from danger ? Should someone in my position enter the Temple to save his life ? No , I wo n't do it ! ”

ID:	2525
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , T'áá aaníígóó ándishní , Díí jį́ Kéyah Hózhǫ́ǫdi shił honílǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you will live in peace . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus replied , “ I assure you , today you will be with me in paradise . ”

ID:	2526
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii doo hool'áágóó yóó'i'didoo'áał da ;
PRED:	The Lord will not abandon his people forever .
GOLD:	For no one is abandonedby the Lord forever .

ID:	2527
INPUT:	Ákohgo naat'áanii danilíinii éí Bérak ádeidííniid , Ni áádóó Jeremáíyah nihílááh nídóht'įįh , áádóó diné ła' t'ááká nídooht'į́į'gi bił bééhoozį́į́' yíila' .
PRED:	Then the officials said to Jeremiah , “ Go and do n't let anyone go to Jeremiah . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Jeremiah should both hide , ” the officials told Baruch . “ Do n't tell anyone where you are ! ”

ID:	2528
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul yę́ę biye' Ish-bósheth éí Hííbran kin haal'áadi Ábner daaztsą́ągo yiyíínii'go t'óó bił áhásdįįd áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso niseekai .
PRED:	When Abner died , Abner son of Ner , he killed Abner and all Israel .
GOLD:	When Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , heard about Abner 's death at Hebron , he lost all courage , and all Israel became paralyzed with fear .

ID:	2529
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Díí baa yáníłti'ígíí bik'ehgo ádeeshnííł , háálá ajooba' bee nich'oha'néego nąąh tsídíkéezgo nízhi' bee nééhasin .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says : I will show you what I am saying , for I am going to honor your name .
GOLD:	The Lord replied to Moses , “ I will indeed do what you have asked , for I look favorably on you , and I know you by name . ”

ID:	2530
INPUT:	Doo ákwii át'éii biniinaa diné nidíteehgo atíníł'į́įgo ch'osh ałchozhii ałchozhígíí nahalingo baa bi ł hózhónígíí bits'ą́ą́' ádííłdįįł . T'áá aaníí , diné t'áá ałtso be'iina' t'ááłáhídi ha'oodzolígíí nahalin ! Síilah .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked be destroyed ; let the hopes of their enemies be destroyed . Let them be destroyed by their sins , and let the rest of your life be destroyed .
GOLD:	When you discipline us for our sins , you consume like a moth what is precious to us.Each of us is but a breath.Interlude

ID:	2531
INPUT:	Áko dah diiyáago halgaigóó níyá ; nít'éé' Kííbar tooh bibąąhgóó Bóhólníihii bee bits'ádi'nílíidii yiiłtsáanii ákwii sizį́įgo náánéiłtsą́ , jó'akon , áko tsé'yaa níshjool .
PRED:	As I walked on the plains of the Jordan River , I saw the Lord standing beside beside the river of the Lord . I saw a lying lying lying face on the ground .
GOLD:	So I got up and went , and there I saw the glory of the Lord , just as I had seen in my first vision by the Kebar River . And I fell face down on the ground .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	béeso bideená bik'é doo yá'ádaashóonii ts'ídá t'áá ákwii át'éego yá hadahadziihii índa t'áá ákogi át'éii bá yá'át'éehii nahjį' kódeił'íinii bich'į' doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who do evil , for those who do evil are righteous and right .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	Bee nihoot'áníjį' ahoolzhiizhgo nínáádoodáałgo shádi'áahjigo bisiláo yił doonééł , nidi ákóne' náánádzáii doo átséedi níyáhígi át'éego náádoodáał da .
PRED:	“ When the time is coming , the commander will return to the south gateway and will return to the south side of the south , but you will never die .
GOLD:	“ Then at the appointed time he will once again invade the south , but this time the result will be different .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	Abímelek éí Ízrel dine'é binazh'nt'áago táá' nááhai .
PRED:	Abimelech reigned in Israel three years .
GOLD:	After Abimelech had ruled over Israel for three years ,

ID:	2535
INPUT:	Háálá kéyah bikáá'góó adilyé t'éí nihinéést'e' . Hóyée'go ha'oodzí'ígíí biniinaa kéyah yínííł nilį́įgo atínídindleeh . Dahonoojíígóó dahootsoígíí nídááltseigo daazgan . Doo yá'át'ééhgóó dahiná , áádóó yee dabidziilii doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'ée da .
PRED:	For the land was filled with violence , and the news of the land fell on the ground . The news of the field was thrown into the field , and the ground died .
GOLD:	For the land is full of adultery , and it lies under a curse.The land itself is in mourning — its wilderness pastures are dried up.For they all do eviland abuse what power they have .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	Háálá k'ad nihíighahgóó ch'ínísháahgo , t'óó kónígháníjį' da'a<unk> dooltséłígíísh biniyé haa jígháah doo nisin . Nidi Bóhólníihii shadi'ní'ą́ą́ ládą́ą́' haada nízahjį' nihił naháshtą́ą dooleełgo shił chohoo'į́ .
PRED:	“ And now , why should I go out to the heights of the church ? No , I will be able to go to the place of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	This time I do n't want to make just a short visit and then go right on . I want to come and stay awhile , if the Lord will let me .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' nihił dahóózhǫǫdígíishą' háájí silį́į́' ? Háálá íídą́ą́' nihá shił bééhózingo nihaa hashne' , bohónéedzą́ą́ ládą́ą́' nihináá' nidi hadadoohniłgo shaa dadoohnił nít'éé' !
PRED:	“ What did you know when I was ? For when you saw that you were in Egypt , you would know that I am with you ? ”
GOLD:	Where is that joyful and grateful spirit you felt then ? I am sure you would have taken out your own eyes and given them to me if it had been possible .

ID:	2538
INPUT:	Kintaa hada'iiztiingóó t'áá ałtso hodílzingo nahaz'ánígíí íinilaago índa kintaa da'nítiingóó t'áá ałtso wódahgo nahaz'ánígíí íinilaago bik'é nich'į' ni'doolyéłígíí doo nínízinígíí beego doo ałjiłniigi ánít'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	In the streets of the city , the city of Jerusalem will be stored up in the streets of the city , and no one will be able to stand in its streets .
GOLD:	You build your pagan shrines on every street corner and your altars to idols in every square . In fact , you have been worse than a prostitute , so eager for sin that you have not even demanded payment .

ID:	2539
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii kóní , Jį́įgo bee adinídíin dooleełii háá'át'áahgo áyósinii , áádóó tł'ée'go bee dahool'in dooleeł biniyé ooljéé' áádóó sǫ' nídadikahgo áyósinii , índa tónteel yił hááhoniłcha'go yilk'oołígíí dadiits'a'go áyósinii , éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii wolyé .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ The light of the earth will be a light of light , a light from the sky , a light of the sky , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who provides the sun to light the dayand the moon and stars to light the night , and who stirs the sea into roaring waves.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and this is what he says :

ID:	2540
INPUT:	Áko Shííkem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii t'áá ałtso áłah silį́į'go Míllo kin yaa áhídóó danilíinii bił dashdiikai , índa Shííkemgi chéch'il áyah nii'áii bíighahgi Abímelek aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	So Shechem gathered all the citizens of Shechem and set up their places for the temple of Abimelech . So Abimelech rebuilt the tower of Shechem .
GOLD:	Then all the leading citizens of Shechem and Beth-millo called a meeting under the oak beside the pillar at Shechem and made Abimelech their king .

ID:	2541
INPUT:	Wáin deizdidlį́įhii índa tó tsi'na'iiłáii ałtaa nídeídlį́įhii ,
PRED:	Do n't eat the wine of wine and drink wine .
GOLD:	What sorrow for those who are heroes at drinking wineand boast about all the alcohol they can hold .

ID:	2542
INPUT:	Áko Biizáliyel éí atis ahííkaadígíí ashdla'go ahídayiishcha' áádóó náá'áshdla'go t'áá ákónáánát'éego ahínáádayiishcha' .
PRED:	Then Bezalel made a small branch of acacia wood and set it up .
GOLD:	Five of these curtains were joined together to make one long curtain , and the other five were joined to make a second long curtain .

ID:	2543
INPUT:	Áko díí hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní :
PRED:	Then Jesus told them this story :
GOLD:	So Jesus told them this story :

ID:	2544
INPUT:	Áko Síírag éí Néíhor há yizhchį́į́dóó bik'ijį' jiináago naakidi neeznádiin honínáánááhaígíí biyi' haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	After the birth of Reu , Nahor lived another 82 years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Nahor , Serug lived another 200 years and had other sons and daughters .

ID:	2545
INPUT:	Áko yá yi'ííníiłta'go neeznáadi mííl tálent bąąh háá'áhígíí bich'į' niidlóóz ,
PRED:	But when he was ready , he took a large amount of silver , he put it on his behalf .
GOLD:	In the process , one of his debtors was brought in who owed him millions of dollars .

ID:	2546
INPUT:	Ił dahółyée'ii bił íits'a' doo ; bighangi t'áá ałtsoní bee ída'íízįįdgo atíbidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	If you listen to your home , you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	The sound of terror rings in their ears , and even on good days they fear the attack of the destroyer .

ID:	2547
INPUT:	Nít'éé' t'áá áko Sesaríyadę́ę́' diné tált'éego shaa yíl'a'go hooghangi sédáhígi yíkai .
PRED:	So they returned to Caesarea and stayed in the village of Caesarea .
GOLD:	“ Just then three men who had been sent from Caesarea arrived at the house where we were staying .

ID:	2548
INPUT:	Nibe' t'áá áłah éí jádí naakií yizhchíinii nahalin .
PRED:	Your mother is like a gazelle , whose mother is like a gazelle .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle .

ID:	2549
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí aláahgo naat'áanii nihinant'áa doo biniyé Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God néididoołtéełii nídadidoołtééł ; nihik'isóó bitahdę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii nihinant'áa dooleełii nidadoołtééł ; dé'éyóní doo nihinant'á biniyé nídadidoołtéeł da ; jó , éí doo nihik'is nilį́į da .
PRED:	But the king will rule over you in the presence of the Lord your God . He will allow you to serve the Lord your God . He will allow you to serve the king .
GOLD:	If this happens , be sure to select as king the man the Lord your God chooses . You must appoint a fellow Israelite ; he may not be a foreigner .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman díí yiyííkeedígíí Bóhólníihii bąą bił hóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	Solomon was very happy when he heard what the Lord had done .
GOLD:	The Lord was pleased that Solomon had asked for wisdom .

ID:	2551
INPUT:	Nááts'ó'oołdísii naaná'ooghasígi át'éego ał'ąą dine'é doo béédahodzísinii bitahgóó tahonooskaadgo hakéyah t'áá ádzaaí silį́į́' ; ts'ídá doo ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ ch'óoya' át'ée da silį́į́' ; kéyah hózhóní yę́ę t'áá ádzaaí ádajiilaa .
PRED:	When the wind blows through a storm , the nations will run through the desert , and no one can escape . There is no one left to live among the nations .
GOLD:	As with a whirlwind , I scattered them among the distant nations , where they lived as strangers . Their land became so desolate that no one even traveled through it . They turned their pleasant land into a desert . ”

ID:	2552
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ha'át'íida yá'át'éehii bínashídíłkid ? T'áadoo yá'át'éhí da . Diyin God t'éiyá yá'át'éehii nilį́ . Iiná biih deeshááł nínízingo , Diyin God yee has'áanii bik'eh honíł'į́ .
PRED:	“ Why do n't you ask ? ” he asked . “ I 'll tell you what God is good . ”
GOLD:	“ Why ask me about what is good ? ” Jesus replied . “ There is only One who is good . But to answer your question — if you want to receive eternal life , keep the commandments . ”

ID:	2553
INPUT:	Géíza kin haal'áadi Sámson yaa naayáii
PRED:	The Fall of Samson
GOLD:	Samson Carries Away Gaza 's Gates

ID:	2554
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi diné t'óó ahayóí silį́į'go bitsi'ké nidahaazhchį́ ,
PRED:	Many of the earth were born , and many daughters were born to the earth .
GOLD:	Then the people began to multiply on the earth , and daughters were born to them .

ID:	2555
INPUT:	Ayóó'áníínísh'níinii , dooládó' naa dzólníi da , jó'akon . T'áá aaníí , ayóó áníínílnin . Nihitsásk'eh ałdó' hoolcházhí .
PRED:	“ See , my darling , my darling ! See , my darling !
GOLD:	You are so handsome , my love , pleasing beyond words ! The soft grass is our bed ;

ID:	2556
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jesus éí diné haal'áhígíí índa bídahooł'aahii áyidííniid ,
PRED:	Jesus said to the disciples and his disciples ,
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples ,

ID:	2557
INPUT:	Díí tó abid wáin bee naagéhígíí ádaaniidígo wáin bii' hadadeelbįįd nít'éé' , shoo , nidahaazdláád , índa doo deeghánídę́ę́' niikaígíí bąą nihi'éé' áádóó nihikee'da ałdó' dadiizhaazh lá .
PRED:	The wine was filled with wine , wine filled with wine , and the wine was filled with wine , and the water was filled with violence .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	2558
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éii bee de áhooshłaa , áádóó há honít'i'góó k'íhoneezláago áhodeeshłííł ; shikin hadaas'áago ádazhdoolííł , áádóó shits'ą́ą́' daasnáanii nályééh ádingo t'áá jíík'eh béédazhdidoochił , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will punish the righteous , and I will punish them for their sins . I will destroy them , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	I will raise up Cyrus to fulfill my righteous purpose , and I will guide his actions.He will restore my city and free my captive people — without seeking a reward ! I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2559
INPUT:	Ana'í bidiltłish t'áá ałtsodę́ę'go nihich'į' deidées'á áádóó yéé' t'áá ałtsodę́ę'go hólónígíí biniinaa t'áadoo háajį' dah nidaahkaí índa atiingóó t'áadoo nidaahkaí .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of all the armies of the earth . Do n't be afraid of the city until you do n't worry about it .
GOLD:	Do n't go out to the fields ! Do n't travel on the roads ! The enemy 's sword is everywhereand terrorizes us at every turn !

ID:	2560
INPUT:	Áko t'áá aná'át'ááh bik'eh kin haal'áhídóó ch'ééjídááh .
PRED:	So they went back to the city of the city .
GOLD:	That evening Jesus and the disciples left the city .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	Társhish bitsi' nílíinii , nikéyah biyi'góó tooh nílínígi át' éego wó'ąninééh , háálá t'áadoo t'ą́ą́' kónánódle'í da .
PRED:	Listen , O daughter of Tarshish , O daughter of Tarshish , for there is no one left .
GOLD:	Come , people of Tarshish , sweep over the land like the flooding Nile , for Tyre is defenseless .

ID:	2562
INPUT:	Áádóó ánááshidoo'niid , Shik'ijį' yiizįįh , baa nánooshkąąh ; shiyíłhé , háálá yéego ti'hooshníihgo t'ahdii hinishná .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Get up , for I am still alive . ”
GOLD:	“ Then he begged me , ‘ Come over here and put me out of my misery , for I am in terrible pain and want to die . '

ID:	2563
INPUT:	yínííł naagháii niidlį́į nidi , t'áá áłahjį' bił hózhóonii niidlį́ ; té'é'į́ niidlį́į nidi , lą'í da'at'į́įgo ádeile'ii niidlį́ ; t'áadoo nihee hólónída nidi , t'áá ałtsoní bee hólóonii niidlį́ .
PRED:	We are full of joy , but we are not rich in poverty . We are not worthy of poverty , but we are not right .
GOLD:	Our hearts ache , but we always have joy . We are poor , but we give spiritual riches to others . We own nothing , and yet we have everything .

ID:	2564
INPUT:	Mt . 15 : <unk>
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Yeast of the Pharisees and Herod

ID:	2565
INPUT:	Bíldad éí , Diyin God áníinii doo haada yit'ée da , ní
PRED:	Bildad 's Third Response to Bildad
GOLD:	Bildad 's First Response to Job

ID:	2566
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí ak'ahígíí bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidiłi' doo , nidi ajéíts'iinígíí éí Éran áádóó biye'ké daabí doo .
PRED:	The priest will burn the fat of the altar on the altar and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	Then the priest will burn the fat on the altar , but the breast will belong to Aaron and his descendants .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	Nít'éé' asdzání hóyáanii léi' kin haal'áhídę́ę́' yéego haadzíi'go ání , Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , nánihooshkąąh , Jó'ab áháníjį' shich'į' nidoogáałgo bich'į' hadeesdzih .
PRED:	A wise woman from the town said , “ Listen to me , and I will answer you .
GOLD:	But a wise woman in the town called out to Joab , “ Listen to me , Joab . Come over here so I can talk to you . ”

ID:	2568
INPUT:	Hwe'oodlą' t'áadoo hats'ą́ą́' niitł'áhí Diyin God yee há nihoní'ánígíí t'áádóo nídí nijólí , áko Diyin God baa hojiniihgo hwe'oodlą' bee hadziil dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	And because of faith , God was very old , and he received the faith of God . And God was very gracious to him .
GOLD:	Abraham never wavered in believing God 's promise . In fact , his faith grew stronger , and in this he brought glory to God .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' hóyée'go bá haasdziih doo , éí Diyin God doo hóyée'go bá haadzíí'góó ? Ha'át'éegoshą' hóyée'go bá hadeesdzih , éí Diyin God doo hóyée'go bá haadzíí'góó ?
PRED:	“ Why are you cursed ? What is God who has a curse to curse God ?
GOLD:	But how can I curse thosewhom God has not cursed ? How can I condemn thosewhom the Lord has not condemned ?

ID:	2570
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad t'áá aaníinii áádóó t'áádóo nídíii ádeiilyaa danohsingo éí Abímelek aláahgo naat'áanii ádaohłaago áádóó Jerabéíyal índa bighandóó danilíinii yá'át'éhígi bich'į' ádaohdzaago , éí yaa naayáhígíí bik'ehgo baa nisoohkai ládą́ą́' yá'át'éhígi lá ádaohdzaa ni ,
PRED:	“ And now , ” Abimelech said , “ you are not ashamed of all the other kings and the other kings and the kings of Baal . You have done what you have done to Baal and what you have done .
GOLD:	Jotham continued , “ Now make sure you have acted honorably and in good faith by making Abimelech your king , and that you have done right by Gideon and all of his descendants . Have you treated him with the honor he deserves for all he accomplished ?

ID:	2571
INPUT:	Áko díí bee ééhózinii níla' bikáa' doo , áádóó bee ééhániihii nítáa'gi bikáa' doo , háálá Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii yee Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' háánihíí'eezh .
PRED:	“ You will make a covenant with your hand , for the Lord brought you out of Egypt , for he brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	This ceremony will be like a mark branded on your hand or your forehead . It is a reminder that the power of the Lord 's mighty hand brought us out of Egypt . ”

ID:	2572
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Neisíyeelgo baa neiseełígíí shił bééhodoozįįłgi bik'ee nisináshtłi' .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ I 'm going to see what I 've seen . ”
GOLD:	he said , “ I have had a dream that deeply troubles me , and I must know what it means . ”

ID:	2573
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi ni éí doo kin shá ádíílíił da , nidi niye' t'áá ni ná yizhchínígíí éí kin íidoolíiłgo bii' shízhi' baa ha'niih doo , níi ni' .
PRED:	“ But do n't say , ‘ You are my sister , but you will praise your name . '
GOLD:	but you are not the one to do it . One of your own sons will build the Temple to honor me . '

ID:	2574
INPUT:	nahałtin baa náhwiilzhíishgo níłtsą́ nihaa hidish'aah doo , áko kéyah bikáá'góó nída'nit'į́įh doo , áádóó tsin bineest'ą' bąąh nídahoodleeł doo .
PRED:	I have seen the sun , and there will be no fruit . I will plant the trees of the earth , and the trees will produce fruit .
GOLD:	I will send you the seasonal rains . The land will then yield its crops , and the trees of the field will produce their fruit .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	Áyąądą́ą́' diné t'áá háiida t'ááká Diyin God bibee ajooba' t'áadoo shóyoołt'eeh da lágo , baa dahonohsą́ą le' , índa ayi' nahodi<unk> bihétł'óól nihich'į' hodiyółnáałgo nohłą́'í nihółchǫǫh lágo .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of God . Do n't be afraid of you . Do n't be afraid of you , and if you are afraid of God 's hand , take it into your hand .
GOLD:	Look after each other so that none of you fails to receive the grace of God . Watch out that no poisonous root of bitterness grows up to trouble you , corrupting many .

ID:	2576
INPUT:	K'ad ánísht'éii áádóó baa naasháhígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé Tíkakas , nihik'is ayóó'óó'níinii índa ba'ahódlíigo Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'ígíí t'áá ałtso yee nihił hodoolnih .
PRED:	Now I am telling you what I am doing , and I will show you everything I am doing .
GOLD:	To bring you up to date , Tychicus will give you a full report about what I am doing and how I am getting along . He is a beloved brother and faithful helper in the Lord 's work .

ID:	2577
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Shoo , doo yá'ádaashóonii díí haz'áníjį' índa ákwii kéédahojit'ínígíí hak'ijį' kódeeshłííł ; éí hóyée'go á hada'iisdzíi'ii t'áá át'é naaltsoos bik'inídaháasdzogo ályaa yę́ę , Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í binááł yéélta'ii hak'ijį' kódeeshłííł .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The wicked are recorded in The Book of the wicked , and these are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	‘ This is what the Lord says : I am going to bring disaster on this city and its people . All the curses written in the scroll that was read to the king of Judah will come true .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel yíká ádííniid
PRED:	Samuel Speaks to Samuel
GOLD:	The

ID:	2579
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bí éí naaldzilgo bíla' dínéesna'jį' Filístiya dine'é neistseed , áko diltłish yidiniiltsood , áko éí bijį́ Bóhólníihii éí ayóó át'éego hwee ak'eh deesdlį́į́' , áko naalye'é bąąh da'oogą́'ígíí t'éiyá biniyé diné hakéé' t'ą́ą́' nákai .
PRED:	So he broke the bones of the Philistines , and he killed the sword that day of the Philistines . So the Lord struck the plunder and killed the plunder that day .
GOLD:	He killed Philistines until his hand was too tired to lift his sword , and the Lord gave him a great victory that day . The rest of the army did not return until it was time to collect the plunder !

ID:	2580
INPUT:	Áko nááda'iiłniihii éí deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádadííniidgo Ízrel dine'é hadadeeshghaazh . Ákódzaago éí deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí diists'ą́'ígíí deidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá áko ayóó át'éego hadadeeshghaazhgo kin haal'áhígíí ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inii naa'adahałdaasgo éí bitis gó'ąą Ízrel dine'é łá'í nítínígo t'áá k'éhézdon yah ííjéé' , áko kin haal'áhígíí deisná .
PRED:	When the priests heard the blast of the ram 's horn , they cried out to the people of Israel . When they heard the sound of the ram 's horn , the people of Israel heard that the sound of their enemies had fled .
GOLD:	When the people heard the sound of the rams ' horns , they shouted as loud as they could . Suddenly , the walls of Jericho collapsed , and the Israelites charged straight into the town and captured it .

ID:	2581
INPUT:	Asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é ádinii t'áadoo bide ádahwíínóhsiní .
PRED:	“ Do not cheat a widow or a widow or a orphans .
GOLD:	“ You must not exploit a widow or an orphan .

ID:	2582
INPUT:	Yisnááh daniidlį́įgo naadiin ashdla' náhááh góne' t'óó hááhaidóó neeznáágóó yoołkáałgo , kin haal'áagi kééhojit'íinii hak'eh hodeesdlį́į́'dóó bik'ijį' dį́į́'ts'áadah nááhaidi t'áá éí bijį́ Bóhólníihii shik'i diilnii'go áadi shił ní'áázh .
PRED:	On March 7 years , during the fifth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , when he returned to the city of the Lord 's captivity , I will bring my fury on the day of my enemies .
GOLD:	On April 28 , during the twenty-fifth year of our captivity — fourteen years after the fall of Jerusalem — the Lord took hold of me .

ID:	2583
INPUT:	Áádóó ánáázhdoo'niid , T'áá shǫǫdí , Bóhólníihii , t'áadoo shá díílnihí , áko t'ááłáhídi hanáádeesdzih . Ákwe'é neeznáá jilt'éego yik'íníyáagoshą' ? Áko ánáádoo'niid , Neeznáá jilt'éego biniinaa doo áhodeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	“ Please do n't be afraid ! ” he said . “ Lord , do n't you want me to speak for ten days ? ” So he said , “ I will certainly die ! ” So he replied , “ I will certainly die . ”
GOLD:	Finally , Abraham said , “ Lord , please do n't be angry with me if I speak one more time . Suppose only ten are found there ? ” And the Lord replied , “ Then I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten . ”

ID:	2584
INPUT:	Tł'iish bitsoo' hááhaashchii'ii nahalingo bitsoo' dadeení áádóó biwooshtł'ah góne' tł'iish bik'asda' naaziid . Síilah .
PRED:	I 'm like a lion from the bottomless pit ; I 'm deeply troubled by the mouth of the bottomless pit .
GOLD:	Their tongues sting like a snake ; the venom of a viper drips from their lips.Interlude

ID:	2585
INPUT:	Áádóó Zedekáíyah haye'ké t'áá hanááł nideistseedgo hó éí hanáá' hadeiznilgo béésh łitsoii da'ahólzha'í yee hoda'aztł'ǫ́ǫgo Bábilangóó hoł daaskai .
PRED:	They captured Zedekiah 's sons and bound him in bronze chains . They bound him in bronze chains and bound him in bronze chains .
GOLD:	They made Zedekiah watch as they slaughtered his sons . Then they gouged out Zedekiah 's eyes , bound him in bronze chains , and led him away to Babylon .

ID:	2586
INPUT:	Bikéyahgóó eda'alyaii ałdó' t'áadoo bee danéelą́'í da ; t'áá bí yindaashnishii yich'į' yaa áńdaat'įįh ; éí t'áá bí ádayiilaa nít'éé' .
PRED:	He made the idols of the land ; he created the people who lived in their own land .
GOLD:	Their land is full of idols ; the people worship things they have madewith their own hands .

ID:	2587
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii kóníłní , Bérak yinílyéii ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says to you , Baruch :

ID:	2588
INPUT:	Adinídíín t'áá aaníinii éí diné ts'ídá t'áá ałtso bá azhdiníłdíin doogo nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' jiníyá ;
PRED:	The light of the light is light ; the light shines on the earth .
GOLD:	The one who is the true light , who gives light to everyone , was coming into the world .

ID:	2589
INPUT:	Áko tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' ahíłnaashiijí nidahaazná . Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ągo ałk'iijée'go Ízrel dine'é éí Síriya dine'é t'áá ni' naajeehígíí t'ááłáhídi míilgo t'áá ła'a jį́ nideistseed .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the second day , the Israelite army gathered up and killed each day of the Israelite army . So the men of Israel killed each day .
GOLD:	The two armies camped opposite each other for seven days , and on the seventh day the battle began . The Israelites killed 100,000 Aramean foot soldiers in one day .

ID:	2590
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' yoołkáłígíí biyi' ídahooł'aahii lą'í yileełgo , Jew dine'é danilíinii Gríik bizaad yee yádaałti'ii saad dahasłį́į'go Hííbrew dine'é yaa nídaast'įįd , háálá bitahdóó asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdígíí t'áá ákwíí jį́ bitaa nída'a'nihii doo baa ádahayą́ą da hazlį́į́' .
PRED:	A few days later , Paul sent many Jews to preach the Good News . Many Jews were afraid of the Jews , and they could n't be afraid of the Jews .
GOLD:	But as the believers rapidly multiplied , there were rumblings of discontent . The Greek-speaking believers complained about the Hebrew-speaking believers , saying that their widows were being discriminated against in the daily distribution of food .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii bá tsin neheeshjíí' éí shádi'ááhjí naadiingo noolkáal dooígíí ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Place the frames of the Tabernacle , the frames of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Make twenty of these frames to support the curtains on the south side of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	Áko Peter tł'óo'di kin binaagi haz'ą́ągo biná'ástł'iní góne' dzizdá . Nít'éé' asdzání naal'a'í kóníigo hach'į' niníyá , Ni la' ałdó' Jesus Gáliliidóóígíí bił nanikai ni' .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter went into the courtyard of the Temple and told him , “ You are afraid of Jesus . You are going to Galilee with Jesus . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard . A servant girl came over and said to him , “ You were one of those with Jesus the Galilean . ”

ID:	2593
INPUT:	T'áá háiida diné doo yá'áshóonii yá'át'éehgo yá yáłti'ii áádóó diné t'áá ákogi át'éii baa níjít'íinii t'áá ájíłah Bóhólníihii doo hółdin da .
PRED:	Those who listen to the wicked , and those who follow the Lord .
GOLD:	Acquitting the guilty and condemning the innocent — both are detestable to the Lord .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	Nibik'ehgo iináanii bee nihá hwiinił'a'go haleebee deíníikáah dooleeł .
PRED:	We will follow your commandments , and we will follow your commandments .
GOLD:	You have charged usto keep your commandments carefully .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , diníigo handziih , Ííjip dine'é binanit'a'í nílíinii , Féro nik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon ; na'ashǫ́'ii łibáhítsoh táyi' sínítíinii , Náil tooh nílínígíí éí t'áá shí ádá áshłaa , diní .
PRED:	“ Tell me , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the enemy of Egypt . I am the enemy of the Nile , the dragon , the dragon , the dragon , and I am the Nile .
GOLD:	Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Pharaoh , king of Egypt — you great monster , lurking in the streams of the Nile.For you have said , ‘ The Nile River is mine ; I made it for myself . '

ID:	2596
INPUT:	Jó , nít'éé' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii nideistseed yę́ę ba'áłchíní danohłį́įgo t'áá nihí ádaa dahołne' .
PRED:	You have killed the prophets of your prophets , and you have killed your children .
GOLD:	“ But in saying that , you testify against yourselves that you are indeed the descendants of those who murdered the prophets .

ID:	2597
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' Amazáíyah éí Íídam dine'é íísdįįdę́ę́' nádzáago Síyer dine'é bidiyin dabidi'níinii néiníjaa'go t'áá bí bidiyin danilį́į dooleełgo dah deiznil áádóó nináhá<unk> go yich'į' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááyiiłniih nít'éé' .
PRED:	After this , Uzziah led his army against Edom , who had been killed by the god of Edom , who had been exiled to the gods of Edom . He offered sacrifices to the gods of Edom and burned incense .
GOLD:	When King Amaziah returned from slaughtering the Edomites , he brought with him idols taken from the people of Seir . He set them up as his own gods , bowed down in front of them , and offered sacrifices to them !

ID:	2598
INPUT:	Hatahdóó hanáásh'nildóó bik'ijį' baa a'ááh nánísdzin doo , áádóó diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo daabíi'ii índa bikéyah baa náhideesh'ish .
PRED:	And I will take a covenant with them , and I will bring them back to the land I have given them .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	Nidi t'ah doo shi'dichí yę́ędą́ą́' Diyin God ats'áshiníłtį́ , áádóó bibee ajooba' yinahjį' shíká ádííniid . Éí t'áá bí íinízingo
PRED:	But before I was in the presence of God , he said to me , “ I am faithful to God . ”
GOLD:	But even before I was born , God chose me and called me by his marvelous grace . Then it pleased him

ID:	2600
INPUT:	Łį́į́' bik'i nida'ołt'i' áádóó łį́į́' bikáá' haohjeeh ; béésh ch'ah danihich'ahgo łį́į́' nihił naazį́ ; tsiidétáán bik'i nidazdidlaadgo ádaohłe' áádóó béésh éé' bee hadadohne' .
PRED:	Take your horses and horses , and put your head on your head . Put your armor on your head , and put it on your head .
GOLD:	Harness the horses , and mount the stallions.Take your positions.Put on your helmets.Sharpen your spears , and prepare your armor .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' David éí Ízrel dine'é binazhnit'áago dízdiin nááhai : Hííbran kin haal'áagi nazhnit'áago tsosts'id nááhai áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nazhnit'áago tádiindóó ba'aan táá' nááhai .
PRED:	David reigned in Hebron for forty years . He reigned in Jerusalem eight years .
GOLD:	David had reigned over Israel for forty years , seven of them in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	Azhą́ ádił oodzíí' biniinaa nihits'íís daninée nidi , Christ t'áá aaníí nihiyi' hólǫ́ǫgo , ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádanoht'é ádanihi'diilyaaígíí bąą Níłch'i Diyinii nihii' hólǫ́ǫgo dahinohná .
PRED:	Even if you have sinned , you will die , but you will die because of the Spirit of our sinful nature .
GOLD:	And Christ lives within you , so even though your body will die because of sin , the Spirit gives you life because you have been made right with God .

ID:	2603
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá nahont'inee éí baa nisíníyá , nidi shí éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso binááł t'áá jį́įgo ákódeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will show you everything you have done , but I will show you all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You did it secretly , but I will make this happen to you openly in the sight of all Israel . ”

ID:	2604
INPUT:	Háí lá Diyin God nilį́ ? Bóhólníihii lą́ą . Háísh tsé niłdzilii nilį́ ? NihiDiyin God lą́ą .
PRED:	Who is the Lord ? Who is the Rock of God ? Who is our God ?
GOLD:	For who is God except the Lord ? Who but our God is a solid rock ?

ID:	2605
INPUT:	Nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bik'ehgo shiyííłááł , háálá éí baa shił nihoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	I delight in your commands , for your commands are my commands .
GOLD:	Make me walk along the path of your commands , for that is where my happiness is found .

ID:	2606
INPUT:	Áko Rúben ánááhodoo'niid , Doo bidił doogoh da ; kwe'é halgaigi t'óó a'áán góyaa adahołhan , áko doo atídadoohłíił da ; dabílák'ee hadeeshtéełgo yisdádeeshtééł , áádóó bizhé'é bił baa nídeesht'ash dziniizį́į́' .
PRED:	Then Reuben replied , “ You will not stumble and fall into a field , and I will not let them go into the field . I will let them go to the ground . ”
GOLD:	“ Why should we shed any blood ? Let 's just throw him into this empty cistern here in the wilderness . Then he 'll die without our laying a hand on him. ” Reuben was secretly planning to rescue Joseph and return him to his father .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	Jesus Christ éí David bits'ą́ą́dóó oochíiłii nilį́ , áádóó David éí Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́dóó oochíiłii nilį́ . Kót'éego Jesus Christ bizází yę́ę náás da'ahílchį́ .
PRED:	This is the son of David , and he is the son of David . This is the son of David , the son of David .
GOLD:	This is a record of the ancestors of Jesus the Messiah , a descendant of David and of Abraham :

ID:	2608
INPUT:	áádóó ákóne' Téímar éí Píírez índa Zíírah , Júdah bá jishchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Píírez éí Hézran há yizhchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Hézran éí Ram há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	These were the father of Tamar , Tamar , whose mother was the father of Judah . The father of Er was the father of Er .
GOLD:	Judah was the father of Perez and Zerah ( whose mother was Tamar ) .Perez was the father of Hezron.Hezron was the father of Ram .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	Áádóó kin haal'á ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inii bee hadaastł'inii naakits'áadah lá , áko éí bikáa'gi Dibé Yázhí nilíinii bá daal'aadii naakits'áadahgoígíí dabízhi' t'áá da'níł'ąą bee bik'ida'ashchį́ .
PRED:	He gave twelve towns to the towns of the city of the twelve towns of the city , and twelve one-year-old male lambs are the names of the twelve disciples .
GOLD:	The wall of the city had twelve foundation stones , and on them were written the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb .

ID:	2610
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego yinaha'áhígíí éí diné bi'áháchį' doo yee ła'yidoolíił da .
PRED:	For God will not accuse us of justice , for he will not be angry with justice .
GOLD:	Human anger does not produce the righteousness God desires .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	Ákoshą' hait'é ? Jó , Ízrel dine'é hádaat'íinii t'áadoo shódayoost'e' da . Diyin God atah yiyiizlá'ígíí t'éiyá shódayoost'e' ; łahjį'ígíí éí doo da'diits'a' da daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	But how can the people of Israel be saved ? The people of Israel have no plunder . But the rest of the plunder of God 's people have been taken away .
GOLD:	So this is the situation : Most of the people of Israel have not found the favor of God they are looking for so earnestly . A few have — the ones God has chosen — but the hearts of the rest were hardened .

ID:	2612
INPUT:	Nidi dáádiníbaal bine' góne' , doodaii' bikáá' náá'iiniihí doo bich'į' nizhdoogáał da , háálá hąąh dahaz'ą́ , áko éí shihodiyingo nahaz'ánígi doo nihozhdiyoołchxǫǫł da ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo dazhdiyingo áhwíínísin .
PRED:	But I will not defile the altar , for I will not defile my sanctuary . I am the Lord , and I will not destroy the sanctuary of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	Yet because of his physical defect , he may not enter the room behind the inner curtain or approach the altar , for this would defile my holy places . I am the Lord who makes them holy . ”

ID:	2613
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Clears the Temple

ID:	2614
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii éí yá'át'ééh ááníłígíí áádóó doo ádił ni'iisíihii t'áá ádin .
PRED:	It is good to the earth , and it is good and good .
GOLD:	Not a single person on earth is always good and never sins .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	<unk> dóó dah náádii'náago <unk> kah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left Punon and camped at Punon .
GOLD:	They left Terah and camped at Mithcah .

ID:	2616
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne'é éí nááda'iiłniihii bá haz'ánígíí áádóó nitsaago haz'ánígíí áyiilaa índa bidáádadilkał áyiilaago béésh łitsoii yik'ídeisti' .
PRED:	He made the courtyard of the priests and the courtyard of the courtyard . He overlaid them with bronze , and he overlaid them with bronze .
GOLD:	He then built a courtyard for the priests , and also the large outer courtyard . He made doors for the courtyard entrances and overlaid them with bronze .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	Nidi dibé yázhí doo át'íínígíí naatseedjį' eedlóozii nahonishłin nít'éé' . Haa'íyee' tsin sikaadígíí bineest'ą' t'áá bił ádadiildįįł ; haa'íyee' dahináanii bitahdóó dadiyiilyééł , áko bízhi' doo bénínááhániih da doo , daaníigo shik'ijį' danilį́įgo shindahazgizígíí doo shił bééhózin da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But if I 'm not a shepherd , I 'm not a shepherd to cut off a tree with a tree , it would not be cut off into a tree . They will not be able to kill me .
GOLD:	I was like a lamb being led to the slaughter . I had no idea that they were planning to kill me ! “ Let 's destroy this man and all his words , ” they said . “ Let 's cut him down , so his name will be forgotten forever . ”

ID:	2618
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Éí bąą shá naal'a'í nílíinii Jéíkab , t'áadoo náníldzidí , índa Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , t'áadoo nitsidaohkaí , háálá doo deeghánídę́ę́' yisdánánihideesh'nił , áádóó niha'áłchíní éí kéyah yii' yisnááh danilį́į́dę́ę́' yisdádeeshnił , áádóó Jéíkab nídoodáałgo bił hodéezyéelgo hanályį́įh doo , índa ła'da doo bił yéé' ánáhodoodlíił da , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Do n't be afraid of Jacob , my servant Jacob , for I will rescue Israel from the distant lands of Israel.For I will be able to save you from exile , and no one will be able to save them . ”
GOLD:	“ So do not be afraid , Jacob , my servant ; do not be dismayed , Israel , ” says the Lord. “ For I will bring you home again from distant lands , and your children will return from their exile.Israel will return to a life of peace and quiet , and no one will terrorize them .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	Áko Paul índa Bárnabas , éí ayóó át'éego bił ałghadazh'dit'áahgo bił na'ahíyádadzisti' , áko Paul áádóó Bárnabas índa náádaała' éí daal'aadii áádóó da'oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii Jerúsalemdi naháaztánígíí díí áhodoo'niidígíí baa nídazhdóot'įįł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ jidookahgo nídahodiinil .
PRED:	As Paul and Barnabas and Barnabas were preaching to Antioch of Syria , some of the apostles and the apostles were standing in Jerusalem . As they were waiting for the church , Paul and Barnabas and Barnabas and the apostles to go to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas disagreed with them , arguing vehemently . Finally , the church decided to send Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem , accompanied by some local believers , to talk to the apostles and elders about this question .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	Áko Heziikáíyah éí hane' nidei'áhí naaltsoos haa deistsoozgo jííłta' , áádóó Heziikáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góde hajiyáago Bóhólníihii bidááhdóó nizhníłtsooz .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah sent this letter to Hezekiah and read it before the Lord . Then Hezekiah went to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	After Hezekiah received the letter from the messengers and read it , he went up to the Lord 's Temple and spread it out before the Lord .

ID:	2621
INPUT:	nidi éí t'óó átsééd nahjį' nizhdiní'ą́ , áádóó á naal'a'í ízh'diilyaago nihokáá' dine'é ahoolchíłígi át'éego ho'dizhchį́ .
PRED:	But when he died , he was born to his servant , he was born to the world .
GOLD:	Instead , he gave up his divine privileges ; he took the humble position of a slaveand was born as a human being.When he appeared in human form ,

ID:	2622
INPUT:	Ákódzaago nahałtinígíí áádóó nílótsoh naałtinígíí índa ni'dilch'ilígíí áhodiilzee'go Féro éí bił bééhoozingo t'ah nááyówehígo ádił náá'ásiih ; bí áádóó bá nidaal'a'í bijéí nááyííłtł'is .
PRED:	When Pharaoh saw that he had been killed , he broke out of the disease and killed all the people of Egypt . He destroyed Pharaoh 's servants and his servants and his servants .
GOLD:	But when Pharaoh saw that the rain , hail , and thunder had stopped , he and his officials sinned again , and Pharaoh again became stubborn .

ID:	2623
INPUT:	Doo honíyáanii wóshdę́ę'go dah diinááh . Bee ak'i'diitįįh bee ádinii kwííłní ,
PRED:	A wise person out from exile , saying , “ This is what it says :
GOLD:	“ Come in with me , ” she urges the simple.To those who lack good judgment , she says ,

ID:	2624
INPUT:	éí hastóí dahóyáanii dabizhé'é yę́ę bits'ą́ą́dóó yaa nidahasne' , áádóó t'áadoo deidínées'į́į' da .
PRED:	The wise have no attention to their ancestors , and the hearts of their ancestors are weary and weary .
GOLD:	And it is confirmed by the reports of wise menwho have heard the same thing from their fathers —

ID:	2625
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad , k'ídinílchíidgo bits'in áádóó bitsį' bidinílchíidgo tídílééh , áko t'áá ninii'jį' níídóodzih .
PRED:	But now , take your hand and put it on your side , and take it away . ”
GOLD:	But reach out and take away his health , and he will surely curse you to your face ! ”

ID:	2626
INPUT:	Jó , Christ t'áá aaníí shiyi'dę́ę́' yáłti'go nihił béédahodoozįįł . Háálá Christ doo adziil yee doo nihich'į' ááníił da , nidi nihitahgóó bibee adziilii yit'íní áyoolííł .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , that Christ will be revealed to you , for he is weak among you .
GOLD:	I will give you all the proof you want that Christ speaks through me . Christ is not weak when he deals with you ; he is powerful among you .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí díí yee atínihidoolííł : nihigod áádóó nihijáád bikáá'góó naałniih łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii índa nihikétł'ááhdóó nihitsiit'áajį' nihaa didoolzhish .
PRED:	And the Lord will strike you with a plague , a skin disease , a skin disease , and a skin disease .
GOLD:	The Lord will cover your knees and legs with incurable boils . In fact , you will be covered from head to foot .

ID:	2628
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ání , Ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaagóó nááda'jiiłniihii índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadiyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' dazhdiłidii éí Mó'ab kéyahgi ádajídingo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	Then the Lord said , “ He will destroy pagan shrines and pagan shrines . He will burn incense in the pagan shrines and fragrant incense to the gods of Moab . ”
GOLD:	“ I will put an end to Moab , ” says the Lord , “ for the people offer sacrifices at the pagan shrines and burn incense to their false gods .

ID:	2629
INPUT:	Éí bąą danihidziil le' , t'áadoo nihąą ninádahaka'í , háálá nihinaanish bideená nihik'idahozhdoodliił .
PRED:	Do n't let us be angry with your enemies , for he will bless us .
GOLD:	But as for you , be strong and courageous , for your work will be rewarded . ”

ID:	2630
INPUT:	Hadásah yineesą́ągo éí hazhé'é yázhígo bitsi' Esther ałdó' wolyé , háálá bizhé'é áádóó bimá neezná . Ch'ikę́ę́h bizhą́ą́ naagháii t'óó dinilgááhí yee' áádóó nizhóní yee' , áko bizhé'é áádóó bimá neezná ; éí bąą Mórdiikai honeesą́ągo t'áá bí bitsi' jílį́įgo áhoolaa .
PRED:	When she saw her father 's daughter , she became the daughter of Esther . She married her father 's mother 's daughter , and she became the daughter of her mother . She was the daughter of her father 's mother .
GOLD:	This man had a very beautiful and lovely young cousin , Hadassah , who was also called Esther . When her father and mother died , Mordecai adopted her into his family and raised her as his own daughter .

ID:	2631
INPUT:	Diné anaa' da'ał'íinii danohłíinii t'áá ánółtso , díí kin haal'áhígíí t'ááłáhídi binínáhkah doo . Ákódaaht'į́įgo hastą́ą́h jį́ adooleeł .
PRED:	“ Son of man , all you people of battle will be accompanied by this day .
GOLD:	You and your fighting men should march around the town once a day for six days .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	Ziilófehad bitsi'ké t'áá aaníígóó hadaasdzíí' ; t'áá aaníí bizhé'é yę́ę bik'is bitahdóó kéyah daahóó' dooígíí hataadidíí'aał , áko bizhé'é yę́ę bikéyah baa dadidíí'ááł .
PRED:	“ The descendants of Zelophehad will give your daughters to the tribe of Zelophehad , and give them land to your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ The claim of the daughters of Zelophehad is legitimate . You must give them a grant of land along with their father 's relatives . Assign them the property that would have been given to their father .

ID:	2633
INPUT:	Jó , nidine'é Jéíkab ba'áłchíní yóó'adííní'ą́ , háálá ha'a'aahdę́ę́' doo t'áá aaníígóó nahagháii hwii' hadadeezbin áádóó Filístiya dine'é nahalingo náásgóó áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii danilį́ índa dé'éyóní ba'áłchíní yił da'ahótą' .
PRED:	For the people of Jacob have abandoned their children , for they will be cut off from the distant lands of Israel . They will be like foreigners living among themselves .
GOLD:	For the Lord has rejected his people , the descendants of Jacob , because they have filled their land with practices from the Eastand with sorcerers , as the Philistines do.They have made alliances with pagans .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	Nidi nihí hak'éí nohłíinii t'áádóo nídí dahodiyoołhééł ; dahodiyoołhééł biniyé nihí alą́ąjį' dahodoohsił áádóó índa diné t'áá ałtso dahodoosił .
PRED:	But do n't be afraid of your relatives , your relatives will kill you . You will kill him and kill everyone . ”
GOLD:	You must put them to death ! Strike the first blow yourself , and then all the people must join in .

ID:	2635
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Summary of Asa 's Reign

ID:	2636
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' nihinanit'a'í díí saad yee haadzíí' . Ná nidaal'a'í t'áá íiyisí doo ákódaone' át'ée da .
PRED:	“ Why do n't we say to our master ? ” they replied . “ We ca n't tell us what we say . ”
GOLD:	“ What are you talking about ? ” the brothers responded . “ We are your servants and would never do such a thing !

ID:	2637
INPUT:	Adoogishjį' dį́į́' nídeezid hadziih , da' doósh dadohníi da ? Jó , nidi shí ánihidishní , Dadohhaałgo dáda'ak'ehgóó dadóh'į́į́' , háálá da'diigaii , áko k'ad agizhjį' ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	“ Do n't you say , ‘ Do n't you say , ‘ I tell you the meaning of your sinful nature ? ' For the time is near , and the time is near .
GOLD:	You know the saying , ‘ Four months between planting and harvest . ' But I say , wake up and look around . The fields are already ripe for harvest .

ID:	2638
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' nihich'į' hahásdzíí' , nidi bich'į' hoolzhish , hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' doo nihich'į' hanáádeesdzih da , nidi t'áá bééhózínígo aTaa' bee nihił hodeeshnih .
PRED:	I will tell you everything I have told you , but I will not tell you the truth , but I will not tell you the Father , but I will tell you the Father .
GOLD:	“ I have spoken of these matters in figures of speech , but soon I will stop speaking figuratively and will tell you plainly all about the Father .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	Háálá nik'i hodii'áanii t'ah naat'áanii bich'į' nił yi'ashgo hazhó'ó bił aha'díí'nít'ą́ągo néididoochił , doodaii' éí ánihwii'aahii yaa nidoolóós , áádóó ánihwii'aahii yah i'iiníiłii yaa nidoołtééł , áko índa yah i'iiníiłii yah andoołt'eeł .
PRED:	For the king will hand you over to the king 's decrees and regulations . If you do , you will release a person to death , you will be healed , and you will be healed . ”
GOLD:	When you are on the way to court with your accuser , try to settle the matter before you get there . Otherwise , your accuser may drag you before the judge , who will hand you over to an officer , who will throw you into prison .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	Ałtso niyázhníłti'go télii biyaats'iin nahgóó ajiyííłxan . Áko ákwe'é Réí<unk> hai hoolyée doo , jidííniid .
PRED:	When he saw that he had gone , he threw his donkey away his donkey into the night . So he named Tamar .
GOLD:	When he finished his boasting , he threw away the jawbone ; and the place was named Jawbone Hill .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	Jiiháshafat éí Ófer kéyahgóó óola bíká dazhdooł'oł biniyé Társhishdóó tsinaa'eeł ál'ínígi át'éego ádajiilaa , nidi t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ dah dazhdiił'éel da , háálá t'áá Ííziyan-gííber kin haal'á binaashiidi tsinaa'eeł hats'ą́ą́' nidahaastǫ' .
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat made a gold cry of gold from Cyprus , a group of gold that is left by the ship of Tarshish , which means “ The people of Edom is broken , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat also built a fleet of trading ships to sail to Ophir for gold . But the ships never set sail , for they met with disaster in their home port of Ezion-geber .

ID:	2642
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́įdi ádidííniił , Bóhólníihii bich'į' ahééh nínízin ; bízhi' yínízhíigo baa honiih ; diné bitahgóó yaa naagháii baa yáníłti'go bízhi' ts'ídá ayóó át'éii baa hólne' .
PRED:	On that day you will say to the Lord , ‘ Give thanks to the name of the Lord , for everyone who calls on the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	In that wonderful day you will sing : “ Thank the Lord ! Praise his name ! Tell the nations what he has done.Let them know how mighty he is !

ID:	2643
INPUT:	Kin ál'į́ dayiichįįhígíí índa kin ál'į́ át'é danízinii éí tsé hadahaasnilígíí áádóó kin bá daní'áhígíí índa bita' nidaaz'áhígíí yá tsin neheeshjíí' nideidiyoołnihgo Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii éí kin bąąh nida<unk> xǫ'ígóó hasht'éédeidoodlííł biniyé béeso yaa deiznil .
PRED:	The idols of the builders , the builders , the builders , the builders , the builders , and the city of Judah .
GOLD:	They hired carpenters and builders , who purchased finished stone for the walls and timber for the rafters and beams . They restored what earlier kings of Judah had allowed to fall into ruin .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' nahadlá dooleełgi bee na'nitin
PRED:	A Call to Faith
GOLD:	Instructions about Worship

ID:	2645
INPUT:	Áádóó asdzání éí tó hahadleeh hahasdzánígíí yik'é'ésti'go naadą́ą́' haaltseedgo yik'i neisas , áko doo bééhózin da .
PRED:	But the woman knew that she was covered with water , and it was hidden from her menstrual impurity .
GOLD:	The man 's wife put a cloth over the top of the well and scattered grain on it to dry in the sun ; so no one suspected they were there .

ID:	2646
INPUT:	Ákondi yóó'adashidoo'ą́ągo diyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' nidahohłáá nít'éé' ; éí bąą doo yisdánáánihideeshnił da .
PRED:	But you refused to abandon me , and you refused to abandon me .
GOLD:	Yet you have abandoned me and served other gods . So I will not rescue you anymore .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	Asdzání jílíinii jidéesxéelgo t'áá aaníí óhojíłníihgo íhwiizhdooł'ááł .
PRED:	If a woman does not object on her head , it will be cursed .
GOLD:	Women should learn quietly and submissively .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	Áko deenásts'aa' hadaałt'éii dibé bitahdę́ę́' nídidíílóosgo bą́ą́h aníłínígíí bik'ehgo doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii át'éego náá'iiłniihii bich'į' kózhdoolííł , áko náá'iiłniihii éí há bee k'énáhoodǫǫłgo nááhániihii t'áadoo baa ákozníziní doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdígíí biniyé há néidiyoołnihgo há yóó'anídidoot'ááł .
PRED:	“ If you present a young goat as a guilt offering , bring it to the priest , the priest will purify you from the guilt offering , making you right with the priest , and you will be forgiven .
GOLD:	For a guilt offering , you must bring to the priest your own ram with no defects , or you may buy one of equal value . Through this process the priest will purify you from your unintentional sin , making you right with the Lord , and you will be forgiven .

ID:	2649
INPUT:	Áko John bá naal'a'í dah nídiit'áazhgo , Jesus éí áłah ílínígíí yich'į' John baa ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní , Ha'át'íishą' dadínóoł'įįłgo honoojíígóó nidasoohkai ? Lók'aa' níyol bighádígíí daats'í ?
PRED:	When John 's servant heard John , he went to John and began to speak to him . “ Are you going to escape ? ” he asked . “ Are you going to see the wind ? ”
GOLD:	After John 's disciples left , Jesus began talking about him to the crowds . “ What kind of man did you go into the wilderness to see ? Was he a weak reed , swayed by every breath of wind ?

ID:	2650
INPUT:	bii' tá'ádígisí óola bee ádaalyaii tádiin , bii' tá'ádígisí náánáła' béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaii ałdó' dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan neeznáá áádóó łeets'aa' náádaała' éí daamiilgo ádanéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	He also brought the gold basins , and he also made of pure gold .
GOLD:	gold bowls30silver bowls410other items1,000

ID:	2651
INPUT:	Íífreiyim éí béégashiitsa'ii yízhǫǫdígíí nahojílingo oolch'ííh hoł ayóó áhoot'éego bąą hazéédí'déeshtį́į́ł . Íífreiyim azaatł'óól bee nahashło' doo ; Júdah éí nihozhdiyoołdlał ; Jéíkab t'áá bí ádá ak'i ni'dooshoł .
PRED:	“ I will see the shepherd of Israel like a shepherd , like a flock of shepherd , like a shepherd , but I will tear down the branches of Judah.I will tear down the branches of Ephraim . ”
GOLD:	“ Israel is like a trained heifer treading out the grain — an easy job she loves.But I will put a heavy yoke on her tender neck.I will force Judah to pull the plowand Israel to break up the hard ground .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	Nidi Diné Silį́į'ii bits'ádi'nílíidgo índa diyingo nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso yił yíkaigo , áadi índa bikáá'dóó nahat'áii bits' ádi'nílíidii yikáá'dóó dah dínóodaał .
PRED:	But the Son of Man will come from the throne of the angels , and all the angels will come to meet him .
GOLD:	“ But when the Son of Man comes in his glory , and all the angels with him , then he will sit upon his glorious throne .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá ádzíłtso Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ááłá'í ch'iyáán dílyinígíí dajííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	All who ate God 's food and ate it .
GOLD:	All of them ate the same spiritual food ,

ID:	2654
INPUT:	Záíyangi Bóhólníihii ayóó át'éii nilį́ . Ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso yiláahgo ayóó át'éii nilį́ .
PRED:	The Lord is greater than all nations , and he is greater than all nations .
GOLD:	The Lord sits in majesty in Jerusalem , exalted above all the nations .

ID:	2655
INPUT:	Éran éí Bóhólníihii binááł bikáá' náá'iiniihí si'áníjį' ch'ééjídáahgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí bá k'ééhoodǫǫłii áńjiil'įįh doo , áádóó dóola yázhí índa tł'ízí bidił ła' náázhdiikáahgo éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bidee' dį́į́'góó deez'áhígíí bąąh áńjiil'įįh doo .
PRED:	Then Aaron must purify the altar in front of the Lord at the altar . Then he must purify the bull and goats . Then he must purify them from the altar .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron will come out to purify the altar that stands before the Lord . He will do this by taking some of the blood from the bull and the goat and putting it on each of the horns of the altar .

ID:	2656
INPUT:	Ásher dine'é nilíinii bidine'é náás ahoolchíiłii éí ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí dabizhé'é yę́ę yada'áłchíní danilį́įgo éí dabi'déélta'ii dabízhi' bik'ehgo diné naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso ana'al'į́ yídaneel'áanii
PRED:	These were the clans of Asher who were responsible for the tribe of Asher . Their registered troops were listed according to their names .
GOLD:	Asher41,500

ID:	2657
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo bibee até'él'íinii doo yich'į' ninihidiní'ą́ą da , nidi nihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ bee yisdá'iildéehii nihee nidahwiileeh .
PRED:	For we are not jealous of God 's anger , but we are not able to save us from our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	For God chose to save us through our Lord Jesus Christ , not to pour out his anger on us .

ID:	2658
INPUT:	doo nidi ła'da ak'i'diitįįh da , doo nidi ła'da Diyin God bééhodeesįįł nízingo háidéez'į́'í da .
PRED:	No one can understand it , but no one can understand what God says .
GOLD:	No one is truly wise ; no one is seeking God .

ID:	2659
INPUT:	Áko tł'óó'dę́ę́' wóne'di dáń'dítį́híjį' náwóne'di ahééhool'áhí góne' naakigo hooghan éí sin yee dahataałígíí bá haz'ą́ ; náhookǫsjí yah a'atiinígíí éí bich'ijígo ła' hooghan , éí shádi'áahjigo ch'é'étiin ; ła' ha'a'aahjí yah a'atiin bíighahgi náhookǫsjigo ch'é'étiin .
PRED:	The entrance of the gateway on the north side of the gateway . There was one on the north side of the gateway on the north side of the north side of the north gateway .
GOLD:	Inside the inner courtyard were two rooms , one beside the north gateway , facing south , and the other beside the south gateway , facing north .

ID:	2660
INPUT:	Áádóó dé'éyóní ł a' nihitahgi t'óó átsééd kééhat'į́įgo éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii íidoolíiłgo bik'ehgo hoogáałii t'áá bik'ehgo ádoonííł ; dé'éyóní , doodaii' diné kéyahgi yizhchíinii t'áá aheełt'éego bá bik'ehgo hoogáałii t'ááłá'ígíí nihee hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	“ If you are living among you , you must follow the Lord as a foreigner living among you , you must follow the regulations of the Lord .
GOLD:	And if foreigners living among you want to celebrate the Passover to the Lord , they must follow these same decrees and regulations . The same laws apply both to native-born Israelites and to the foreigners living among you . ”

ID:	2661
INPUT:	Azhé'é danilíinii ch'il na'atł'o'ii dadík'ǫ́zhígíí dayooldéél índa áłchíní biwoo' deidínéestseed , diníigo , díí saad nawólta' Ízrel dine'é bikéyah bee háánídzihígíí , ha'át'íí ááhdiní ?
PRED:	They ate the sour wine and sour wine , and they say , “ Where are the people of Israel ? ” They say , “ What 's the land mean ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why do you quote this proverb concerning the land of Israel : ‘ The parents have eaten sour grapes , but their children 's mouths pucker at the taste ' ?

ID:	2662
INPUT:	Tónteel índa tó ditáanii néíníłtseígíí ánít'į́ áádóó bik'é niná'ílyáii tónteel ditáanii bii'góó bá ch'ééhonít'i'go íinilaaígíí ánít'į́ .
PRED:	You give the water to the Dead Sea and the waters of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	Are you not the same today , the one who dried up the sea , making a path of escape through the depthsso that your people could cross over ?

ID:	2663
INPUT:	Áko ałk'éí danilíinii daadziihígíí t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo ba'áłchíní bídaóltą'go t'áá sahdii , bida'asdzą́ą́ t'áá sahdii yínííł danilį́įgo atínídadindleeh doo .
PRED:	“ All of your relatives who are in charge of the family of your family will be defiled , and you will be defiled .
GOLD:	Each of the surviving clans from Judah will mourn separately , and with the husbands separate from their wives .

ID:	2664
INPUT:	Shikágí éí deijį́į'go nahgóó ahi<unk> ; kǫ' hózhdínił nahalingo shits'in daneezgai .
PRED:	My bones are black , and the bones of my bones are like fire .
GOLD:	My skin has turned dark , and my bones burn with fever .

ID:	2665
INPUT:	Nidi ts'ídá ałtso ádadoołdįįł : Het dine'é áádóó Ámor dine'é , Kéínan dine'é áádóó Píírez dine'é , Háíva dine'é índa Jííbas dine'é ákódadoohłííł ; jó , ákót'éego Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihich'į' yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	But you must destroy all the Canaanites , Canaanites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites . This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	You must completely destroy the Hittites , Amorites , Canaanites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites , just as the Lord your God has commanded you .

ID:	2666
INPUT:	Áko índa tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł ada'doołkał biniyé baa hozhníłtį́ . [ Áko Jesus dayiiłtsoodgo dah deidiilóóz . ]
PRED:	So Jesus took him to the cross and took him to the cross . Then he took Jesus and took him to Jesus .
GOLD:	Then Pilate turned Jesus over to them to be crucified.So they took Jesus away .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	Nilą́ąjį' yisháałgo nidahoneeshtł'iizhii k'ídahodeeshdǫǫł ; béésh łitsoii dáń'dítį́hí nihideeshtih áádóó béésh nitł'izii bee dá'deelkaalígíí k'ídeeshtih ;
PRED:	I will turn away from you , and I will not abandon you . I will not break the gates of bronze , and I will break the wall .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will go before you , Cyrus , and level the mountains.I will smash down gates of bronzeand cut through bars of iron .

ID:	2668
INPUT:	Nizhé'é índa nimá nił nilį́įgo íínísin ; díí bee haz'áanii alą́ąjį' bee nihoot'áanii bił niilyáii át'é ,
PRED:	“ You are my father and mother , my mother , and I am writing this to you .
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother. ” This is the first commandment with a promise :

ID:	2669
INPUT:	Áádóó dabíínáłígíí éí níłch'i bida'iiníziinii bii' hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę hadaałt'é násdlį́'ígíí yee ahił dahoolne' .
PRED:	He gave us the power of the devil 's demons .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	2670
INPUT:	Da'diłt'ohii háni' dayiił'a'go hak'ee dadiniihgo dahółt'óóh ,
PRED:	When they cry out to him , they cry out to him ,
GOLD:	Archers attacked him savagely ; they shot at him and harassed him .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	Áádóó ná naal'a'í éí nidine'é nídininilígíí yitahgi naaghá ; dine'é t'óó ahayóigo doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą' da .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel are as numerous as you count ! The people of Israel are as numerous as you count .
GOLD:	And here I am in the midst of your own chosen people , a nation so great and numerous they can not be counted !

ID:	2672
INPUT:	Réíhab , ałjiłnii nilíinii , bi'oodlą' bik'ehgo doo ak'eh dahół'íinii t'áadoo yitah daaztsą́ą da , háálá k'é nídzingo naalchi'í yah ayíí'eezh .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your faith , dear brothers and sisters , for they have not been purchased by the death of your servant .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Rahab the prostitute was not destroyed with the people in her city who refused to obey God . For she had given a friendly welcome to the spies .

ID:	2673
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é daadzíi'ii tábąąhgóó kéyahígíí daabí dooleeł . Éí kéyahígíí yits'ą́ą́dóó da'ayą́ą dooleeł . E'e'áahgo Áshkelan kin haal'áhígi danjah doo . Háálá haDiyin God Bóhólníihii haa áhodool<unk> go yisnááh dajílíinii nahjį' kwíidoolíiłgo daa<unk> nít'éé' yę́ę hóó' nídadoodleełgo íidoolííł .
PRED:	“ The people of Judah will return to the distant lands of Judah , and they will return to the Mediterranean Sea . They will be able to rebuild the land of the Lord , the God of Judah . ”
GOLD:	The remnant of the tribe of Judah will pasture there.They will rest at night in the abandoned houses in Ashkelon.For the Lord their God will visit his people in kindnessand restore their prosperity again .

ID:	2674
INPUT:	Shí doo hashké nísdzin da ; ch'il da'dishahii áádóó hosh dadeeníinii anadashił'į́įgo bik'i nideeshaałgo adahodideeshk'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	I am not ashamed of my brothers ; I will be thrown into the dust .
GOLD:	My anger will be gone.If I find briers and thorns growing , I will attack them ; I will burn them up —

ID:	2675
INPUT:	Wóne'é hódahooł'aahii t'áá éí yínináádahódééłkid .
PRED:	Jesus asked his disciples , “ Where are the disciples ? ”
GOLD:	Later , when he was alone with his disciples in the house , they brought up the subject again .

ID:	2676
INPUT:	Ákódzaago halį́į́' ada'niiltsąądgo , jó'akon , deenásts'aa' daashtłizhígíí áádóó daastł'inígíí áádóó áhánígo daastł'inígíí t'éiyá nináda'niyo'go baa nei<unk> .
PRED:	When she became pregnant , she became pregnant , and a basket covered with a ram , and the fortified towns are filled with contempt .
GOLD:	“ One time during the mating season , I had a dream and saw that the male goats mating with the females were streaked , speckled , and spotted .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' nihijéí daołtł'is ? Jó , Ííjip dine'é áádóó Féro bijéí dayííłtł'is yę́ęgi ádaoht'į́ . Shą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii hatahgóó t'óó bik'eda'ayóii yaa naayáago Ízrel dine'é bééda'dzisnii'go dah diiná .
PRED:	Why did you make your hearts stubborn ? Why did you make Pharaoh 's heart stubborn and stubborn people ?
GOLD:	Do n't be stubborn and rebellious as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were . By the time God was finished with them , they were eager to let Israel go .

ID:	2678
INPUT:	Shá nidahałt'i'iísh doo shináhookah da , índa shá nídahałchįįhiísh doo áłahjį' yish'į́į da ?
PRED:	They do n't let me go to me , but I am innocent .
GOLD:	I am surrounded by mockers.I watch how bitterly they taunt me .

ID:	2679
INPUT:	Áko ats'áho'deet'ání góne' t'áá bik'izhnitéhígíí índa t'áá bik'i názhnídaahígíí t'óó baa'ih neheleeh doo .
PRED:	They will be ceremonially unclean until they are defiled , and they will be defiled .
GOLD:	Anything on which the woman lies or sits during the time of her period will be unclean .

ID:	2680
INPUT:	Áko da'jiyą́ągo bááh néidii'ą́ągo yik'i sodoolzingo niyiizti' índa hataiznii'go áhodííniid , Nídahidooh'aahgo daohsą́ ; díí shits'íís át'é .
PRED:	Then he took the bread and placed it on the evening . Then he told them , “ Be careful to eat this bread and eat it . ”
GOLD:	As they were eating , Jesus took some bread and blessed it . Then he broke it in pieces and gave it to the disciples , saying , “ Take it , for this is my body . ”

ID:	2681
INPUT:	Bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ą́ą dooleełígíí dį́į'go naanídaaz'áhígóó bee niłdzil dooleełii éí dį́į́' , éí bii' tá'ádígisí bá si'ą́ą dooleełígíí bił t'áá ła' bizhi'eego ályaa .
PRED:	He also cast four bronze grating for the four corners of the four bronze basin called the Sea .
GOLD:	There were handles at each of the four corners of the carts , and these , too , were cast as one unit with the cart .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph bik'isóó áyidííniid , T'áá shǫǫdí , shíighahjį' ninohkááh . Áko hwíighahjį' nijíkaigo áhodííniid , Shí , Jóseph nihik'is , Ííjip kéyahjį' nidahisoołnii'ígíí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	Finally , Joseph said to Joseph , “ Please come to me and meet me . I am your brother , ” he said . “ I am your brother . ”
GOLD:	“ Please , come closer , ” he said to them . So they came closer . And he said again , “ I am Joseph , your brother , whom you sold into slavery in Egypt .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	<unk> 'ii'níiłgi yiltééháádóó yóó'ábi'diil'įįhgo ła'da yik'i ha'ídées'į́į́' .
PRED:	“ Suppose a man who has been taken away , and a person who has hidden her face .
GOLD:	When they are carried to the grave , an honor guard keeps watch at their tomb .

ID:	2684
INPUT:	Eltólad , Bét<unk> , Hórmah ,
PRED:	boat , Kesil , Hormah ,
GOLD:	Eltolad , Bethul , Hormah ,

ID:	2685
INPUT:	Áko náhookǫsjigo Enshíímesh tó háálį́į́góó nááhodeesdzo , éí áádóó Geláílath haz'ánígóó Adámim báhátis áádóó Rúben biye' Bóhan bitsé si'ání góyaa hodeesdzo ,
PRED:	From there he went to the north side of the north side of the north side of the north side of the valley of Reuben , Gad , and the Lord gave them this message .
GOLD:	From En-rogel the boundary proceeded in a northerly direction and came to En-shemesh and on to Geliloth ( which is across from the slopes of Adummim ) . Then it went down to the Stone of Bohan . ( Bohan was Reuben 's son . )

ID:	2686
INPUT:	Áádóó Adonáíjah baa jiiskaígíí t'áá ádzíłtso nídadzisdzííd , áko nízhdiijée'go t'ááłá'í jinítínígo anídajiiskai .
PRED:	Then Adonijah sent his men to be afraid of them , and they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	Then all of Adonijah 's guests jumped up in panic from the banquet table and quickly scattered .

ID:	2687
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii bibi'oh adidilyéehii ch'é'étiingi dah yildohii dah diildogo chérabim bikáa'jį' niildoh .
PRED:	Then the Ark of the Lord appeared to the entrance of the cherubim .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord moved out from the entrance of the Temple and hovered above the cherubim .

ID:	2688
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí ił ééhózin yik'i déez'į́į'go yaa áhályą́ , nidi diné nináda'dii'aahii bizaad doo ílį́į́góó áyoolííł .
PRED:	The lips of the Lord watch , but the lips of the wicked are crushed .
GOLD:	The Lord preserves those with knowledge , but he ruins the plans of the treacherous .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Íífreiyim ba'áłchíní áádóó naakidi nánálígíí jiiłtsą́ ; Manáseh biye' Méíkir wolyéii ba'áłchíní éí Jóseph náhodiyiiłjéé' .
PRED:	When Joseph saw the descendants of Manasseh , Manasseh 's descendants , Manasseh , Manasseh , and Manasseh 's descendants were Manasseh .
GOLD:	He lived to see three generations of descendants of his son Ephraim , and he lived to see the birth of the children of Manasseh 's son Makir , whom he claimed as his own .

ID:	2690
INPUT:	K'ad Diyin God yá'át'éehii baa nideinohkąąhgo daats'í nihaa jooba' doo . Ákódaat'éii náádahoołnii'ígíí daats'í binahjį' nihaa jooba' doo ? ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Now why do you call to God for you ? Do n't you ignore the Good News ? Has the Lord of Heaven 's Armies come to us ?
GOLD:	“ Go ahead , beg God to be merciful to you ! But when you bring that kind of offering , why should he show you any favor at all ? ” asks the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	Áko Abáíjam bíyoołkááłdą́ą́' Riihobówam áádóó Jerobówam t'áá áłahjį' yił anaa' hółǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	There was constant war between Abijah and Jeroboam .
GOLD:	There was war between Abijam and Jeroboam throughout Abijam 's reign .

ID:	2692
INPUT:	nidi éí kéyahgóó yisnááh ádaho'diilyaa yę́ędi hajéítł'áahdi łahgo át'éego tsíńdazdookosgo áádóó dahasnánígíí bikéyahdi nich'į' nída'jookąąhgo kódajiníigo , Nida'ayeelzíí' áádóó doo ádahwiilyą́ą́góó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádeiit'įįd ;
PRED:	But when they entered the land of exile , they cried out to the land of Canaan , “ We have sinned against us , but we have sinned against us . We have sinned against such evil things and evil people . ”
GOLD:	But in that land of exile , they might turn to you in repentance and pray , ‘ We have sinned , done evil , and acted wickedly . '

ID:	2693
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , diné léi' bíla' t'ááłáhíjí bąąh dah haz'ą́ą́ léi' ákwe'é naagháá lá . Áádóó , Háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne'ésh nááhodi'doo<unk> go bee haz'ą́ ? daaníigo nidahódééłkid , éí yee hak'i dahodidoo'ááł yiniyé ádaaní .
PRED:	One day a man named a man named a man named a man named a human body . He said , “ Where is the Sabbath ? ” And they said , “ Where is the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	where he noticed a man with a deformed hand . The Pharisees asked Jesus , “ Does the law permit a person to work by healing on the Sabbath ? ” ( They were hoping he would say yes , so they could bring charges against him . )

ID:	2694
INPUT:	Áádóó k'os níyizii hadaaldohgo éí Bóhólníihii yii'jį' hadahóóle'go níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'éédą́ą'gi yiizį'go Éran áádóó Míriyam yíká ádííniid , áko t'áá ájíłah áajį' ch'ízhní'áázh .
PRED:	When they arrived at the cloud , Aaron stood up and stood at the entrance of the Tabernacle . Then Miriam called Miriam to Miriam and Aaron .
GOLD:	Then the Lord descended in the pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the Tabernacle . “ Aaron and Miriam ! ” he called , and they stepped forward .

ID:	2695
INPUT:	John haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Diné t'áadoo baa doodiłí da , t'áá hazhó'ó yá'ąąshdę́ę́' t'éí ba'doodił .
PRED:	John said to John , “ Do n't worry about this man from heaven . It 's better to eat from heaven . ”
GOLD:	John replied , “ No one can receive anything unless God gives it from heaven .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	Haa'íyee' Christ bizaad lą'ígo bee ákidaahdláa le' , bee hódzáanii t'áá ałtso bee ahidiníłnáago nida'ahinohtin , índa chánah áda'ahíínółzin , áádóó Diyin God bizaad biyi'dóó sin , áádóó sin bee Diyin God baa ha'niihii , índa ajooba' nihijéí bii' hólǫ́ǫgo Níłch'i Diyinii k'ehgo sin bee Bóhólníihii bich'į' dahohtaał .
PRED:	Let us teach the word of Christ , and may God 's grace and kindness to all who are living in God 's sight , and teach us what is written in the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Let the message about Christ , in all its richness , fill your lives . Teach and counsel each other with all the wisdom he gives . Sing psalms and hymns and spiritual songs to God with thankful hearts .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	Nihí shik'ídahidoohkah , ní Bóhólníihii áádóó yisnááh danohłį́ yę́ędóó nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo danihíí' yę́ę nihíí' nídadoodleełgo ádeeshłííł áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó índa bił dah nahaz'ą́ą́góó yisnááh danohłį́į dooleeł biniyé dah danihidíníiłkaadídóó áajį' áłah ánánihideeshdlííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ I will rescue you from exile , ” says the Lord . “ I will bring you back to distant lands , and I will bring you back to the distant lands of the nations . I will bring you back to distant lands . ”
GOLD:	I will be found by you , ” says the Lord . “ I will end your captivity and restore your fortunes . I will gather you out of the nations where I sent you and will bring you home again to your own land . ”

ID:	2698
INPUT:	Nidi da'iinołch'į́įdgo nihii' nidahodi<unk> ládą́ą́' áádóó ałch'ą́ą́h nidaah'na' ládą́ą́' , t'áadoo ádaa dahoh'niihí , t'áá aaníinii t'áadoo bik'ijį' danihiyooch'ídí .
PRED:	But if you are unfaithful , do n't let us stop sinning . Do n't worry about it . Do n't be afraid of your sins .
GOLD:	But if you are bitterly jealous and there is selfish ambition in your heart , do n't cover up the truth with boasting and lying .

ID:	2699
INPUT:	áádóó náádahidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii ádaat'éego éí béégashii naakigo , deenásts'aa' ashdla'go , tł'ízíchǫǫh ashdla'go , dibé yázhí biką'ii ła' béédááhaii ashdla'go , díí éí Gídiyónai biye' Abáídan nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	He brought two bulls , five rams , five rams , five male goats , and five one-year-old male lambs . This was the offering brought by Nethanel son of Pedahzur .
GOLD:	For a peace offering he brought two bulls , five rams , five male goats , and five one-year-old male lambs . This was the offering brought by Abidan son of Gideoni .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	Áko Jesus haadzíi'go ání , K'ad Diné Silį́į'ii ayóó át'éii ádoolníiłgo baa hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Now the Son of Man will happen to the Son of Man . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Now the time has come for the Son of Man to enter into his glory .

ID:	2701
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus haadzíi'go ashiiké áyidííniid , Yínóhkeedígíí doo nihił bééhózingóó ádóhní . <unk> dlį́įłgo <unk> káanii daats'í doohdlį́įłgo bínooł'ą́ ? [ Áádóó bee shidi'doolzįhii daats'í bee nihidi'doolzįhgo bínooł'ą́ ? ] Áko , Bíniil'ą́ą́ lą́ą , hodííniid .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you know what I am going to drink ? Are you able to drink the cup of suffering of suffering ? ” And they replied , “ Are you able to drink the cup of suffering of suffering ? ” And they replied .
GOLD:	But Jesus answered by saying to them , “ You do n't know what you are asking ! Are you able to drink from the bitter cup of suffering I am about to drink ? ” “ Oh yes , ” they replied , “ we are able ! ”

ID:	2702
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' néidiłi' doo ; éí ch'iyáán didlidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii át'ée doo ; ak'ah t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii bí .
PRED:	The priest will burn it on the altar , and it is a special gift presented to the Lord . It is a special gift presented to the Lord .
GOLD:	and the priest will burn them on the altar . It is a special gift of food , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . All the fat belongs to the Lord .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	Íílam ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii ła' : Matanáíyah , Zekaráíyah , Jiiháíyel , Ábdai , Jériimath índa Iiláíyah .
PRED:	From the family of Elam : Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , and Zechariah .
GOLD:	From the family of Elam : Mattaniah , Zechariah , Jehiel , Abdi , Jeremoth , and Elijah .

ID:	2704
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus áhodííniid , Iiyehii t'ah hoł naakaigo iigehgi nidahaaskaígíísh yínííł danilį́į doo ? Nidi beidoołkááł , iiyehii hats'ą́ą́' nídidooltéełgo índa dahodísingo doo da'ayą́ą da doo .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Where is the wedding feast ? ” But he asked them , “ But the time will be taken away from the end of those who have no plunder . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Do wedding guests mourn while celebrating with the groom ? Of course not . But someday the groom will be taken away from them , and then they will fast .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	Áko diné ándaha'áii áłah nilínígíí bits'ą́ą́' dashdiikaigo , Jesus bízhi' biniinaa doo ił ídlį́ bik'ee ti'dahodzooznii'ígi bą́ą́h da'jílį́įgo hąąh tsíhodeeskézígíí baa hoł dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	So the crowd left the city and began to hear Jesus because of his fame , because he was very rich in his name .
GOLD:	The apostles left the high council rejoicing that God had counted them worthy to suffer disgrace for the name of Jesus .

ID:	2706
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Damáskas kin haal'áádóó dajílíinii táadi , doodaii' dį́įdi bee haz'áanii k'ídajizti'go biniinaa dooshą' léi' t'áadoo atíháshłééh lá , háálá béésh bee ha'altsééd nahalingo Gíliyad dine'é ádajííł'įįd .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will again again again again again go to Damascus , but I will not let them go unpunished . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Damascus have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They beat down my people in Gileadas grain is threshed with iron sledges .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	Ná dahalne'í shik'ijį' danilį́įgo ánáádlííł , áádóó shik'ijį' nánáháchįįhígíí t'óó hoonaał ; ana'í ániidiígíí shich'į' ałnáá<unk> nił .
PRED:	You are my servants ; your enemies are angry ; your anger will be mocked by my anger .
GOLD:	Again and again you witness against me.You pour out your growing anger on meand bring fresh armies against me .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	Dé'éyóní danilíinii t'áá bí shiyaajį' ni'ídii'nííł ; t'áá dashidiits'į́hí shik'eh dahół'į́ .
PRED:	All who listen to me , and they listen to me .
GOLD:	Foreign nations cringe before me ; as soon as they hear of me , they submit .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	Ch'éénídzííd , Déborah , ch'éénídzííd ! Ch'éénídzííd , sin ła' bee hótaał , ch'éénídzííd ! Nídiidááh , Abínowam biye' Bérak yinílyéii , dasíníłná danilíinii dah dii'éésh .
PRED:	Wake up , wake up ! Wake up ! Wake up ! Wake up , wake up ! Wake up , wake up ! Wake up and wake up !
GOLD:	“ Wake up , Deborah , wake up ! Wake up , wake up , and sing a song ! Arise , Barak ! Lead your captives away , son of Abinoam !

ID:	2710
INPUT:	Diné náánáła' bich'į'go ájít'ée dooleełgi bee na'nitin
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Advice about Widows , Elders , and Slaves

ID:	2711
INPUT:	Éí bąągo ádííniid , Doo nihits'ádínéeshkał da , nidi nihooshk'iizh góne' nihaa anída'ajiłígi át'éego hóyée'go nihich'į' nidahwiiłnáa doo , áádóó bidiyin dabidi'níinii łoh nihá nánídlį́įgo bizahohkáah doo .
PRED:	He said , “ I will not abandon you , but you will live in a trap of a trap . You will live in the trap of your enemies , and you will live in a trap .
GOLD:	So now I declare that I will no longer drive out the people living in your land . They will be thorns in your sides , and their gods will be a constant temptation to you . ”

ID:	2712
INPUT:	díí dine'é Jerúsalemgi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin biyi' nááda'di'yoołnih biniyé ákóde eekai ládą́ą́' , díí diné łahgo áńdeiniidzį́į'go yídahółníihii Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Riihobówam yikéé' dah nídiisą́ągo shí dashdiyoołhéełgo Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Riihobówam yikéé' dah nínáádidookah .
PRED:	When the people of Judah arrived at Jerusalem , the people of Judah went to Jerusalem to worship the Lord 's Temple , and the king of Judah remained loyal to Rehoboam .
GOLD:	When these people go to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices at the Temple of the Lord , they will again give their allegiance to King Rehoboam of Judah . They will kill me and make him their king instead . ”

ID:	2713
INPUT:	Áádóó Áman dine'é éí Síriya dine'é danéechéehgo dayiiłtsą́ągo , bí ałdó' Abísheiyai yits'ą́ąjį' dadínéezhchą́ą'go , kin haal'áajį' yah anídahaazhjéé' . Áko Jó'ab éí Áman dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ą́ą́' dah nízhdiikaigo Jerúsalemgi níjíkai .
PRED:	When the Arameans saw that the Arameans fled , they fled to the town of Aram and fled to the town of Joab . So Joab returned to Jerusalem . So Joab returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	And when the Ammonites saw the Arameans running , they ran from Abishai and retreated into the city . After the battle was over , Joab returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	2714
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bí'ídadínóołnánígíí łá'í nootínígo díí jį́ dahinohná .
PRED:	But the Lord your God is giving you today today .
GOLD:	But all of you who were faithful to the Lord your God are still alive today — every one of you .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é ábidiní , Nihí t'áá háiida , doodaii' niha'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii éí diné bits'íís daaztsą́ągo yee ádoolchxǫ'go , doodaii' háájída nízaadgóó naagháago éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii t'áá íidoolííł .
PRED:	“ All the people of Israel will die , ” says the Lord . “ If you are defiled , you will be defiled by the Passover meal , and you will never eat the Passover meal .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : If any of the people now or in future generations are ceremonially unclean at Passover time because of touching a dead body , or if they are on a journey and can not be present at the ceremony , they may still celebrate the Lord 's Passover .

ID:	2716
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii báháchįįhgo náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí biyi' nahodi'ni'go ánínígíí nahalin , nidi yee ach'ooníinii éí dahtoo' ch'il bąąh haleehígíí nahalin .
PRED:	A wise person is like a lion , but a lion is like a lion .
GOLD:	The king 's anger is like a lion 's roar , but his favor is like dew on the grass .

ID:	2717
INPUT:	nidi t'ááłá'í nootínígo diné nihinaalte' índa asdzání nihinaalte' danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę shónídeisołt'e'go nihinaalte' áńdaohdlaago shits'ą́ąjį' noojée'go shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó ádaohłaa . Éí ádeinízinígíí bik'ehgo béédadoochid nít'éé' , nidi k'ad éí nihik'eh náádahół'į́į dooleeł biniyé nihinaalte' ánáádaohdlaa .
PRED:	“ But if you were slaves , you are free from the wilderness and free free free from your slavery , you have helped me to follow my name . But now you have violated my name . ”
GOLD:	But now you have shrugged off your oath and defiled my name by taking back the men and women you had freed , forcing them to be slaves once again .

ID:	2718
INPUT:	T'áá éí bijį́ nizhdilt'éego Eméíyas hoolyéego kin sinilígóó joo'ash , éí Jerúsalemdóó tsosts'idi daats'í tsin sitą́ ánízah ,
PRED:	As soon as he was sitting at Jerusalem , he was sitting at Jerusalem .
GOLD:	That same day two of Jesus ' followers were walking to the village of Emmaus , seven miles from Jerusalem .

ID:	2719
INPUT:	Héímath kin haal'áádóó índa Árpad kin haal'áádóó dabidiyinii éí háájí ? Séfarvéíyim kin haal'áádóó dabidiyinii éí háájí ? Da' éísh Samériya kéyah shighadeideest'ą́ ?
PRED:	“ What happened to the town of Hamath and the people of Samaria ? Where are the people of Samaria ? ”
GOLD:	What happened to the gods of Hamath and Arpad ? And what about the gods of Sepharvaim ? Did any god rescue Samaria from my power ?

ID:	2720
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Jesus éí Christ nilį́įgo joodlánígíí Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó bi'dizhchíinii jílį́ . T'áá háiida azhé'é ayóó'ájó'nínígíí ba'áłchíní ałdó' ayóó'ájó'níi doo .
PRED:	Anyone who belongs to Christ Jesus Christ is the one who is from God 's children , and those who love God 's children will also love their children .
GOLD:	Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has become a child of God . And everyone who loves the Father loves his children , too .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	Christ bee chánah danohłį́įgo , éí ayóó'ánihó'níigo bee nihik'i dahata'go , Níłch'i Diyinii bił ahił danohdlį́įgo , ahaa a'ááh danohsingo ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níigo ,
PRED:	And if you love Christ , dear brothers and sisters , love to the Holy Spirit ,
GOLD:	Is there any encouragement from belonging to Christ ? Any comfort from his love ? Any fellowship together in the Spirit ? Are your hearts tender and compassionate ?

ID:	2722
INPUT:	Ákohgo Áriyak éí ts'ídá tsxį́įłgo aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó Daniel bił nizhní'áazhgo ájíní , Júdahdóó diné yisnááh nilíinii bik'íníyáago aláahgo naat'áanii yaa nayiizyeelígíí ááhyiłníinii yił yééhodoosįįł .
PRED:	So Peter went to the king and told him , “ Daniel , the men of Judah will know that he is going to tell the king what he meant . ”
GOLD:	Arioch quickly took Daniel to the king and said , “ I have found one of the captives from Judah who will tell the king the meaning of his dream ! ”

ID:	2723
INPUT:	Ákódaat'íinii dabizaad naałdzid nahalingo idadééłní . Haimeníyas áádóó Failíítas éí áájí atah nilį́ .
PRED:	“ Where is your message ? ” they demanded . “ He is the fortress of Rome . ”
GOLD:	This kind of talk spreads like cancer , as in the case of Hymenaeus and Philetus .

ID:	2724
INPUT:	Áko ání , Asdzání ha'niyóodii nohłíinii , Hííbrew asdzání nida'iiłchíihgo ííshją́ą́ hadaohsíidgo ashkiigo éí nidaałtseed doo ; at'ééd nilį́įgo t'áá dahináa doo .
PRED:	“ All right , ” the woman said , “ you are careful to follow the terms of the servant of the servant of the woman . ”
GOLD:	“ When you help the Hebrew women as they give birth , watch as they deliver . If the baby is a boy , kill him ; if it is a girl , let her live . ”

ID:	2725
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é éí Gílgalgi Jáshowa yaa yíkai áádóó Jiifáneh éí Kíínez dine'é nilínígíí biye' Kéíleb éí Jáshowa áyidííniid , Nił bééhózingo , Bóhólníihii Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó diné jílíinii Mózes áyidííniidígíí , éí shí índa ni ałdó' ádínihídéélt'i'go Kéídesh-barníyadi kódííniid ni' .
PRED:	So the men of Judah went to Gilgal and told Joshua son of Jephunneh , Joshua son of Jephunneh , the Lord , the God of the tribe of Caleb , the God of Caleb , who said , “ I am the Lord , the God of Moses . ”
GOLD:	A delegation from the tribe of Judah , led by Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite , came to Joshua at Gilgal . Caleb said to Joshua , “ Remember what the Lord said to Moses , the man of God , about you and me when we were at Kadesh-barnea .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	Yah a'atiinígi tsin yadaa'áhígíí bíighahgóó hooghan si'ą́ ; éí bich'é'étiin hólǫ́ ; ákwii didlidgo náádahaniihii tánínádaagis .
PRED:	The road to the door of the gateway ; there is a burnt offering for burnt offering .
GOLD:	A door led from the entry room of one of the inner gateways into a side room , where the meat for sacrifices was washed .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	Áko tsxį́įłgo ákǫ́ǫ́ jíkaigo , Mary áádóó Jóseph índa awéé' éí béégashii yii' nída'alchoshígíí yii' sitį́įgo bik'íjíkai .
PRED:	So they went and found Joseph 's sister , Mary 's sister , and they found him in the tomb of Joseph .
GOLD:	They hurried to the village and found Mary and Joseph . And there was the baby , lying in the manger .

ID:	2728
INPUT:	nidi kéyah danihíí' dooleeł biniyé bich'į' disoonánígíí éí deílk'idgóó áádóó deíldzisgóó nahałtinígíí t'éí bee nínáháltłoh .
PRED:	But you will live in the land where you live in the mountains , where you live in the mountains .
GOLD:	Rather , the land you will soon take over is a land of hills and valleys with plenty of rain —

ID:	2729
INPUT:	Áko éí haz'ánígi Másah índa Méribah hoosye' , háálá ákwe'é Ízrel dine'é nidaalteeh nít'éé' , áádóó ałdó' Bóhólníihii yídaneeztą́ą'go ádaaní , Da' Bóhólníihiísh nihitahgi hólǫ́ , dooda daats'í ?
PRED:	But when he arrived at Kadesh , he said , “ The people of Israel have been here in the presence of the Lord , ” they said , “ why did we have n't been among us ? ”
GOLD:	Moses named the place Massah ( which means “ test ” ) and Meribah ( which means “ arguing ” ) because the people of Israel argued with Moses and tested the Lord by saying , “ Is the Lord here with us or not ? ”

ID:	2730
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	David 's Thirty Mighty Men

ID:	2731
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é yá nihwii'aahii nílíinii , díldzíiłgo diné ádaa daha'niihii k'éédahodídle' !
PRED:	Arise , O God , and let the world praise you .
GOLD:	Arise , O Judge of the earth.Give the proud what they deserve .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	háálá Éíbraham shizaad yik'eh hóół'įįd ; éí bich'į' yíł'aadígíí áádóó shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó bee nihoyí'áanii índa shibee nahaz'áanii yik'eh hóół'įįd .
PRED:	For Abraham refused to obey my commands and regulations . He refused to obey my commands and regulations .
GOLD:	I will do this because Abraham listened to me and obeyed all my requirements , commands , decrees , and instructions . ”

ID:	2733
INPUT:	Áko Paul , t'áá át'į́į́ łehígi át'éego hoł yah ííyáago , táadi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́'ígíí biyi' Diyin God bizaad bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí hoł yeiníst'įįd .
PRED:	So Paul went into the middle of the field , but they kept the Sabbath in the book of God until the Scriptures read it .
GOLD:	As was Paul 's custom , he went to the synagogue service , and for three Sabbaths in a row he used the Scriptures to reason with the people .

ID:	2734
INPUT:	Íídam dine'é a'ohgo ábi'didoolnííł
PRED:	The Land of Edom
GOLD:	Edom 's Judgment Announced

ID:	2735
INPUT:	áádóó niyi'di kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá bił ni'jį' andi'yoolghą́ą́ł , índa tsé t'ááłá'í nidi doo ałk'i dah si'ą́ą́góó ádeidoolíłígíí éí bił neidoołkááł , háálá Diyin God naa níyáhígíí t'áadoo baa ákoninizį́į' da .
PRED:	But let them be thrown into the world , and let them be thrown into the fire of God 's judgment . For God has rejected him .
GOLD:	They will crush you into the ground , and your children with you . Your enemies will not leave a single stone in place , because you did not recognize it when God visited you . ”

ID:	2736
INPUT:	Paul éí kéyah táyi' si'ánígíí Málta hoolyéegi naaghá
PRED:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer
GOLD:	Paul on the Island of Malta

ID:	2737
INPUT:	Nidi Ízrel dine'é doo dashíists'ą́'ígíí bąą doo daníists'ą́ą' da doo ; Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso shich'į' nidaalteeh áádóó shich'į' bijéí dantł'iz .
PRED:	But if you listen to me , you will not listen to me or listen to me .
GOLD:	But the people of Israel wo n't listen to you any more than they listen to me ! For the whole lot of them are hard-hearted and stubborn .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , t'óó báhádzidgo bee até'ésh'íinii bee atíhodeeshłííł yę́ę t'ą́ą́' kónáshdlaago ał'ąą dine'é binááł ch'íhoní'eezh yę́ę éí dabinááł shízhi' doo ílį́į́góó doo bee hadazdoodzihígíí biniyé baa atíít'įįd .
PRED:	But when I saw my fury on my fury , I will pour out my fury on the nations in my name .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , I withdrew my judgment against them to protect the honor of my name before the nations that had seen my power in bringing them out of Egypt .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	2740
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá ákót'éego hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , T'áá háiida díí diné jiisxíinii éí ákót'éego hach'ohodoo'niił .
PRED:	Then everyone said to them , “ Anyone who kills another person must be put to death . ”
GOLD:	And these men gave David the same reply . They said , “ Yes , that is the reward for killing him . ”

ID:	2741
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii ayóó áníínílninígíí yidánoolníi doo . NiBóhólníihii nilínígíí bąą bich'į' hodíínísin .
PRED:	“ You are your King , ” the king said , “ and you will fear the Lord .
GOLD:	For your royal husband delights in your beauty ; honor him , for he is your lord .

ID:	2742
INPUT:	áádóó doo t'áá éí t'éiyá bąą hodeel'a' da , nidi Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih doo biniyé , índa yá'át'éehgo bee íiniidzinii ííshjání dooleeł biniyé da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii díí ajooba'go áká a'alyeedii baa neiit'aashgóó nihił nijikai doo biniyé nidahastį́ .
PRED:	That is why we do n't want to preach the Lord 's Good News , but we want to preach the Good News . We are looking for the church to preach the Good News of the church .
GOLD:	He was appointed by the churches to accompany us as we take the offering to Jerusalem — a service that glorifies the Lord and shows our eagerness to help .

ID:	2743
INPUT:	Lk . 8 : 4-8
PRED:	Jesus Calms the Storm
GOLD:	Parable of the Wheat and Weeds Explained

ID:	2744
INPUT:	Épafras éí Níłch'i Diyinii bee ayóó'áda'íínóh'níigo yee nihił náhoolne' .
PRED:	Greet your Holy Spirit with you , your love .
GOLD:	He has told us about the love for others that the Holy Spirit has given you .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	Tónteel éí ayóó át'éego yilk'oołgo bikáá' ha'naa łį́į́' nił niikai .
PRED:	You are my victims with the sea , but you are my followers .
GOLD:	You trampled the sea with your horses , and the mighty waters piled high .

ID:	2746
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bich'į' ahééh hasin , éí t'áá áłahjį' Christ bee ak'eh diidlį́įgo nihoo'ish , áádóó łikání halchinígíigi át'éego Christ bee béého'dílzinii t'áá ałtsogóó nihee náás shoogish .
PRED:	But I thank God and give thanks to you as a special gift to God , as a special gift of silver and a special gift to Christ .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has made us his captives and continues to lead us along in Christ 's triumphal procession . Now he uses us to spread the knowledge of Christ everywhere , like a sweet perfume .

ID:	2747
INPUT:	Tónteel bíígháán t'óó báhádzidgo náádadiidáahii bi<unk> 'ígi át'éego t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádajit'į́ ; sǫ' wót'áahdi hidijeehígíí hool'áágóó ts'ídá diłhiłgo chahałheeł bee bá nahaz'ánígíigi ádajít'é .
PRED:	Let the sea be filled with the sea , and the heavens will be filled with the heavens . It is the light of the earth .
GOLD:	They are like wild waves of the sea , churning up the foam of their shameful deeds . They are like wandering stars , doomed forever to blackest darkness .

ID:	2748
INPUT:	Háálá nihił béédahózingo danihizhé'é yę́ę bi'é'él'į' t'áadoo nánídlínígóó yee nidanihineestą́'ígíí bits'ą́ąjį' náádanihi'diiznii' . T'áadoo le'é áádįįłii , béésh łigaii , doodaii' óolada éí doo bee náádanihi'diiznii' da ,
PRED:	For we know that our ancestors had not been unfaithful to our ancestors . We have not been sold for our ancestors , silver , silver , silver , silver , silver , or silver , or silver .
GOLD:	For you know that God paid a ransom to save you from the empty life you inherited from your ancestors . And it was not paid with mere gold or silver , which lose their value .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	Áádóó hane' yiní'ánígíí David áyidííniid , T'áá aaníí diné nihik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' ; kin haal'áádę́ę́' halgaijį' nihich'į' ch'ídahaazhjéé' , áádóó kin haal'á bił yah a'atiinjį' t'ą́ą́' anídaniilkaad .
PRED:	Then David told David , “ You 're going out to attack the town of the town , and they ran out to the town of the town . ”
GOLD:	“ The enemy came out against us in the open fields , ” he said . “ And as we chased them back to the city gate ,

ID:	2750
INPUT:	NihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ bibee ajooba' yee nihik'ijidlíi doo . [ T'áá ákót'ée doo . ]
PRED:	May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you .
GOLD:	May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit .

ID:	2751
INPUT:	Diné doo ła' t'áá ádííghahígo hináa da , índa diné doo ła' t'áá ádííghahígo daatsaah da .
PRED:	“ Suppose someone else hates another person , and no one else has no other .
GOLD:	For we do n't live for ourselves or die for ourselves .

ID:	2752
INPUT:	Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yę́ę dabizaad díí t'áá yił aheełt'éego halne' . Kóníigo bee ak'e'ashchį́ :
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ This is what the Scriptures say :
GOLD:	And this conversion of Gentiles is exactly what the prophets predicted . As it is written :

ID:	2753
INPUT:	Mk . 8 : <unk>
PRED:	Jesus Calms the Storm
GOLD:	Peter 's Declaration about Jesus

ID:	2754
INPUT:	Nidi háádaas<unk> dóó bik'ijį' ninááł doo yá'áshónígi ánáádáát'įįd ; éí bąą hoda'ana'í t'áá biyaa dziznilgo áhwiinilaa , áko éí hwee ádídahólnííh nít'éé' , nidi nich'į' dah nídahidiikaigo áádóó nídanooskango yá'ąąshdę́ę́' dahodisíníts'ą́ą́' índa haa a'ááh nínízinígíí bik'ehgo lą'ídi yisdáhwííníjaa' ,
PRED:	But he did what was evil in the sight of the wicked things he had done . So he went to heaven and worshiped him , and he turned his compassion and compassion and compassion on us .
GOLD:	“ But as soon as they were at peace , your people again committed evil in your sight , and once more you let their enemies conquer them . Yet whenever your people turned and cried to you again for help , you listened once more from heaven . In your wonderful mercy , you rescued them many times !

ID:	2755
INPUT:	Éí ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí índa aláahgo naat'áanii ayóó ádaat'éii íísdįįd ni' .
PRED:	He destroyed many nations , and he destroyed many nations .
GOLD:	He struck down great nationsand slaughtered mighty kings —

ID:	2756
INPUT:	Áádóó Gíírar kéyah nahós'a' binaagóó kin hadaas'áhígíí t'áá át'é atídayiilaa , háálá Bóhólníihii yik'ee bił yéé' dahazlį́į́' áádóó kin hadaas'áágóó t'áá át'é adayiizyį́ , háálá yisnááh t'áá íiyisí t'óó ahayóí .
PRED:	The people of the Negev , because they were afraid of their land , for they were afraid of their towns , for the Lord had captured many towns .
GOLD:	While they were at Gerar , they attacked all the towns in that area , and terror from the Lord came upon the people there . As a result , a vast amount of plunder was taken from these towns , too .

ID:	2757
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bidził naaznilgóó díní'į́į'go ábidi'doolníłígíí bee bik'ijį' handziihgo
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against the mountains of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , turn and face the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them .

ID:	2758
INPUT:	Konanáíyah ałdó' áádóó bik'is Shiiméíyah áádóó Niithániyel áádóó Hashabáíyah áádóó Jáíyel índa Jázabad , díí Líívai dine'é yiląąjį' naazíinii éí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii nááhidoonih biniyé ashdladi mííl dibé yázhí áádóó tł'ízí yázhí índa ashdladi neeznádiin dóola éí Líívai dine'é yaa deiznil .
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , and Jozabad . These are the Levites who were presented to the priests and Levites .
GOLD:	The Levite leaders — Conaniah and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel , as well as Hashabiah , Jeiel , and Jozabad — gave 5,000 lambs and young goats and 500 cattle to the Levites for their Passover offerings .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	Náás oochííł dooleełgóó díí bee bá ak'e'doochííł , áko diné nináádahidoochíłígíí éí Bóhólníihii yaa dahaniih doo .
PRED:	Future generations will produce a new life , and the Lord will praise you .
GOLD:	Let this be recorded for future generations , so that a people not yet born will praise the Lord .

ID:	2760
INPUT:	Áko hak'ee dadiniihii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáhóónil índa ana'í bílák'eedę́ę́' nááhwiisnii' .
PRED:	Then he saved them from their enemies and rescued them from their enemies .
GOLD:	So he rescued them from their enemiesand redeemed them from their foes .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'éego á ha'iidziih bineest'ą'
PRED:	Living by False Prophets
GOLD:	Faith Brings Joy

ID:	2762
INPUT:	Shide ádahósinii bits'ą́ąjį' hááshíłteeh , áko nibik'ehgo iináanii bik'eh honish'į́į doo .
PRED:	Save me from those who fear me , for I will obey my commandments .
GOLD:	Ransom me from the oppression of evil people ; then I can obey your commandments .

ID:	2763
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bá bikáá' náá'iiniihí tsé doo hasht'e'nibí'ílne'ii bee ádadoohłííł , áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náádahidoołnih .
PRED:	You must present burnt offerings to the Lord your God , and present it to the altar of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	Jesus ádeidííniid , Na'nitiní , díí asdzání adiléé lágo habi'deel'į́į́' .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Teacher , you are going to attack the men of Judah . ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , ” they said to Jesus , “ this woman was caught in the act of adultery .

ID:	2765
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéfthah éí Gíliyad dine'é t'áá ałtso áłah áyiilaago Íífreiyim dine'é yił ałk'iijéé' . Áko Gíliyad dine'é éí Íífreiyim dine'é yik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' , háálá ádaaní , Gíliyad dine'é nohłíinii , Íífreiyim dine'é áádóó Manáseh dine'é bitahgóó kéédahoht'íinii áłt'ąą la' Íífreiyim dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó yóó'adahaazhjée'ii dasoolį́į́' .
PRED:	So Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead and killed the men of Gilead , and the men of Gilead had fled to Ephraim , for the tribe of Ephraim had fled to Ephraim , for the tribe of Ephraim and Ephraim .
GOLD:	The people of Ephraim responded , “ You men of Gilead are nothing more than fugitives from Ephraim and Manasseh. ” So Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead and attacked the men of Ephraim and defeated them .

ID:	2766
INPUT:	Jó , naaki shitsi' t'ah doo diné bee haleeh da ; t'áá shǫǫdí , shíni'dii éí nihich'į' ch'ídeesh'ish ; t'áá nihí danohsinígi ádadoohłííł , áko díí diné doo ádadoohłíłí da , háálá shighan góne' yah íí'áázh .
PRED:	“ Look , my daughter , my daughter , do n't let me go out to the grave . I will bring you back to this place where you are . ”
GOLD:	Look , I have two virgin daughters . Let me bring them out to you , and you can do with them as you wish . But please , leave these men alone , for they are my guests and are under my protection . ”

ID:	2767
INPUT:	Bá da'diłt'ohii shináshzhiizh . Doo áá sísįįhgóó shitsą́ áshk'azhí ałtáiniiłgizh ; shitł'izh ni'jį' náálį́įgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	I am afraid of my enemies ; I am torn down like a bird that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	and now his archers surround me.His arrows pierce me without mercy.The ground is wet with my blood .

ID:	2768
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	2769
INPUT:	Diyin God atah yiyiizláa'go ba'áłchíní daazlį́į'ii háishą' t'áadoo le'é yee yik'i hodidoo'ááł ? Diyin God yee' ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego bá hahadziih !
PRED:	For what will happen to God 's children ? Who will happen to God 's children ?
GOLD:	Who dares accuse us whom God has chosen for his own ? No one — for God himself has given us right standing with himself .

ID:	2770
INPUT:	Haa'íshą' kééhat'ínígi yah adiikah ; bibikáá' dah adées'eezí si'ą́ągi nidahodiidlaał !
PRED:	Let us enter the land of Canaan ; let them go down to the farthest ends of the earth .
GOLD:	Let us go to the sanctuary of the Lord ; let us worship at the footstool of his throne .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán éí diné doo yá'ádaashóonii baa deet'ą́ ; nihokáá'góó ándahwii'aahii dabinii' yik'íná'áłtih , áko bí doo át'į́į́góoshą' háí ákót'į́ ?
PRED:	“ The wicked have sinned against the wicked , and who will never be punished ?
GOLD:	The whole earth is in the hands of the wicked , and God blinds the eyes of the judges.If he 's not the one who does it , who is ?

ID:	2772
INPUT:	Jó , doo yá'áshóonii nik'ijį' kódeeshłííł áádóó nits' ą́ą́dóó diné deíchíhígíí t'áá éí Ízrel kéyahdóó diné daadziihígíí ałtso Éíhab bits'ą́ą́dóó áhodeeshdįįł ,
PRED:	I will destroy the wicked , and I will destroy all the people of Israel . I will destroy all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So now the Lord says , ‘ I will bring disaster on you and consume you . I will destroy every one of your male descendants , slave and free alike , anywhere in Israel !

ID:	2773
INPUT:	Diné hanaagóó kéédahat'į́įgo hak'ee dadiniihii éí t'áá ałtso há beinísht'į́įgo ákwii t'áadoo hainít'ínígóó kéédahojit'į́į doo ; ákwii kin nidazhdoonił , áádóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii deíl'áago ádazhdoolííł ; ákwii t'áadoo hainít'ínígóó kéédahojit'į́į doo , áko índa haDiyin God Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I am afraid of all the people who live in exile , and I will live in safety . I will live in their fields , and they will live in their fields . I will know that I am the Lord , the God of their God .
GOLD:	They will live safely in Israel and build homes and plant vineyards . And when I punish the neighboring nations that treated them with contempt , they will know that I am the Lord their God . ”

ID:	2774
INPUT:	Áádóó Ísakar dine'é ahoolchíiłii ła' Aháíjah biye' Béíyasha éí Néídab yihodeez'ą́ągo Gíbiithan éí Filístiya dine'é bikin haal'áagi yiyiisxį́ , háálá Néídab áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é Gíbiithan yizénáshzhiizh .
PRED:	From the tribe of Issachar , Nadab son of Baasha son of Baasha , who had killed the Philistines . He also killed the Philistines in Tirzah .
GOLD:	Then Baasha son of Ahijah , from the tribe of Issachar , plotted against Nadab and assassinated him while he and the Israelite army were laying siege to the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	T'áá áko tsinaa'eeł t'áá ákǫ́ǫgo hazhé'é bits'ą́ą́' dashdii'áázh , áádóó Jesus bikéé' jiní'áázh .
PRED:	So they left the boat and followed Jesus .
GOLD:	They immediately followed him , leaving the boat and their father behind .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso aheełt'éego bich'į' áhoonííł : diné t'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó doo yá'áshóonii , diné yá'át'éehii áádóó yá'át'éehgo bii' honít'i'ii índa nichǫ́'ígo bii' honít'i'ii , diné náá'iiłniihii áádóó diné doo náá'iiłniihígíí t'áá aheełt'éego bich'į' áhoonííł ; diné yá'át'éehiigi át'éego , bąąhági ááníiłii ałdó' t'áá ákót'é , áádóó ádee hahididziihii , índa ádee ha'didziih yits'ąą yisti'ii t'áá ákót'éego bich'į' áhoonííł .
PRED:	The wicked will say to the wicked , “ The wicked are good and good , and evil will be brought to the wicked . This is what is right and right , the priest , the priest , the priest , the priest , the priest , the priest , the priest , and the priest will be forgiven .
GOLD:	The same destiny ultimately awaits everyone , whether righteous or wicked , good or bad , ceremonially clean or unclean , religious or irreligious . Good people receive the same treatment as sinners , and people who make promises to God are treated like people who do n't .

ID:	2777
INPUT:	Tónteel bibąąhgóó kéyah danohłíinii , shidááhdóó dadínółhéelgo bíni'dii diné yee dabidziilii ániidí nídaadleeh ; bíni'dii áháníjį' nihekáahgo bíni'dii yádaałti' ; aa hwiinít'įįhjį' áháníjį' ahididiikah .
PRED:	Come to the Red Sea , and let the sea be silent before the Red Sea . Let them go down to the Red Sea , and let them go down to the Red Sea .
GOLD:	“ Listen in silence before me , you lands beyond the sea.Bring your strongest arguments.Come now and speak.The court is ready for your case .

ID:	2778
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdgo áádóó hashké niidzį́į'go índa ts'ídá ayóó át'éego báháchį'go hakédaayahdóó hahoniiskaadgo náánáła' kéyahgóó ahoniiskaad ; dííshjį́į́góó ákót'é .
PRED:	The Lord was angry with anger , and he became very angry with his fury .
GOLD:	In great anger and fury the Lord uprooted his people from their land and banished them to another land , where they still live today ! '

ID:	2779
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí náádi'yoołnihgo t'ááłá'ígo ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áádóó ła'ígíí éí didlidgo nááhániihii át'éego néidiyoołnih ; kót'éego náá'iiłniihii éí asdzání bidił bighánílį́įgo doo bi'didééhgóó biniinaa Bóhólníihii binááł yá k'ééhodoołdǫǫł .
PRED:	“ The priest must present a sin offering as a sin offering for a sin offering and a burnt offering . This is a permanent law for the Lord . He will purify the priest as a sin offering for the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . Through this process , the priest will purify her before the Lord for the ceremonial impurity caused by her bleeding .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii dadiyin doo
PRED:	Offerings for the Priests
GOLD:	Instructions for the Priests

ID:	2781
INPUT:	Éí bąą haa'íshą' bee k'é náhoodleełii áádóó t'áá áníiltso ahidiníłnáago danihidziil ánihidoolíiłii hádeiit'į́į doo .
PRED:	So let us be our confident , and we will be our weak and weak .
GOLD:	So then , let us aim for harmony in the church and try to build each other up .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	Díí saad éí hodéét'i'go Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' , Ch'ikę́ę́h Záíyan bich'é'é nilíinii niz'įįdgo áádóó neiidlohgo ná nahast'i' ; Jerúsalem bich'é'é nilíinii nich'į' bitsiits'iin yiyíígháád .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The virgin daughter of Zion is coming to attack Jerusalem , and he has joined his head on his head .
GOLD:	And the Lord has spoken this word against him : “ The virgin daughter of Ziondespises you and laughs at you.The daughter of Jerusalemshakes her head in derision as you flee .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í hak'i hoole'go Bóhólníihii bits'ádi'nílíidii bee hanaagóó i'díídláád , áko t'áá íiyisí nídadzisdzííd .
PRED:	When the angel of the Lord came upon him , the angel of the Lord came upon him , and they were terrified .
GOLD:	Suddenly , an angel of the Lord appeared among them , and the radiance of the Lord 's glory surrounded them . They were terrified ,

ID:	2784
INPUT:	Mo<unk> dóó dah náádii'náago Bé<unk> yakan hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left Rephidim and camped at Dibon-gad .
GOLD:	They left Moseroth and camped at Bene-jaakan .

ID:	2785
INPUT:	Nidi kin haal'áhídóó łid hahagháahgo hakéé'dę́ę́' Bénjamin dine'é t'ą́ą́' nídadéét'į́į́' nít'éé' ; shoo , kin haal'áhídóó yót'ááhgóó łid hahagháahgo dayiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	But when he saw the smoke from the town of Benjamin , he saw the smoke from the town of Benjamin and saw it .
GOLD:	But when the warriors of Benjamin looked behind them and saw the smoke rising into the sky from every part of the town ,

ID:	2786
INPUT:	Áko shída , shik'i<unk> da , shá nidaal'a'ída , diné hada'asíidii shikéé' naakaígíida , t'áadoo nihi'éé' hadadii'nil da , t'áá hazhó'ó nidadiibeełgo t'éí háádadii'nił nít'éé' .
PRED:	And if you are my brothers and sisters , we would n't be able to follow me . We did n't have enough to follow me .
GOLD:	During this time , none of us — not I , nor my relatives , nor my servants , nor the guards who were with me — ever took off our clothes . We carried our weapons with us at all times , even when we went for water .

ID:	2787
INPUT:	Áádóó Damį́įgo abínígo t'ah chahałheełgo , Mary Mágdaliin tséní'ootséelgi jiníyáá nít'éé' tsé dáádeelmááz nít'é'ígíí nahjį' eelmáazgo jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	On the first day they found Mary Magdalene , Mary Magdalene , who had seen the tomb of Mary Magdalene , laid the stone in the tomb of the tomb .
GOLD:	Early on Sunday morning , while it was still dark , Mary Magdalene came to the tomb and found that the stone had been rolled away from the entrance .

ID:	2788
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Design of the Ephod

ID:	2789
INPUT:	Dooda , shinanit'a'í shííníłts'ą́ą́' ; kéyahígíí áádóó biyi' tséníhoodzánígíí ałdó' t'óó naa dideesh'ááł ; shidine'é ba'áłchíní dabinááł naa dideesh'ááł , áko nąąh daaztsánígíí ákwii yóó'ádíílííł .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , my master , my master , and I will give you all your children . I will make you sick in your presence , and I will bury you .
GOLD:	“ No , my lord , ” he said to Abraham , “ please listen to me . I will give you the field and the cave . Here in the presence of my people , I give it to you . Go and bury your dead . ”

ID:	2790
INPUT:	Ąąh niiníláhígíí t'áá e'e'ááh bik'eh baa náhíł<unk> doo , áko yee nánítéehgo naahaniih doo ; éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí t'áá ákogi áhát'íinii át'éego nihaa nitsíkees doo .
PRED:	Do n't let us go down into the fear of the Lord your God , and he will succeed .
GOLD:	Return the cloak to its owner by sunset so he can stay warm through the night and bless you , and the Lord your God will count you as righteous .

ID:	2791
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá íídą́ą́' ła' ats'áhaaskaigo Séítan yikéé' aheeskai .
PRED:	So Satan left Satan and followed him .
GOLD:	For I am afraid that some of them have already gone astray and now follow Satan .

ID:	2792
INPUT:	Diné doo dahóyáanii , t'áá aaníí doo béédaho'dílzinii ba'áłchíní dajílį́įgot'áadoo biniyéhígóó nidajikai nít'éé' ; éí nahjį' kódaho'diilyaa .
PRED:	But the wise are defiled by their children , and their children were unfaithful to their children .
GOLD:	They are nameless fools , outcasts from society .

ID:	2793
INPUT:	Áadi dichin dzizlį́į'go ajóyą́ą́' laanaa jiniizį́į́' , nidi t'ahdii ch'iyáán ádeiléehgo hoł áhát'į́įgo
PRED:	But when he was hungry , he decided to eat the food he had decided to eat .
GOLD:	and he was hungry . But while a meal was being prepared , he fell into a trance .

ID:	2794
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii hool'áágóó kéyah bíí' dadooleeł , áádóó ákwii hool'áágóó kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	The godly will live forever , and the land will live forever .
GOLD:	The godly will possess the landand will live there forever .

ID:	2795
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Belsházar nant'áago táá' náhááh góne' shí , Daniel yinishyéii , átsé shił áhoodzaa áádóó shił ánááhoodzaa .
PRED:	On the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Daniel , was in the third year of his reign .
GOLD:	During the third year of King Belshazzar 's reign , I , Daniel , saw another vision , following the one that had already appeared to me .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	Háálá dé'éyóní shich'į' nídahidiikai , diné ade ádeinízinii shida'niiłhį́ ; éí Diyin God doo bilą́ąjį' hólǫ́ǫgo ádayósin da . Síilah .
PRED:	For they are trying to kill me , and they are trying to kill me . They are gods of God . Interlude
GOLD:	For strangers are attacking me ; violent people are trying to kill me.They care nothing for God.Interlude

ID:	2797
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán biishch'id bii'dę́ę́' tónteel deesh<unk> go<unk> háí t'ą́ą́' áyósin dooleełgo bidáń'da'ditį́įhii yich'ą́ą́h dádeideeztą́ ?
PRED:	Who gives birth to the depths of the earth ? Who gives them victory over the depths of the sea ?
GOLD:	“ Who kept the sea inside its boundariesas it burst from the womb ,

ID:	2798
INPUT:	Áádóó áhodííniid , T'áá shił síníkéego t'óó ahayóí yidoołkááł ; t'áadoo ałjiłnii nílíní doo , doo nidi diné ła' nínáádidííłtéeł da . Áko shí ałdó' ákónísht'ée doo .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Do n't be surprised ! If you do n't have a prostitute , do n't have a prostitute to another man . ”
GOLD:	Then I said to her , “ You must live in my house for many days and stop your prostitution . During this time , you will not have sexual relations with anyone , not even with me . ”

ID:	2799
INPUT:	Áko Féro éí Éíbram hágo yidííniidgo ání , Díishą' haa shiinilaa lá ? Ha'át'éegoshą' díí ne'asdzą́ą́ nilį́įgo t'áadoo bee shił hwíínílne' da ?
PRED:	Then Pharaoh asked him , “ Why have you done this ? Why have you married me ? ”
GOLD:	So Pharaoh summoned Abram and accused him sharply . “ What have you done to me ? ” he demanded . “ Why did n't you tell me she was your wife ?

ID:	2800
INPUT:	Zébyulan dine'é nilíinii bidine'é náás ahoolchíiłii éí ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí dabizhé'é yę́ę yada'áłchíní danilį́įgo éí dabi'déélta'ii dabízhi' bik'ehgo diné naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso ana'al'į́ yídaneel'áanii
PRED:	These were the clans of the tribe of Zebulun . Their registered troops numbered each of the tribe of Zebulun .
GOLD:	Zebulun57,400

ID:	2801
INPUT:	Ákondi doo da'oodlání na'ageh yee tsi'naaldeehii , doodaii' adádanoolníinii , doodaii' t'áá ádzaagóó nidahagizii , doodaii' e'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáii doo bił ałtaołdeeh da dooleełígíí doo ááhdishníi da , háálá nihokáá'dóó hahidoohkahgo doo bohónéedzą́ą da .
PRED:	But if you do n't sin or sexual relations with sexual sin or sexual immorality or sexual immorality or sexual immorality , or people do n't understand what they do . I am saying , ‘ I do n't understand it . ' ”
GOLD:	But I was n't talking about unbelievers who indulge in sexual sin , or are greedy , or cheat people , or worship idols . You would have to leave this world to avoid people like that .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	K'é ha'níinii
PRED:	Greetings from Paul
GOLD:	Greetings from Paul

ID:	2803
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' ahééh hasin náádahołniih áádóó t' áá aaníí ádadohníigo Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii bich'į' bee ádee hadadoohdzíi'ii bida'dohłííł .
PRED:	Give thanks to God , and give thanks to the Most High .
GOLD:	Make thankfulness your sacrifice to God , and keep the vows you made to the Most High .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	Nít'éé' éí tsits'aa' bii' béeso t'óó ahayóí lágo dayiiłtsą́ągo , aláahgo naat'áanii binaaltsoos ííł'íní éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii yił ní'áazhgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béeso yiyííłta'go azis yiih yiyíínil .
PRED:	When he saw this , he said to the king , “ The king has taken his money into the Temple of the Lord , and he put it into the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Whenever the chest became full , the court secretary and the high priest counted the money that had been brought to the Lord 's Temple and put it into bags .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	Háálá ániit'éhígíí bił bééhózin ; łeezh niidlį́įgo yénálniih .
PRED:	For he knows how he is going to eat , and he is dust .
GOLD:	For he knows how weak we are ; he remembers we are only dust .

ID:	2806
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í nishłíinii ninii' bee shik'i di'niłdíín , áádóó bee nihoyíní'áanii bínashiníłtin .
PRED:	Your servant is your servant ; teach me your instructions .
GOLD:	Look upon me with love ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	2807
INPUT:	Azhą́ diné dahináanii bitahdi yił nidahoołyéé' nít'éé' nidi , Mííshek dine'é áádóó Túbal dine'é índa bidine'é dah yinééł nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso ałdó' áadi , áko t'áadoo bąąh náhineeshgizhii danilíinii diltłish bee nidaaztseedgo hanaagóó yóó'ádaalyaa .
PRED:	But the living among the people who were afraid of the living among us , along with the sword , along with the sword of the Babylonians . But the men who were led by the sword .
GOLD:	“ Meshech and Tubal are there , surrounded by the graves of all their hordes . They once struck terror in the hearts of people everywhere . But now they are outcasts , all slaughtered by the sword .

ID:	2808
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bąą doo nił hats'íid da ? Áádóó ha'át'íí lá bąą ádił nitsééníltłi' ? Diyin God bee nił chohoo'į́ , háálá shíká análwo'go shił hózhǫ́ǫgo ánáshoodlíłígíí éí shiDiyin God baa nááhásh'niih doo .
PRED:	“ Why are I discouraged ? Why are I discouraged ? Why are my God ? For I will praise my God , my God , my God , for I will praise my God .
GOLD:	Why am I discouraged ? Why is my heart so sad ? I will put my hope in God ! I will praise him again — my Savior and my God !

ID:	2809
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2810
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo kóbidiní , Ła' t'áadoo baa ákozníziní ádił adzisiihgo , éí Bóhólníihii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii doo ádoolníił da , nínígíí ájiilaago , éí t'ááłáhígo haz'ą́ dziz'įįdígíí bee ádihozhdiilt'i'go ,
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel , ” says the Lord . “ It 's not a person who has sinned against the Lord , but it is not a guilty person who lives .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . This is how you are to deal with those who sin unintentionally by doing anything that violates one of the Lord 's commands .

ID:	2811
INPUT:	áádóó nidashinitinígíí doo bik'eh honish'į́į da nít'éé' , índa nidashinitinii doo yínísts'ą́ą' da nít'éé' !
PRED:	I could listen and obey my commands , and I refused to listen .
GOLD:	Oh , why did n't I listen to my teachers ? Why did n't I pay attention to my instructors ?

ID:	2812
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné t'ááłá'í sizínígíí éí hádą́ą́' shį́į́ daaztsą́ nahalin nidi bits'ą́ą́dóó ba'áłchíní náás da'ahideeshchį́ , éí yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' t'óó ahayóigi ánéelą́ą'go índa tónteel bibąąhgóó séí doo jóołta'ígi ánéelą́ą'go ba'áłchíní náás da'ahideeshchį́ .
PRED:	So I will make a man like a human being like the sky , but I will make the stars as numerous as the stars as the stars of the seashore .
GOLD:	And so a whole nation came from this one man who was as good as dead — a nation with so many people that , like the stars in the sky and the sand on the seashore , there is no way to count them .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i Diyinii éí Gídiyan bik'i hoole' go deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádííniidgo Éíbiyíízer dine'é hakéé' dah diiná .
PRED:	But the Spirit of the Lord said to Gideon , “ When the Ark of the Lord saw the ram 's horn ,
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of the Lord clothed Gideon with power . He blew a ram 's horn as a call to arms , and the men of the clan of Abiezer came to him .

ID:	2814
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí tsosts'idiindi mííl yilt'éego hééł nideiyéhígíí índa tseebídiindi mííl dziłdi da'atseełígíí bá nidaalnish nít'éé' ;
PRED:	Solomon also killed 1,000 men in the hill country of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Solomon also had 70,000 common laborers , 80,000 quarry workers in the hill country ,

ID:	2815
INPUT:	Áádóó ání , Nantł'ago la' í'dííníkeed , ákót'ée nidi , ííshją́ą́ nits'ą́ą́' náshi'diiltį́įgo shiiniłtsą́ą́ ládą́ą́' t'áá ná ákódoonííł , nidi dooda ládą́ą́' , éí doo ákódooníił da .
PRED:	And he said , “ If you want me to know that I am dead , it will never die . But if you do n't know that I am dead . ”
GOLD:	“ You have asked a difficult thing , ” Elijah replied . “ If you see me when I am taken from you , then you will get your request . But if not , then you wo n't . ”

ID:	2816
INPUT:	Áko ni , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , doo ákwii ádahat'ínígíí baa ákonínízingo háishą' yíníłdzil doo ?
PRED:	O Lord , how long will you think about what is right ?
GOLD:	Lord , if you kept a record of our sins , who , O Lord , could ever survive ?

ID:	2817
INPUT:	Nídiidáahgo ásaa' ííł'íní bighangóó dínááh ; áadi shizaad didííts'į́į́ł .
PRED:	“ Go and hear my message , ” he said . “ Stay here and hear me . ”
GOLD:	“ Go down to the potter 's shop , and I will speak to you there . ”

ID:	2818
INPUT:	Áko nich'į' hashké niisdzį́į'go áádóó t'áá íiyisí nandishteehgo atínísh'į́įgo ał'ąą dine'é ninaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí binááł t'óó ná nahat'i'ii áádóó nee adlohodichíii , áádóó bee i'ílnii'ii índa t'óó bik'e'ayóii nílį́į doo . Bóhólníihii nishłíinii kót'éego haasdzíí' .
PRED:	I was taken away to your ancestors , and I will destroy the nations of the pagan nations . I have sworn to the Lord , who made you an object of sorrow and wonders . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	You will become an object of mockery and taunting and horror . You will be a warning to all the nations around you . They will see what happens when the Lord punishes a nation in anger and rebukes it , says the Lord .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	Áko níbaal bii' hodílzinii nihidoogéełgo Líívai dine'é éí ninádei'dii'áah doo , índa nináádoot'áałgo Líívai dine'é éí ninádei'áah dooleeł , índa t'áá háiida doo Líívai dine'é nilíinii níbaal bii' hodílzinii yíighahjį' deeyáii éí bidi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	The Levites will be carried off from the tent of the Levites . All the Levites will be burned up to the Tabernacle , and the Levites will be put to death . Anyone who will be put to death .
GOLD:	Whenever it is time for the Tabernacle to move , the Levites will take it down . And when it is time to stop , they will set it up again . But any unauthorized person who goes too near the Tabernacle must be put to death .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	K'ad nidi tsin bihétł'óól biniyé tsénił si'ą́ , áko tsin t'áá ałtso bineest'ą' doo yá'át'ééhgóó bąąh nídahadleehígíí k'ídahalne'go kǫ' biyi' góne' adahaltł'iid .
PRED:	But now I have hidden your roots into the tree , so that it will be thrown into the roots of the trees .
GOLD:	Even now the ax of God 's judgment is poised , ready to sever the roots of the trees . Yes , every tree that does not produce good fruit will be chopped down and thrown into the fire . ”

ID:	2821
INPUT:	Honoojíígóó tó naazką́ągo áyoolííł . <unk> gango haz'ą́ągi tó hadaazlį́įgo áyoolííł .
PRED:	He will draw water into the wilderness of water , and he will draw water into the wilderness .
GOLD:	But he also turns deserts into pools of water , the dry land into springs of water .

ID:	2822
INPUT:	Nidi nihí Bóhólníihii dah nihidii'eezh áádóó kǫ' bits'á honigahii bii'dóó hanihíí'eezh ; t'áá Ííjip kéyahgi kǫ' bit'ááh dahalchxíi'ii bii'dę́ę́' hanihíí'eezhii ; díí jį́ t'áá bí bidine'é bíí' dooleełii danohłį́į doo biniyé tánihidi'éésh .
PRED:	But the Lord brought you out of Egypt and led you out of the fire of the Nile . You must be a devouring fire from the community of Egypt . You must be your special possession .
GOLD:	Remember that the Lord rescued you from the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt in order to make you his very own people and his special possession , which is what you are today .

ID:	2823
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Paul éí Ananáíyas áyidííniid , Iná'ástł'inii łigaigo yishdléezhii nílíinii , Diyin God atínidoolííł ! Bee haz'áanii bik'ehgo shaa nídíít'įįłgo dah sínídáa nidi , da' ákoósh bee haz'áanii doo bídéét'i'góó shi<unk> doolts'į́įłgo bee hwiinił'a' ?
PRED:	Paul said to Festus , “ Son of God , I want you to live in the field of God . You are trying to kill me , but you are trying to kill me . Why are you trying to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	But Paul said to him , “ God will slap you , you corrupt hypocrite ! What kind of judge are you to break the law yourself by ordering me struck like that ? ”

ID:	2824
INPUT:	Nidi dasétsą́ągo Ííjip kéyahdóó ch'íshidííłtéełgo dashizhé'é yóó'ádaalyaa yę́ędi yóó'áshidíílííł . Áko áhozhdííniid , T'áá ádínínígi ádeeshnííł .
PRED:	But when I saw this , he said to me , “ I will bury my ancestors in Egypt . ” So he said , “ I 'll tell you what I am going to do . ”
GOLD:	When I die , please take my body out of Egypt and bury me with my ancestors. ” So Joseph promised , “ I will do as you ask . ”

ID:	2825
INPUT:	NihiBóhólníihii Jesus Christ nihaa a'ááh nízingo iiná doo ninít'i'ii nihaididoo'áłígíí bíká dadínóh'į́į'go Diyin God bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' bii' dahonohłǫ́ǫgo áda'díí'nółzin .
PRED:	May the Lord Jesus Christ be merciful to you , for he has mercy on the way of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	and await the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ , who will bring you eternal life . In this way , you will keep yourselves safe in God 's love .

ID:	2826
INPUT:	Éí bąą Ben-héídad bá hane' nidei'áhígíí ábijiní , Shinanit'a'í , aláahgo naat'áanii bił dahołne' , Áłtséédą́ą́' ná naal'a'í biniyé bich'į' nisíníł'a' yę́ę éí t' áá át'é ádeeshnííł , nidi díí éí doo ádeeshníił da . Áko hane' nidei'áhígíí dah nídiikaigo Ben-héídad hane' yaa nídeiz'ą́ .
PRED:	So Ben-hadad told his officials , “ My lord the king , my servant Ben-hadad has sent this message to the king : I will never tell you what you have done . ” So Ben-hadad told them , “ I will never tell you what we have done . ”
GOLD:	So Ahab told the messengers from Ben-hadad , “ Say this to my lord the king : ‘ I will give you everything you asked for the first time , but I can not accept this last demand of yours . ' ” So the messengers returned to Ben-hadad with that response .

ID:	2827
INPUT:	Ísakar éí télii bidziilii hééł naakiígíí bita'gi dziztíinii jílį́ ,
PRED:	Simeon was a young donkey named after his donkey , and he was the son of Simeon .
GOLD:	“ Issachar is a sturdy donkey , resting between two saddlepacks .

ID:	2828
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip kéyahgóó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' diné nihinéést'e'go tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz bits'ásk'ehgi behégod áłah ánáádajidle' .
PRED:	So we divided the land of Egypt , and we decided to be beaten with straw .
GOLD:	So the people scattered throughout the land of Egypt in search of stubble to use as straw .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	Bá ííyah danii'áii naadiingo áádóó bitł'ááh naaznilígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí ałdó' naadiingo béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaa , nidi ííyah danii'áii bąąh hada'azhahígíí índa bita'ndaaz'áhígíí éí béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	The posts of the courtyard were decorated with bronze bases , and the tops of the posts were overlaid with silver .
GOLD:	They were held up by twenty posts set securely in twenty bronze bases . He hung the curtains with silver hooks and rings .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	Nidi David éí Abísheiyai áyidííniid , Doo atídíílíił da , háálá Bóhólníihii ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'iishą' háí atíjiilaago doo ádihozhdiilt'i' da doo ?
PRED:	But David said to Abishai , “ Do n't have done anything for the Lord 's anointed king ? ”
GOLD:	“ No ! ” David said . “ Do n't kill him . For who can remain innocent after attacking the Lord 's anointed one ?

ID:	2831
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Zedekáíyah índa naat'áanii danilíinii éí ana'í danilíinii áádóó hazéé'deidoot'įįłgo hádaat'íinii índa Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo bikéyahgóó anídahaas'náanii baa hodideesh'ááł .
PRED:	Then I will give the king of Judah and officials of Judah and officials to the king of Babylon . I will give them victory over the king of Babylon and the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ I will hand over King Zedekiah of Judah and his officials to the army of the king of Babylon . And although they have left Jerusalem for a while ,

ID:	2832
INPUT:	Shikin bii' sohodizin haníi'gi hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫgo ał'ąą dine'é éí shí Ízrel dine'é diyingo ádaashłaago bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I know that I am in the sanctuary of my sanctuary , the nations of Israel will know that I am holy .
GOLD:	And when my Temple is among them forever , the nations will know that I am the Lord , who makes Israel holy . ”

ID:	2833
INPUT:	Tsxį́įłgo ádee ha'diidziihii éí doo áháyą' át'é
PRED:	Eliphaz 's Third Response to Eliphaz
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	2834
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní biDiyin God nílíinii , hasht'éénihídlééh áádóó ayóó ánít'éii bee i'díłdlaadgo yisdánihidi'doo'nił !
PRED:	Come , O God of Heaven 's Armies , and let us be saved .
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O God of Heaven 's Armies.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	2835
INPUT:	Áádóó Ábner áhodííniid , Ninish'náajigo , doodaii' ninishtł'ajigo hanilyeed , áko tsíłkéí ła' yiisiłgo yee naabaahii bighaní'nííł . Nidi Éísahel t'áá hakéé' yilwoł .
PRED:	Then Abner said to him , “ Go and get out of his right hand ! ” So Abner ordered that his young men and fled to death .
GOLD:	“ Go fight someone else ! ” Abner warned . “ Take on one of the younger men , and strip him of his weapons. ” But Asahel kept right on chasing Abner .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	Diyin God Bóhólníihii nilíinii éí yádiłhił áyiilaago k'íísts'ǫ́ǫdii áádóó nahasdzáán áádóó biyi' hólóonii yił k'íísts'ǫ́ǫdii áádóó bikáa'gi diné nídídzihgo índa níłch'i yee hináago áyiilaii ání ,
PRED:	For the Lord , the God of the heavens , Creator of all the nations of the earth . He has made us a trap for his dwelling in a trap .
GOLD:	God , the Lord , created the heavens and stretched them out.He created the earth and everything in it.He gives breath to everyone , life to everyone who walks the earth.And it is he who says ,

ID:	2837
INPUT:	Áádóó <unk> kin haal'áagi Diyin God bizaad bee yájííłti'go Ataláíya góyaa jiní'áázh ,
PRED:	When they returned to the town of God , they returned to the town of God .
GOLD:	They preached the word in Perga , then went down to Attalia .

ID:	2838
INPUT:	Áko abínígo adideezdládígíí nahalingo idi'dííłdlał áádóó bee nąąh dahaz'áanii bits'ą́ą́dóó t'ahaa'go yá'át'ééh nídíídleeł índa nit'áá ákogi át'éii nilą́ąjį' hólǫ́ǫ doo ; Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii éí yee nik'iiní'į́į' doo .
PRED:	As you see , you will be like a cup of fire , and you will be filled with justice , and you will see the Lord 's greatness .
GOLD:	“ Then your salvation will come like the dawn , and your wounds will quickly heal.Your godliness will lead you forward , and the glory of the Lord will protect you from behind .

ID:	2839
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Béíyasha nant'áago Jerobówam ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii t'áá át'é ałtso neistseed ; Bóhólníihii kóníigo bá naal'a'í Sháíloh kin haal'áádóó diné Aháíjah wolyéii yee yich'į' haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo Jerobówam yits'ą́ą́dóó danilíinii nabi'diztseedjį' doo ła' ch'ééyáa da ,
PRED:	So Jeroboam slaughtered all the families of Jeroboam 's family , and the Lord had killed all the men of Shiloh . He did not allow anyone to go to Shiloh to Shiloh .
GOLD:	He immediately slaughtered all the descendants of King Jeroboam , so that not one of the royal family was left , just as the Lord had promised concerning Jeroboam by the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh .

ID:	2840
INPUT:	Áádóó David bá nidaal'a'í hach'į' ayííł'a'go hoł nídaaskai áádóó bił yah ajííyáago hoł biiską́ . Jó , ąądii bits'ą́ą́dóó ho'díídee' , áádóó haghangóó anídzoodzá .
PRED:	So David sent his servants to bring him back to the next day , and she ate her during her menstrual period .
GOLD:	Then David sent messengers to get her ; and when she came to the palace , he slept with her . She had just completed the purification rites after having her menstrual period . Then she returned home .

ID:	2841
INPUT:	Adláanii nahalingo nidazhnit'i áádóó naanídazhnéekaad índa t'áadoo ánáádajó'ne'é da .
PRED:	He makes them like a wild wind , and he destroys them .
GOLD:	They reeled and staggered like drunkardsand were at their wits ' end .

ID:	2842
INPUT:	Áko Jerabéíyal biye'ké tsosts'idiinígíí yich'į' t'óó báhádzidígi ádáát'įįd áádóó hak'isóó naaztseedii bidiłígíí Abímelek hak'i didoot'ááł , índa Shííkem dine'é háká ííjée'go hak'isóó neistseedígíí ałdó' yik'i deididoo'ááł .
PRED:	One day Gideon 's sons and his sons did as he had done . He ordered his brothers to kill Abimelech and his brothers and his brothers .
GOLD:	God was punishing Abimelech for murdering Gideon 's seventy sons , and the citizens of Shechem for supporting him in this treachery of murdering his brothers .

ID:	2843
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii niDiyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó bee ééhózinii bííníkeed ; ch'į́įdiitahgóó , doodaii' yá'ąąshgóó bee ééhózinii yíníkeed .
PRED:	I asked the Lord , the God of heaven , and he asked them to give them a miraculous sign from heaven .
GOLD:	“ Ask the Lord your God for a sign of confirmation , Ahaz . Make it as difficult as you want — as high as heaven or as deep as the place of the dead . ”

ID:	2844
INPUT:	Nidaalteehii t'áá íiyisí doo yá'áshóonii yiih níídee' , áko t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá shí dadideeshteh .
PRED:	Let the wicked fall into the wicked , and I will not be healed .
GOLD:	You have dug a deep pit to trap them at Acacia Grove.But I will settle with you for what you have done .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	Shich'į' nahwii'náago yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' shaatįįh yíná , nidi Bóhólníihii bee nisdzil nít'éé' .
PRED:	So I left you in trouble , but the Lord tested me .
GOLD:	They attacked me at a moment when I was in distress , but the Lord supported me .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Ákǫ́ǫ́ dínáahgo nínaaíké áádóó dibé baa nidíníítaał ; nínaaíké índa dibéda daats'í yá'ádaat'ééh . Áko áádę́ę́' hane' shaa nídíí'ááł . Ákohgo Hííbran honíteeldóó dahozhdiił'a'go Shííkem nahós'a'di jiníyá .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to his brothers , “ Go and sing to the flocks of sheep and goats , goats , and Jacob . ” So they went out to the valley of Shechem .
GOLD:	“ Go and see how your brothers and the flocks are getting along , ” Jacob said . “ Then come back and bring me a report. ” So Jacob sent him on his way , and Joseph traveled to Shechem from their home in the valley of Hebron .

ID:	2847
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad nílááh , náálwoł ; jó , ayóó át'éego ił nílį́įgo ándeeshłííł nisin nít'éé' , nidi ił ídlį́ bits'ą́ąjį' Bóhólníihii t'ą́ą́' ánóhsin nít'éé' .
PRED:	Now go , and I will help you , for you were great and honor the Lord .
GOLD:	Now get out of here ! Go back home ! I promised to reward you richly , but the Lord has kept you from your reward . ”

ID:	2848
INPUT:	Tł'oh yishbizh shi'éé' áshłaago shi'ana'í yá nidahałt'i'ii sélį́į́' .
PRED:	He dressed me in burlap and clothed me in burlap .
GOLD:	When I dress in burlap to show sorrow , they make fun of me .

ID:	2849
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Ádam bítsą́ą́' hayíítánígíí yee asdzání áyiilaa , áádóó Ádam yich'į' yił ní'áázh .
PRED:	So the Lord God gave birth to Adam , and the woman who had intercourse with her .
GOLD:	Then the Lord God made a woman from the rib , and he brought her to the man .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí Bóhólníihii bił hólǫ́ , áádóó diné bohónéedzáanii dzizlį́į́' , áko Ííjip diné honanit'a'í nilíinii bighan góne' kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Joseph became very glad , and he was afraid of all the people of Egypt . And when the king of Egypt arrived in Egypt , he lived in Egypt .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	2851
INPUT:	Ákohgo tsosts'id nídízííd binih Iilíshama biye' Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí aláahgo naat'áanii bidine'é ahoolchíiłii áádóó biyaa sinilii agháago naat'áanii ła' nilį́įgo éí diné neeznált'éego yił Mízpah kin haal'áadi Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah yaa yíkai ; áadi t'ááłáhíjį' da'jííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	On the seventh year of Ishmael , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Nethaniah , grandson of Ishmael , who was taken from the town of Mizpah . But Gedaliah son of Ahikam and grandson of Mizpah .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family and had been one of the king 's high officials , went to Mizpah with ten men to meet Gedaliah . While they were eating together ,

ID:	2852
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Kót'éego Máíkah shá ádzaago bik'é shich'į' ni'iiléego bináá'iiłniihii sélį́į́' .
PRED:	Then he said to Micah , “ If I want to go to the priest , he healed me as a priest . ”
GOLD:	He told them about his agreement with Micah and that he had been hired as Micah 's personal priest .

ID:	2853
INPUT:	Háálá nihí ałdó' łah doo dahoniidzą́ą da nít'éé' , doo ak'eh dahoniil'į́į da nít'éé' , yóó'adanihidi'niit'ááh nít'éé' . Adáhonooníinii índa honeeni ał'ąą ádaat'éii binaalte' daniidlį́į́ nít'éé' . Áká nideiit'áago índa da'iilch'į́įdgo , nihik'eda'diniihgo índa ak'edadinii'niihgo nihídayéełkaah nít'éé' .
PRED:	For we could not obey God 's command , and we were unfaithful to us . We were jealous of our freedom , and we were jealous of our slavery . We were jealous of our slavery .
GOLD:	Once we , too , were foolish and disobedient . We were misled and became slaves to many lusts and pleasures . Our lives were full of evil and envy , and we hated each other .

ID:	2854
INPUT:	Áádóó Bérak nideídééłkidgo ádaaní , Díishą' haa yit'éego saad t'áá át'é bee ak'e'shíníłchį́ ? <unk> tihgoósh bik'e'shíníłchį́ ?
PRED:	Then Barak asked them , “ What did you mean ? What did you mean ? ”
GOLD:	“ But first , tell us how you got these messages . Did they come directly from Jeremiah ? ”

ID:	2855
INPUT:	Nidi ha'át'íí shį́į́ bich'į́įdii át'į́ danízingo hak'ee tsídadoolyizgo bił yéé' dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	But when the grave saw that they were afraid , they were terrified and terrified .
GOLD:	But the whole group was startled and frightened , thinking they were seeing a ghost !

ID:	2856
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2857
INPUT:	Áko shoo , ła' diné biye' nilíinii nahalingo shidaa' yideelchid , nít'éé' shizéé' ąą ádzaago yáshti'go shidááhdę́ę́' sizínígíí ábidishní , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shił áhoodzaaígíí t'áá íiyisí yínííł bik'e'íyée'ii shik'i hoole' , áko shitah doo hwiiłna' da .
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” someone said , “ I 'm speaking to my lips . My lips are open to my mouth , O Lord , and I have seen what I said .
GOLD:	Then the one who looked like a man touched my lips , and I opened my mouth and began to speak . I said to the one standing in front of me , “ I am filled with anguish because of the vision I have seen , my lord , and I am very weak .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	Díí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii bee haz'áanii át'é : éí ts'ídá aláahgo dílzinii át'é .
PRED:	“ These are the instructions regarding the law . This is the Most High .
GOLD:	“ These are the instructions for the guilt offering . It is most holy .

ID:	2859
INPUT:	Áádóó tsé bee adzoolne' ánízahjį' bits'ázhníyáago , áadi nitsizhdinígo'go sozdoolzingo ájíní ,
PRED:	Then she went to his feet and prayed for him . He prayed to his feet ,
GOLD:	He walked away , about a stone 's throw , and knelt down and prayed ,

ID:	2860
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro áádóó diné eel'áago yinant'áhígíí ábidiní , Ayóó ádanoht'éego háí lá bił ahąąh ninihideeshnił lá ?
PRED:	“ Son of man , the king of Egypt , ” the king of Egypt said , “ I will bring you victory over the land of Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give this message to Pharaoh , king of Egypt , and all his hordes : “ To whom would you compare your greatness ?

ID:	2861
INPUT:	Ts'ídá ákohgo , diné doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą́'góó áłah silį́į'go t'áá hazhó'ó ałk'i na'asdee' , áko hódahooł'aahii áłtsé bich'į' ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní , Férisii danilíinii bidíík'ǫsh bee taos'nii' niilyółí bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ , éí t'óó áhodi'į́ át'é .
PRED:	As a result , the crowd looked up and saw a huge crowd that had been healed . And when the Pharisees saw that the crowd were born to the crowd , they said , “ Brothers , you have been healed of the Pharisees ! ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the crowds grew until thousands were milling about and stepping on each other . Jesus turned first to his disciples and warned them , “ Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees — their hypocrisy .

ID:	2862
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus t'áadoo ha'di'ní'ą́ą́góó kóhodííniid , Nílááh , nighangóó nik'éí bich'į' nídídáahgo ayóó ádaat'éii Bóhólníihii ná yaa naayáhígíí índa yee naa joozba'ígíí bee bił dahólne' .
PRED:	But Jesus told him , “ Go back to the home of the Lord . Go to your family and your family , and you will be faithful to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No , go home to your family , and tell them everything the Lord has done for you and how merciful he has been . ”

ID:	2863
INPUT:	Nihi'ana'í bich'į' nihíká anilyeed , háálá diné t'éiyá áká iilwo'go t'áadoo nádleehí da !
PRED:	Do n't help your enemies , for you do n't need to help you .
GOLD:	Oh , please help us against our enemies , for all human help is useless .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	Ch'ikę́ę́h éí diné ła' bił ahaazhdoot'ash biniyé bił ahazhdeet'ą́ągo , nít'éé' diné ła' hak'íníyáago hoł neezhtéezhgo ,
PRED:	“ Suppose a man marries a man with her , she must have sex with her , and she is sex with her .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man meets a young woman , a virgin who is engaged to be married , and he has sexual intercourse with her . If this happens within a town ,

ID:	2865
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , nániisiskan , háálá shich'į' ééhodíísįįł ; shich'į' dah díníit'aahgo ádíshnínígíí diits'į́į́h .
PRED:	O God , listen to my cry for help ; listen to my ears .
GOLD:	I am praying to you because I know you will answer , O God.Bend down and listen as I pray .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' anáázh'niiltsąądgo ashkii náájíshchį́ , áko ázhdííniid , K'ad lá índa shahastiin bił hinish'náa doo ni , háálá táadi haye' há shéłchį́ , áko díí bąą ashkii Líívai bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	Then she became pregnant again and gave birth to a son . “ This is my son , ” he said . “ I am the son of Levi , and I will live in this name . ”
GOLD:	Then she became pregnant a third time and gave birth to another son . He was named Levi , for she said , “ Surely this time my husband will feel affection for me , since I have given him three sons ! ”

ID:	2867
INPUT:	Áádóó ánihidishní , Ha'a'aahdę́ę́' índa e'e'aahdę́ę́' diné lą'í nidahidookah , áádóó yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ądi Éíbraham áádóó Áízak índa Jéíkab yił da'dooyį́į́ł biniyé yił dah dínóobįįł ,
PRED:	And I tell you , ‘ The east will come from the west and west of the west of the west and the Kingdom of Abraham , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob . ' ”
GOLD:	And I tell you this , that many Gentiles will come from all over the world — from east and west — and sit down with Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob at the feast in the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	Tsin deíl'áhígíí éí bineest'ą' bąąh nídahoodleeł doo , nahasdzáán éí bits'ą́ą́dóó nínáda'nt'į́įh doo áádóó bikéyahgi háádę́ę'da doo baa hwiinít'į́į́góó nida'nt'ą' doo ; hazéédadéetání há nidaháti'go índa ana'í dahasnáago binaa'nil dajílíinii bighááhonish'nilgo , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	The trees of the trees will come to the land of the earth , and the land of the earth will be taken away from the Euphrates River . I will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	The orchards and fields of my people will yield bumper crops , and everyone will live in safety . When I have broken their chains of slavery and rescued them from those who enslaved them , then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2869
INPUT:	Óola biisdííłtóolii nahalingo náhookǫsdę́ę́' ayóó ánóolninii hahwiileeh ; Diyin God éí t'óó bik'e'ayóigo binaagóó haz'ą́ .
PRED:	You have placed the Ark of God like a gold container in the north of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	So also , golden splendor comes from the mountain of God.He is clothed in dazzling splendor .

ID:	2870
INPUT:	Éí bąą Féro bidziilii bee nihaa yádahodoosįįł áádóó Ííjip dine'é bine' dadoohdzih baa da'íínóhłíhígíí nihił dahodoo<unk> .
PRED:	Therefore , I will tell you what you have done to Pharaoh and Egypt . Then you will tell you what you have said .
GOLD:	But by trusting Pharaoh , you will be humiliated , and by depending on him , you will be disgraced .

ID:	2871
INPUT:	Ákót'éego yishááł nít'éé' Damáskas t'áá áhání hadziihgo , ts'ídá hanii shį́į́ ałní'ní'ą́ągo , t'áadoo hooyání yá'ąąshdę́ę́' t'áá íiyisí ayóó át'éego shinaagóó łe'díídláád .
PRED:	As he was speaking to Damascus , he said to Damascus , “ You have seen a great sign from heaven , a great sign from heaven . ”
GOLD:	“ As I was on the road , approaching Damascus about noon , a very bright light from heaven suddenly shone down around me .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hak'isóó índa hazhé'é ba'áłchíní t'áá ałtso ábizhdííniid , Féro bich'į' deesháałgo bił hodeeshnihgo ábidideeshniił , Shik'isóó índa shizhé'é ba'áłchíní t'áá ałtso Kéínan kéyahdi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'é'ígíí shaa níná .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to his brothers and his brothers , “ I will return to Pharaoh 's family , and I will return to Pharaoh 's family . ”
GOLD:	And Joseph said to his brothers and to his father 's entire family , “ I will go to Pharaoh and tell him , ‘ My brothers and my father 's entire family have come to me from the land of Canaan .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí bizéé'dę́ę́' áádóó dóola da'ałchinii bidee' bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshíłteehgo shich'į' ééhonísįįh !
PRED:	Rescue me from the lions ; rescue me from their mouths ; rescue me from their enemies .
GOLD:	Snatch me from the lion 's jawsand from the horns of these wild oxen .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	Kodi ałtádiisghaas , dííniidgo , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , aa a'ááh nínízinii bee de áshíínísin .
PRED:	You shouted to me , O Lord , for you have mercy on me .
GOLD:	I cried out , “ I am slipping ! ” but your unfailing love , O Lord , supported me .

ID:	2875
INPUT:	Áko Tííman kin haal'áádóó Élifaz wolyéii ánááhodoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied :
GOLD:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied to Job :

ID:	2876
INPUT:	Áko álíleego áda'ooł'įįłii beda'álííl yee t'áá ákónááda'iidlaa , áko Ííjip kéyahjį' ch'ał nááníłnii' .
PRED:	So Pharaoh sent the people out of Egypt , so so they could have enough money to eat the land .
GOLD:	But the magicians were able to do the same thing with their magic . They , too , caused frogs to come up on the land of Egypt .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	t'áá dichin danilį́įgo hooghangóó béé'ayéłnii'go hooghan t'áá yi'oh dahidínóołnah , háálá ła' nízaadę́ę́' nidaakai .
PRED:	I will feed you with food , and you will run away to a distance , for no one has left you .
GOLD:	If I send them home hungry , they will faint along the way . For some of them have come a long distance . ”

ID:	2878
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	and a male goat for a sin offering .
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	Áko éí ayóó íits'a'go hadoolghaazhgo ání , Tsin sikaadii k'íníłne' índa bits' ádaoz'a' bąąh híłne' ; bit'ąą' bąąh hi<unk> <unk> áádóó bineest'ą' yóó'ahíłkaad ; háni'dii naaldlooshii éí tsin sikaadii yiyaa hahajeeh áádóó tsin bits'ádaoz'a' bąąhdóó tsídii nídahidiit'ááh , ní .
PRED:	Then he cried out to the tree and said , “ Get up from the trees of the trees and the trees of the trees and the trees of the trees . Let the tree be cut down from the tree . ”
GOLD:	The messenger shouted , “ Cut down the tree and lop off its branches ! Shake off its leaves and scatter its fruit ! Chase the wild animals from its shadeand the birds from its branches .

ID:	2880
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí tónteel bikáa'jigo dah didiilnii' áádóó hayííłką́ągo tónteel ałch'į' kónádzaago nídiilkǫ' , áko Ííjip dine'é éí tónteel biyi' tsístł'aaskai , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é bik'ijį' tó ahinéidiiłk'olgo íísdįįd .
PRED:	So Moses threw the sea into the sea and threw it into the sea . Then he threw the water into the sea into the sea , and the Egyptians struck the Egyptians with the water of Egypt . And the Lord destroyed the Egyptians .
GOLD:	So as the sun began to rise , Moses raised his hand over the sea , and the water rushed back into its usual place . The Egyptians tried to escape , but the Lord swept them into the sea .

ID:	2881
INPUT:	David hwe'asdzą́ą́ nidilt'éhígíí ałdó' yisnááh ályaa lá . Ahínowam éí Jézriyeldóó naaghá , Ábigeil bąąh áhásdįįdii Néíbal be'asdzą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę éí Kármeldóó naaghá .
PRED:	David 's wife was Ahinoam from Jezreel , and she was taking her widow 's wife . She was taking her widow from Jezreel .
GOLD:	David 's two wives , Ahinoam from Jezreel and Abigail , the widow of Nabal from Carmel , were among those captured .

ID:	2882
INPUT:	kózhdoonííł ; jó , ádił adzisiihgo bee ádihozhdiilt'i'go t'áá na'níle'dii agha'yídláhígíí , doodaii' ina'adlo' bee shójoost'e'ígíí , doodaii' hąąh ni'níláhígíí , doodaii' yóó'eeldéelii nízhdiiláhígíí béé'áhozhdilyáahgo éí ákódziidzaaígíí bąą ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	“ If you are guilty , you must be guilty of a person who is guilty , or if you are guilty or a thief or a thief or a thief or a thief or a thief .
GOLD:	If you have sinned in any of these ways , you are guilty . You must give back whatever you stole , or the money you took by extortion , or the security deposit , or the lost property you found ,

ID:	2883
INPUT:	Jórdan tooh nílíní ha'a'aahjígo táa'go kin haal'áii áádóó Kéínan kéyah bii' táa'go kin haal'áii éí Líívai dine'é baa dadidooh'ááł ; éí kin hadaas'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichééh biniyé nihá át'ée doo .
PRED:	“ On the east side of the Jordan River , the tribe of Canaan , the tribe of Canaan , will be called for the tribe of Canaan .
GOLD:	three on the east side of the Jordan River and three on the west in the land of Canaan .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	Áádóó níbaal bii' hodílzinii bá tsin neheeshjíí' náhookǫsjí nool<unk> dooígíí naadiingo ánáádadoohdlííł ,
PRED:	Make twenty frames of the Tabernacle for the north side of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , make another twenty frames ,

ID:	2885
INPUT:	ázhdííniid , ShiBóhólníihii , nihił nishłį́į́ ládą́ą́' nihinaal'a'í t'ááká bits'ą́ą́' dah doohkááh yíila' , t'áá shǫǫdí .
PRED:	“ Please , Lord , ” he replied . “ Do n't let me go to your servant . ”
GOLD:	“ My lord , ” he said , “ if it pleases you , stop here for a while .

ID:	2886
INPUT:	Diné ła' yíighahgóó hidikáahgo , shoo , ats'íís atiingóó sitį́įgo áádóó náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ats'íís yíighahgóó sizį́įgo dayiiłtsą́ , áko kin haal'áadi Diyin God yá halne'ii haastihígíí kééhat'į́įdi yíkaigo yaa dahoolne' .
PRED:	“ I saw a man standing beside the road beside the road . I saw a lion standing beside the road beside the city , but the people who lived in the city of God came to him .
GOLD:	People who passed by saw the body lying in the road and the lion standing beside it , and they went and reported it in Bethel , where the old prophet lived .

ID:	2887
INPUT:	Azhą́ bíká aashwod índa bidziilgo áńdeishdlaa nidi , t'ahdii t'óó shik'ijį' nidaha'á .
PRED:	I have seen the strength of my arm , but he has broken my strength .
GOLD:	I trained them and made them strong , yet now they plot evil against me .

ID:	2888
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David yę́ę áádóó siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í Jó'ab yę́ę dabizhé'é yę́ę bikéé' áhásdįįdgo éí Ííjip kéyahgi Héídad yiyíínii'go Féro ííłní , T'áá shí shikéyahgóó nídeeshdááł biniyé sha'di'ní'aah .
PRED:	So David and his army went to Egypt , and he said to his father , “ I 'll go to Egypt . I 'll return to Pharaoh . ”
GOLD:	When the news reached Hadad in Egypt that David and his commander Joab were both dead , he said to Pharaoh , “ Let me return to my own country . ”

ID:	2889
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áshidííniid , Díí dine'é nísh'į́įgo , shoo , díí diné t'áá íiyisí doo nibída'didzilii danilį́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ This is what the Lord says : The people are stubborn and rebellious people .
GOLD:	“ The Lord also said to me , ‘ I have seen how stubborn and rebellious these people are .

ID:	2890
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Háájíshą' ne'asdzą́ą́ Sárah ? Áko ázhdííniid , Níbaal yii' sidá .
PRED:	“ Where is your wife ? ” they asked . “ Yes , Sarah , Sarah , ” he replied .
GOLD:	“ Where is Sarah , your wife ? ” the visitors asked. “ She 's inside the tent , ” Abraham replied .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	Áádóó Miirárai bits'ą́ą́dóó Málai dine'é índa Múshai dine'é ahidideeshchį́ ; díí Miirárai dine'é bada'áłchíní ádaat'į́ .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from Merari : The clans of Merari were named after their ancestor Merari .
GOLD:	The descendants of Merari were composed of the clans descended from Mahli and Mushi .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	Ákoshą' Jew dine'é jílíinii ha'át'íí bee t'ah atisídi haa nitsáhákees ? Doodaii' ąąh náhinilgishshą' ha'át'íí bee ílį́ ?
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” the Jewish leaders demanded . “ Even if you have been circumcised ? ”
GOLD:	Then what 's the advantage of being a Jew ? Is there any value in the ceremony of circumcision ?

ID:	2893
INPUT:	Shoo , Bóhólníihii éí áłchíní aa yiinííł , iishch'id bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ineest'ą' hach'į' nahalyéii át'é .
PRED:	Look , the Lord has given you a gift of blessing .
GOLD:	Children are a gift from the Lord ; they are a reward from him .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	Kíídesh , Édriyai , <unk> zor ,
PRED:	Kedesh , Hazor , Ithlah ,
GOLD:	Kedesh , Edrei , En-hazor ,

ID:	2895
INPUT:	Diné léi' hatsijį' ayííł'a' ; éí Jóseph naalte' dooleełgo nahaaznii'ii
PRED:	“ Suppose a man named Joseph , a man named Joseph ,
GOLD:	Then he sent someone to Egypt ahead of them — Joseph , who was sold as a slave .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Ha'át'íida nahasdzáán bikáa'gi bee a'di'noo'ánígíí , t'áá éí yá'ąąshdi bee a'deet'ą́ą doo , áádóó ha'át'íida nahasdzáán bikáa'gi doo bee a'di'noo'ánígíí , t'áá éí yá'ąąshdi ałdó' doo bee a'deet'ą́ą da dooleeł .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , you will be rich in heaven , but the earth will not be planted in the wilderness .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven .

ID:	2897
INPUT:	Nidi ni ánít'į́į́ lá ; diné t'áá bił ahinisht'éii , bił tádísh'aashii , shik'is nílíinii , ni ánít'į́į́ lá ;
PRED:	But I am telling you , ‘ You are my brother , my friend . '
GOLD:	Instead , it is you — my equal , my companion and close friend .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	Ish-bósheth bi'diisyį́
PRED:	Ishbosheth 's Death
GOLD:	The Murder of Ishbosheth

ID:	2899
INPUT:	Háálá nihí łah doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ádaat'ínígi ádaaht'į́į́ nít'éé' , baa'ihgo tsi'nidaahkai nít'éé' , adádanoołníí nít'éé' , wáin daahdlą́ą́ nít'éé' , adlą́ nihił dahoneełni nít'éé' , t'áá na'níle'dii nida'soohdlą' , índa e'elyaii doo daaldinii bich'į' nidahohłáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	For you were not living among the Jews . You have been drinking wine and drinking wine and drinking wine . You have been drinking wine and drinking wine and drinking wine before you . You have never been drinking wine and drinking wine .
GOLD:	You have had enough in the past of the evil things that godless people enjoy — their immorality and lust , their feasting and drunkenness and wild parties , and their terrible worship of idols .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yidááhdóó dahataał le' , háálá nahasdzáán yaa nídóot'įįł biniyé yíghááh . T'áá ákogi át'éii yee nahasdzáán yaa nídóot'įįł ; nihokáá' dine'é t'áá aheełt'éego baa nízh<unk> įįł .
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , for he will sing his justice to the world , for he is coming to judge the world .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with fairness .

ID:	2901
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá danół'į́ ; t'áá daats'í bí bikéyahjigo Beth-shíímesh kin shijaa'góó nídoodleeł , áádóó índa ayóó át'éego atínihiilaii éí bí át'į́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł , nidi doo bí át'į́į́góó bí doo atínihiilaagóó nihił béédahoozingo éí t'óó nihich'į' ákóhóót'įįd dooleeł .
PRED:	But if you see , we will know how many enemies are going to attack Beth-shemesh and Beth-shemesh , they will know that he has done to us . But we will know that he has done to us . ”
GOLD:	If they cross the border of our land and go to Beth-shemesh , we will know it was the Lord who brought this great disaster upon us . If they do n't , we will know it was not his hand that caused the plague . It came simply by chance . ”

ID:	2902
INPUT:	Áko Gálgatha hoolyéegi yíkaigo éí tsiits'in si'ání jiníigo óolyé ,
PRED:	Then they went to a place called the place where he called the place where he said ,
GOLD:	And they went out to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó ał'ąą dine'é doo daaldinii yaa naakaigo ch'íniiníłkaadii t'áá éí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa naayá .
PRED:	When the Israelites left the Lord 's presence , the people of Israel followed the evil practices of the Lord had done for them .
GOLD:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , following the detestable practices of the pagan nations that the Lord had driven from the land ahead of the Israelites .

ID:	2904
INPUT:	Ákohgo Héíman éí naat'á éé' nizhóníii ła' néidiinil áádóó łį́į́' ałdó' néidiilóozgo Mórdiikai ééh jííłtį́ áádóó łį́į́' bikáá' dah bizneesdáago kintah ha'diitiingóó łį́į́' bił jinílóozgo ájíní , Aláahgo naat'áanii diné yaa bił nihoozhǫǫhgo bił nilíinii ákót'éego áhodoolííł .
PRED:	So Haman took some of the royal robe and put it on the roof of the royal robes and put it on the roof of the king 's royal robes . And the king said , “ The king will be filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	So Haman took the robes and put them on Mordecai , placed him on the king 's own horse , and led him through the city square , shouting , “ This is what the king does for someone he wishes to honor ! ”

ID:	2905
INPUT:	Iiláíjah áádóó Zárefathdóó asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii
PRED:	Elisha and the Woman
GOLD:	The Widow at Zarephath

ID:	2906
INPUT:	Bizaad éí Jéíkab dine'é yił ííshjání ííł'į́ ; yee nihwiiz'áanii índa bik'eh hoogáałii Ízrel dine'é yee yił halne' .
PRED:	His words is the path of Jacob ; his regulations are his regulations .
GOLD:	He has revealed his words to Jacob , his decrees and regulations to Israel .

ID:	2907
INPUT:	Háálá yóó'adashideez'ą́ áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii deidiłid ; t'áá bí ádayiilaii t'áá át'é yee shá dahodoołchįįł yiniyé ádaat'į́ . Éí bąą díí kéyah nahós'a'ígíí bik'ijį' bee hashké niisdzį́į'ii yeideeshxéełgo doo dínóoltsis da .
PRED:	For they have abandoned my people , and they will burn incense to idols and burn incense to idols . They will never again destroy them . I will destroy them , and I will never destroy them . ”
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will be poured out on this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	2908
INPUT:	Háálá Jéíkab dine'é bitahgi bee bééhániihii hasht'eyiilaa , áádóó Ízrel dine'é bitahgi bee haz'áanii niinílá . Éí danihizhé'é yę́ę bada'áłchíní bił béédahózingo ádayoolíił doo , yiłníigo yich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	For he told Jacob , “ He has made us a sacred place among the people of Israel . He has told us what they did to do . ”
GOLD:	For he issued his laws to Jacob ; he gave his instructions to Israel.He commanded our ancestorsto teach them to their children ,

ID:	2909
INPUT:	Deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí áníigo jidiizts'ą́ą́' bee ho'ílnii'ígíí éí t'áadoo bi'jiilaa da , áko ho'diisyínígíí t'áá hó hadił bee hohodiit'i' doo . Nidi bee ho'ílnii'ígíí bi'jiilaago éí jidoodzih nít'éé' .
PRED:	When the blast of the ram 's horn heard the blast of the ram 's horn , it would be punished because of their sins . But the wicked will be punished for their sins .
GOLD:	They heard the alarm but ignored it , so the responsibility is theirs . If they had listened to the warning , they could have saved their lives .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	Hánnah biyiin
PRED:	Hannah and His Song of Praise
GOLD:	Hannah 's Prayer of Praise

ID:	2911
INPUT:	Áko táá' daats'í , dį́į́' daats'í tsin sitą́ ánízahgóó da'jíł'eełgo Jesus táłkáá'góó tsinaa'eeł yich'į' yigáałgo dajiiłtsą́ . Áko bik'ee hoł yéé' dahazlį́į́' ,
PRED:	About three months Jesus was walking through the boat , and the sailors saw Jesus was afraid of the ship . So they realized that Jesus was afraid of the boat .
GOLD:	They had rowed three or four miles when suddenly they saw Jesus walking on the water toward the boat . They were terrified ,

ID:	2912
INPUT:	áko Jesus yich'į' nitsidinígo'go yich'į' ahééh niizį́į́' . Éí Samériya dine'é jílį́įgo ájít'į́ .
PRED:	Jesus prayed to the disciples , and he gave thanks to the people of Samaria .
GOLD:	He fell to the ground at Jesus ' feet , thanking him for what he had done . This man was a Samaritan .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	Áko David éí Saul áyidííniid , Shoo , ha'át'éegoshą' saad yee hadahadziihgo yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , David atínídoolííł , daniłní ?
PRED:	David asked Saul , “ What do you want to kill David ? ”
GOLD:	Then he shouted to Saul , “ Why do you listen to the people who say I am trying to harm you ?

ID:	2914
INPUT:	Áko díí áhóót'įįdígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł danízingo Jesus yaa haazhjée'go diné biyi'dę́ę́' níłch'i bida'iiníziinii hahaazhjé'ígíí bi'éé' hólǫ́ǫgo índa bintsíkees yá'át'éehgo Jesus yíighahgi sidáago bik'íjíkai , áko t'áá ádzíłtso béédadzisdzííd .
PRED:	When you see this , you will know that Jesus had done this , he was able to see that the demon was healed of the demons .
GOLD:	People rushed out to see what had happened . A crowd soon gathered around Jesus , and they saw the man who had been freed from the demons . He was sitting at Jesus ' feet , fully clothed and perfectly sane , and they were all afraid .

ID:	2915
INPUT:	Nízhi' ayóó át'éii índa t'áá íiyisí bits'ąą hasti'ii yee danózhíigo naa dahaniih le' ! Háálá hó jidiyin !
PRED:	Let them praise your name and praise you , for he will praise you .
GOLD:	Let them praise your great and awesome name.Your name is holy !

ID:	2916
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bidiltłish há hashk'aazhii
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The

ID:	2917
INPUT:	Éí bąągo ch'į́įdiitah ayóo aldeeł áádóó bizéé' doo bí'nól'ąąh áníłtsogóó yee aldeeł , áádóó yee ayóó ádaat'éii áádóó bidine'é deíl'áhígíí áádóó yee ayóó ádaat'é ída'dólzinii índa t'áá háiida baa hoł hózhóonii éí jishcháá' góne' ajiikáah doo .
PRED:	All who live in the grave will be cut off from the grave and all the people of the world . Anyone who believes in the power of the godly will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	The grave is licking its lips in anticipation , opening its mouth wide.The great and the lowlyand all the drunken mob will be swallowed up .

ID:	2918
INPUT:	Áádóó ánááshidi'ní , Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é ayóó át'éego doo yildinígi át'éego yaa nidaakaigo biniinaa shikin bii' sohodizin doo deeghánígóó bits'ádeesháłígíísh yíní'į́ ? Nidi náánáłahjigo náádínít'į́į́' . Díí biláahgo t'áá íiyisí doo daaldinii yaa nidaakaigo néidííłtsééł .
PRED:	Then he said , “ Son of man , you are going to see the Temple of Israel . How can I see the Temple of my people ? Do n't you see this in the Temple ? ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ do you see what they are doing ? Do you see the detestable sins the people of Israel are committing to drive me from my Temple ? But come , and you will see even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	2919
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo binanit'a'í nilíinii éí naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá yił yisnááh dadooleeł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	The king will rescue the king , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	And their king and his princes will go into exile together , ” says the Lord .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	Ákondi t'áá shí bee ayóó ánísht'ée dooleełii doo hásht'į́į da ; t'áá łashdilt'éhí t'éí bee ayóó ánísht'éii hoł nilį́įgo hájít'į́ , áko éí á nihojii'aah doo .
PRED:	But I am not worthy of great power , so that we can not be able to live with Christ . And we will be raised to death .
GOLD:	And though I have no wish to glorify myself , God is going to glorify me . He is the true judge .

ID:	2921
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii éí dóola yázhí nááyiisnii' yę́ęgi át'éego náá'iiłniihii ákó'doolííł ; kót'éego náá'iiłniihii éí há bee k'ééhodoodǫǫłii há nááyiisnii'go ádił nida'dziisí'ígíí há yóó'anídidoot'ááł .
PRED:	The priest will purify the sin offering of the sin offering , just as the sin offering of the sin offering . Through this process , the priest will purify you from the sin offering .
GOLD:	just as he does with the bull offered as a sin offering for the high priest . Through this process , the priest will purify the people , making them right with the Lord , and they will be forgiven .

ID:	2922
INPUT:	Diné badahojoobá'íii t'áadoo le'é yaa yiinííł , t'áá aaníí , hojooba' nahas'áanii yaa jooba'go t'áadoo le'é yich'į' kódeile' .
PRED:	Do n't let the poor get rich , for they are poor .
GOLD:	She extends a helping hand to the poorand opens her arms to the needy .

ID:	2923
INPUT:	Áko tóhígíí ałch'į' kónádzaago tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí índa łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii áádóó Féro bisiláo t'áá ałtso tónteel biyi' góne' hakéé' íínáago tó bik'i diilkǫ' ; t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' yidzíi' da .
PRED:	So the water came to Pharaoh and his chariots , and all his chariots were thrown into the sea . There was no water in the sea .
GOLD:	Then the waters returned and covered all the chariots and charioteers — the entire army of Pharaoh . Of all the Egyptians who had chased the Israelites into the sea , not a single one survived .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	Éí Diyin God bee bits'ádi'nílíidii bee bits'ádi'nílíidgo , bits'ádi'nílídígíí tsé ílíinii bik'i nizdidlaadígíigi át'é , jásper wolyéhígíí nahalingo , tséghádi'nídíniigi át'éego niłtólí .
PRED:	As a result , O God , a man of God , was cut off like a stone stone . It was like a millstone , like a stone lapis lazuli .
GOLD:	It shone with the glory of God and sparkled like a precious stone — like jasper as clear as crystal .

ID:	2925
INPUT:	Bíni'dii naa hashniih doo , háálá bee nihoyíní'áanii bínashiníníłtą́ą́' .
PRED:	Let me praise your decrees , for you have taught me .
GOLD:	Let praise flow from my lips , for you have taught me your decrees .

ID:	2926
INPUT:	Niizáíyah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Hatáífa ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii .
PRED:	The family of Uzziel .
GOLD:	Neziah , and Hatipha .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	Tsídii wódahgo nidaat'a'ígíí danół'į́ : éí doo k'ééda'didléeh da , doo nidi nída'agish da , índa doo nooh nída'ałchíih da , ákondi nihiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii ba'ałtso' . Da' nihíísh doo éí biláahgo da'nohłį́į da ?
PRED:	“ If you see the birds of the forest , you will not eat it , you will not eat the fruit of the trees , but you will not be your Father in heaven ? ”
GOLD:	Look at the birds . They do n't plant or harvest or store food in barns , for your heavenly Father feeds them . And are n't you far more valuable to him than they are ?

ID:	2928
INPUT:	Kin bii' nahadláii éí Dáíban hoolyéegi dah daask'id bighą́ą'di ádaalyaaígóó dadoochah yiniyé eekai ; Mó'ab dine'é éí Nííbo áádóó Médiiba kin haal'áii yaa chaał hadahoyiinííh ; dabitsii' ałtso ádídayoolzhéé' áádóó dabidághaa' ałtso dayííshéé' .
PRED:	The leaders of the tribe of Shechem went to the top of the hill country of Dibon , the people of Moab , and Nebo .
GOLD:	Your people will go to their temple in Dibon to mourn.They will go to their sacred shrines to weep.They will wail for the fate of Nebo and Medeba , shaving their heads in sorrow and cutting off their beards .

ID:	2929
INPUT:	Kódaadzaadóó bik'ijį' Jew dine'é hodílzingo áłah nída'ałeeh baa honíyá , áko Jerúsalem góde Jesus jiníyá .
PRED:	When the Jewish leaders arrived at Jerusalem , Jesus went to Jerusalem and went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Afterward Jesus returned to Jerusalem for one of the Jewish holy days .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	Díí índída nihidadziiznáago Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo dashdiiná .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	When the people set out for the first time , following the instructions the Lord had given through Moses ,

ID:	2931
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binááł dahináanii bitahdi yisháał doo .
PRED:	I will live among the living in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	And so I walk in the Lord 's presenceas I live here on earth !

ID:	2932
INPUT:	Áko índa bich'į' nidahwii'náago Bóhólníihii nídayooskan , áko tsístł'adahaaskaii yits'ą́ąjį' yisdáyíínil .
PRED:	Then they cried out to the Lord for help , and he saved them from their distress .
GOLD:	“ Lord , help ! ” they cried in their trouble , and he rescued them from their distress .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Jesus hach'į' haadzíí'dóó bik'ijį' yá'ąąsh góde anáhóóle'go Diyin God binish'náájí dah neezdá .
PRED:	Then Jesus left heaven and camped at the place of the Lord at heaven .
GOLD:	When the Lord Jesus had finished talking with them , he was taken up into heaven and sat down in the place of honor at God 's right hand .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel áyidííniid , Haash nízáágóó Saul baa yínííł nílį́į doo ; shą́ą́' , nináałgo Ízrel dine'é binanit'a'í jílį́į́ nít'éé' nidi doo honiizį́į' da ? Ak'ah ni'adee' bii' hadíłbin , áádóó Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó diné nilíinii Jésii bighangóó nideesh'aał , háálá éí biye'ké bitahdóó ła' aláahgo naat'áanii dooleełgo ádá nídiishtį́ .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Samuel , “ How long will you be ? You are the king of Israel , but you have rejected me from Bethlehem . But I will send my sons to Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem . ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord said to Samuel , “ You have mourned long enough for Saul . I have rejected him as king of Israel , so fill your flask with olive oil and go to Bethlehem . Find a man named Jesse who lives there , for I have selected one of his sons to be my king . ”

ID:	2935
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul éí bá nidaal'a'í binaagóó naazínígíí áyidííniid , Bénjamin dine'é nohłíinii , da'íísínółts'ą́ą́' , da' t'ááłá'í nootínígo kéyah índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'éédílyéeh doogi Jésii biye' wolyéiísh nihaa hodidoo'ááł índa da' t'áásh ánółtso siláo miilgo binanit'a'í danohłį́įgo índa siláo neeznádiingo binanit'a'í danohłį́įgo ánihidoolííł ?
PRED:	Then Saul said to his servants , “ Listen to this message from the Lord : O Benjamin , you people of Benjamin , the king of Benjamin , the king of Benjamin , and all the other warriors of Israel , will be killed . ”
GOLD:	“ Listen here , you men of Benjamin ! ” Saul shouted to his officers when he heard the news . “ Has that son of Jesse promised every one of you fields and vineyards ? Has he promised to make you all generals and captains in his army ?

ID:	2936
INPUT:	Éí bada'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii dabízhi' naaltsoos bikáá' ádaalyaaígíí hazhó'ó naaskáa'go háí ádaat'ínígíí doo hózhǫ́ bééhózin da . Éí bąą doo dazhdiyingóó haa nitsáhákeesgo nááda'iiłniihii t'áadoo bił dahodéélta' da .
PRED:	These are the names of the names of the names of the members of the members of the sky . So they do n't realize that they do n't know that they do n't know what they are right .
GOLD:	They searched for their names in the genealogical records , but they were not found , so they were disqualified from serving as priests .

ID:	2937
INPUT:	Sámuel éí Saul áyidííniid , Shí náásgóó ádahodooníiłii yaa halne'ii nishłį́ . Nílááh , aláahgo yanáalk'id bikáa'jį' shilą́ąjį' hasínááh , háálá díí jį́ nił adeeshį́į́ł , áádóó yiską́ągo néé'níshníihgo índa baa nitsíníkeesígíí t'áá át'é bee nił hodeeshnih .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ I am the prophet , and I will show you the place where you are coming . I will show you today , and I will show you today . ”
GOLD:	“ I am the seer ! ” Samuel replied . “ Go up to the place of worship ahead of me . We will eat there together , and in the morning I 'll tell you what you want to know and send you on your way .

ID:	2938
INPUT:	T'áá háiida díí bee haz'áanii t'áá aaníígóó áníinii doo bik'eh ájít'éégóó éí hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Anyone who obeys the law will say , ‘ Amen . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who does not affirm and obey the terms of these instructions . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	2939
INPUT:	T'áá Christ ayóó'ánihó'nínígi át'éego ayóó'ó'ó'ní bee dayínóhkááh . Jó , Christ nihá niná'ádeet'ą́ągo łikání halchingo nááhániihii nilį́įgo Diyin God yich'į' náá'ádiisnii' .
PRED:	As for Christ , you love God 's love for Christ , so that you are a special gift to Christ . It is a pleasing aroma to Christ .
GOLD:	Live a life filled with love , following the example of Christ . He loved us and offered himself as a sacrifice for us , a pleasing aroma to God .

ID:	2940
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí niba' ádaat'éhígíí doo ła' t'óó baa yáhásinígi ábi'dil'į́į da le' , nidi t'áadoo biniinaanígóó shindahaz'áanii ádaa yádahiniizįįh le' .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone be fooled by the truth , but let anyone die .
GOLD:	No one who trusts in you will ever be disgraced , but disgrace comes to those who try to deceive others .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Rábshakeh yiizį'go ayóó íits'a'go Jew k'ehjí chánahgo yee haadzíi'go ání , Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ayóó át'é nanit'a'í nilíinii yee hahaasdzí'ígíí dadoohts'į́į́h .
PRED:	Then the chief of staff stood and said , “ Listen to the king of Assyria ! Listen to this message from the king of Assyria !
GOLD:	Then the chief of staff stood and shouted in Hebrew to the people on the wall , “ Listen to this message from the great king of Assyria !

ID:	2942
INPUT:	Kót'éego Líívai dine'é bee Ízrel dine'é náádabi'diiznii'ii ba'aan dzidínéezdee'ii béeso hak'é naalyáhígíí Mózes yaa deiznil .
PRED:	So the Levites took the money from the Law of Moses and distributed it to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So Moses collected the silver for redeeming the firstborn sons of Israel who exceeded the number of Levites .

ID:	2943
INPUT:	Diné yíl'áhígíí ałdó' ábizhdííniid , E'e'aah biyaají k'os haleehgo daołtséehgo , t'áá áko ádadohniih , Nahodoołtį́į́ł lá , áko t'áá ákót'įįh .
PRED:	Then he said to the man , “ Tell the glorious presence of the sky , and everyone will see it .
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to the crowd and said , “ When you see clouds beginning to form in the west , you say , ‘ Here comes a shower . ' And you are right .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	Haa nízáagishą' díí doo yá'áshónígi ádaat'į́įgo dah yinéłígíí shik'ijį' danilį́įgo saad dahółǫ́ǫ doo ? Ízrel dine'é shik'ijį' danilį́įgo saad dahółǫ́ǫgo shik'ijį' yádaałti'go diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	How long will the people of Israel ? How long will you be with me ? How long will I be with the people of Israel ?
GOLD:	“ How long must I put up with this wicked community and its complaints about me ? Yes , I have heard the complaints the Israelites are making against me .

ID:	2945
INPUT:	Béésh łitsoii naneesdizígíí áádóó da'ahól<unk> go náhineests'ee'go éí béésh łitsoii íí'áa dooígíí bílátah dah doo'niłígíí biniyé áyiilaa ; éí dah doo'niłígíí yá tsosts'idgo , náánáła'ígíí ałdó' yá tsosts'idgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	“ These are the same size and small animals that scurry along the edge of the Lord 's command . He also made seven bronze for seven days .
GOLD:	Each capital was decorated with seven sets of latticework and interwoven chains .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	Áádóó Líívai dine'é yádaałti'go Ízrel dine'é hastóí danilíinii t'áá ałtso ayóó íits'a'go yich'į' hadadoodzih :
PRED:	Then the Levites will say to the people of Israel , “ Listen to the voice of the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Levites will shout to all the people of Israel :

ID:	2947
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii índa bá kót'éego daaníinii áádóó bikéédę́ę́' naat'áanii danilíinii índa Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso ákwii nidaakaii éí béésh łigaii áádóó óola índa beedí chodao'íinii nihiDiyin God bikin biniyé adayiiznilii dah dahidiilo'go bitaa sénii' .
PRED:	I took the kings of Israel and the kings of Israel , and I gave them silver and gold , silver , gold , silver , silver , and gold .
GOLD:	to be in charge of transporting the silver , the gold , the gold bowls , and the other items that the king , his council , his officials , and all the people of Israel had presented for the Temple of God .

ID:	2948
INPUT:	Aró'er kin shijaa'di kééhót'íinii , atiin bąąhdóó sínízį́įgo ha'ísíidgo diné noochéełii índa asdzání yisdágháahii , Haa hóót'įįd , diníigo nidabídíłkid .
PRED:	“ As he was at Aroer on the road , he saw a man who had lived in the wilderness of Aroer on the road . “ Oh , ” he said .
GOLD:	You people of Aroer , stand beside the road and watch.Shout to those who flee from Moab , ‘ What has happened there ? '

ID:	2949
INPUT:	Daneeshjoolgo t'áá ła' yaa ádaadzaa , áko hééł deidooyéełgi yi'oh daneel'ą́ , nidi t'áá bí ałdó' dabidisná .
PRED:	They did what they were saying , and they will kill them . They will also kill them .
GOLD:	Both the idols and their owners are bowed down.The gods can not protect the people , and the people can not protect the gods.They go off into captivity together .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad Diyin God binááł shich'į' ádee hadídziihgo t'áadoo shina'ílo'í doo ; shiye' ałdó' dooda , shinálí ałdó' dooda ; naa jooshba'ígi át'éego ni ałdó' shich'į' t'áá ákónít'ée doo , áádóó kéyah bikáá' níínínánígi ałdó' bich'į' ákónít'ée dooleeł .
PRED:	And now , O God , do n't let me tell you what I am saying . I will do to you , too , and I will give you your brother , and I will do to you .
GOLD:	“ Swear to me in God 's name that you will never deceive me , my children , or any of my descendants . I have been loyal to you , so now swear that you will be loyal to me and to this country where you are living as a foreigner . ”

ID:	2951
INPUT:	Diyin God éí dził nahjį' kóyiił'įįhgo doo hoł béédahózin da ; báháchįįhgo dził nídeidiyeenił .
PRED:	God knows the mountains , and he does not know how he does not know the mountains .
GOLD:	“ Without warning , he moves the mountains , overturning them in his anger .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihóíyakim éí kóbididííniił , Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí naaltsoos yisdisii dííníłidgo kódíní , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé díí naaltsoos yisdisii kót'éego bikáá' bik'e'shíníłchį́įgo kódííníniid , Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í doonéełgo díí kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' yidoołchxǫǫł , áádóó bikáa'gi diné kéédahat'íinii índa naaldlooshii nahjį' kwíidoolííł ?
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : Why are you going to destroy the people of Judah ? Why are you going to destroy the land of Babylon ? '
GOLD:	Then say to the king , ‘ This is what the Lord says : You burned the scroll because it said the king of Babylon would destroy this land and empty it of people and animals .

ID:	2953
INPUT:	Ex . 23 : <unk>
PRED:	The Land Given to Jesus
GOLD:	The Festival of Shelters

ID:	2954
INPUT:	Shí éí t'áá ałtsoní shoosánígo ádííniid , Ts'ídá doo nahjį' kóshidoolíłí da .
PRED:	I said to myself , ‘ You are not living in the desert . '
GOLD:	When I was prosperous , I said , “ Nothing can stop me now ! ”

ID:	2955
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí baa nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo nihił dahózhǫ́ , háálá yá'ąąshdi ayóó át'éii nihaa dahidoolyééł , háálá t'áá ákót'éego Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yę́ę t'áá nihítséedi atídayííł'įįd .
PRED:	And you will rejoice because you are great joy , for you are great in heaven . For you are a great prophet who has been raised from heaven .
GOLD:	Be happy about it ! Be very glad ! For a great reward awaits you in heaven . And remember , the ancient prophets were persecuted in the same way .

ID:	2956
INPUT:	Ayóó'ánósh'níinii , tsį́įłgo ánít'į́ , áádóó ch'il łikání dahalchinígíí spáis wolyéii dził bił ní'áagi jádí , doodaii' bįįhką' naagháhígíigi ánít'éego shił yí'ash .
PRED:	Come , my darling , my darling , as well as the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Come away , my love ! Be like a gazelleor a young stag on the mountains of spices .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Líyah bijijoodláago bił bééhózin , áko jooltsą́ągo áhoolaa , nidi Réíchel éí doo ałchíi da .
PRED:	So Leah realized that the Lord was watching for Leah , and he did n't know how much he had married Rachel .
GOLD:	When the Lord saw that Leah was unloved , he enabled her to have children , but Rachel could not conceive .

ID:	2958
INPUT:	Honoojíidi nihwéédahaas<unk> gíí
PRED:	Jesus ' Trial in the wilderness
GOLD:	Remembering Israel 's Wanderings

ID:	2959
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá ałkéé' hasnilígíí bik'ehgo Christ ts'ídá áłtsé náádiidzáii éí átsé , áadi índa t'áá bí náánádzáá góne' daboodlą́ągo daabíhígíí náábidi'dooljah .
PRED:	But if the first person is the first first of the first body , the first person must also be the first of the first body .
GOLD:	But there is an order to this resurrection : Christ was raised as the first of the harvest ; then all who belong to Christ will be raised when he comes back .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus kóníigo hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yee hach'į' hanáánáádzíí' ,
PRED:	Jesus told them this story :
GOLD:	Jesus also told them other parables . He said ,

ID:	2961
INPUT:	Ła' shį́į́ doo yil'aadii nishłį́įgo shaa nitsídaakees da , nidi nihí éí nihich'į' yil'aadii nishłį́įgo shaa nitsídaahkees . Háálá yil'aadii nishłį́įgo Bóhólníihii bá dahinohnánígíí bee shá bee ééhózinii danohłį́ .
PRED:	Some of the apostles do n't know what I am saying , but I am the Lord . For I am giving you the miraculous signs that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Even if others think I am not an apostle , I certainly am to you . You yourselves are proof that I am the Lord 's apostle .

ID:	2962
INPUT:	Áádóó joo'ash nít'éé' , jó'akon , aa ádahalyáanii ła' kin haal'áagi yíkaigo , ádahóót'įįdígíí t'áá ałtso aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii yee yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	When they arrived at the town , the leading priests returned to the town of the high priest , and all the priests told him what had happened .
GOLD:	As the women were on their way , some of the guards went into the city and told the leading priests what had happened .

ID:	2963
INPUT:	éí díí k'ad hoolzhishígíí biyi' hwee hólónígíí lą'ídi ahą́ą́h nániiláago haa nídoolyééł , áádóó łahgo náhodeesdzáago iiná doo ninít'i'ii hwee hodooleeł .
PRED:	And now the world will have a life of life , but it will have life to life and life . And now the life of life will be life .
GOLD:	will be repaid many times over in this life , and will have eternal life in the world to come . ”

ID:	2964
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hólǫ́ǫgi Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God náhodidoo'áłígi ákwii daohsą́ą doo ; ni áádóó niye' áádóó nitsi' áádóó diné ná naal'a'í áádóó asdzání ná naal'a'í índa Líívai dine'é nilíinii t'áá nighangi nił yah e'etiingóó nił kééhat'íinii Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hólǫ́ǫgi baa nidaahkaígíí t'áá ałtso baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	But you will live in the presence of the Lord your God . You will eat the food of the Lord your God and your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , your servant , and you will rejoice in your household .
GOLD:	You must eat these in the presence of the Lord your God at the place he will choose . Eat them there with your children , your servants , and the Levites who live in your towns , celebrating in the presence of the Lord your God in all you do .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	Diné ba'ahódlíii éí bee bik'ihojidlíii t'óó ahayói doo , nidi diné adoot'įįłígíí yaa tsxį́į́ł niizį́į'ii éí t'áá atíbidi'doolníłí .
PRED:	A person who finds a blessing is a blessing ; a person 's conscience is without good .
GOLD:	The trustworthy person will get a rich reward , but a person who wants quick riches will get into trouble .

ID:	2966
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , <unk> dahałt'i'go áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó shindaha'áago t'áá ałtso disíníts'ą́ą́' ;
PRED:	O Lord , hear me from the wicked ; listen to my decrees .
GOLD:	Lord , you have heard the vile names they call me.You know all about the plans they have made .

ID:	2967
INPUT:	Diyin God bits'os nineezígíí nik'íidoołtih áádóó bit'a' biyaajį' yisdádínííchééł . Yee ba'ahódlíii éí naagé índa béésh téél ách'ą́ą́h dah yit'áałii nihá nilį́ .
PRED:	God will rescue you from his wings ; he is a shield of refuge for us . He is a shield for us .
GOLD:	He will cover you with his feathers.He will shelter you with his wings.His faithful promises are your armor and protection .

ID:	2968
INPUT:	Áko díí diné bidił yę́ę bee Jó'ab bihodiit'i' doo áádóó ha'áłchíní ahoolchíłígíí ałdó' bihodiit'i'go ahool'áa doo , nidi David áádóó ba'áłchíní áádóó ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii índa bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' bee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'go ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	And this is what the Lord says : “ The descendants of Joab will be made right with David and his descendants forever and ever ! The descendants of David will come from generation to generation . ”
GOLD:	May their blood be on Joab and his descendants forever , and may the Lord grant peace forever to David , his descendants , his dynasty , and his throne . ”

ID:	2969
INPUT:	Nidi yee hach'į' haadzí'ígíí doo bik'izh'diitą́ą da .
PRED:	But the day of the sun will never see the sun .
GOLD:	But they did n't understand what he meant .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	Áko Ábsalam éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kééhat'į́įgo naaki nááhai índa aláahgo naat'áanii doo yił ahoot'į́į da .
PRED:	Absalom stayed in Jerusalem for two years .
GOLD:	Absalom lived in Jerusalem for two years , but he never got to see the king .

ID:	2971
INPUT:	Diné baa nijigháii bits'ázhdoogááłáádóó ádaa hoji'niihígíí doo ajít'ée da jidooleeł biniyé kódahale' .
PRED:	Oh , that a man could not be afraid of him .
GOLD:	He makes them turn from doing wrong ; he keeps them from pride .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	Áko da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii na'nitin woodláanii bee bidziil ádaalyaa , áádóó t'áá ákwíí jį́ lą'í ihidiikáahgo k'ee'ąą yilzhish .
PRED:	So the church must teach the church about the church , and many people gathered together in the church .
GOLD:	So the churches were strengthened in their faith and grew larger every day .

ID:	2973
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad díí dadoohts'į́į́h , nihich'į' hodiiznáa'ii , wáin t'áágééd nidi nídadí'nóohdlą́ą'ii ,
PRED:	Therefore , listen to this message : “ Listen to the dead , you will have no wine .
GOLD:	But now listen to this , you afflicted oneswho sit in a drunken stupor , though not from drinking wine .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	Dahoniidzą́ , danízingo ádadiníl'íinii áádóó , Hóyáanii daniidlį́ , danízinii bich'į' doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who are wise , and those who are wise .
GOLD:	What sorrow for those who are wise in their own eyesand think themselves so clever .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	<unk> tsoh , hayoołkááł biye' nílíinii , <unk> , dooládó' yá'ąąshdę́ę́' hadadzííníłhaal da ! Ał'ąą dine'é doo dabidziilgóó ádanile'ii nílíinii , dooládó' nihokáa'jį' andi'yoolghan da !
PRED:	Do n't let your children go down from heaven ? Do n't let the nations fall into the world , O God of heaven .
GOLD:	“ How you are fallen from heaven , O shining star , son of the morning ! You have been thrown down to the earth , you who destroyed the nations of the world .

ID:	2976
INPUT:	Háálá , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ni t'éiyá nee shił chohoo'į́ . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , t'áá ániid naasháádą́ą́' naa jííníshłí .
PRED:	For you are my hope in the Lord , O God , who has given me victory .
GOLD:	O Lord , you alone are my hope.I 've trusted you , O Lord , from childhood .

ID:	2977
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii David éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' diyingo niidiní'áanii ał'ąą ana'í yik'eh deesdlį́'ígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó béésh łigaii índa óola t'áá íídą́ą́' diyingo niidiní'ánígíí éí yíjaa' yę́ę yíyiyiiłtsoodgo diyingo niidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	Then King David took the gold from the Lord 's presence and placed them in the presence of the Lord . He took the gold from his own gold and gold .
GOLD:	King David dedicated all these gifts to the Lord , as he did with the silver and gold from the other nations he had defeated —

ID:	2978
INPUT:	Áádóó diné índa asdzání t'óó ahayóí Bóhólníihii dayoosdląądgo yaa dadzoozlíi'go hohidiikai .
PRED:	And many of the women and women believed in the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	Yet more and more people believed and were brought to the Lord — crowds of both men and women .

ID:	2979
INPUT:	jó , diné éí kin ííléehii níléí wóyahdę́ę́' tsé'éłkáa'gi ha'íítł'inígíí nahojílin , áko tó dááląądgo bízdeesxał , nidi doo hidó'nááł át'ée da , háálá tsé'éłkáa'gi bidziilgo ályaa éí bąą .
PRED:	It is like a person in the middle of the house of the city , and it is not greater than the wall . That 's why it is why it is not better to be thrown into the rock .
GOLD:	It is like a person building a house who digs deep and lays the foundation on solid rock . When the floodwaters rise and break against that house , it stands firm because it is well built .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	Áko deesk'aazgo , nidaal'a'ígíí áádóó siláo éí t'eesh nídeidiiłtłahgo yich'į' naazį́įgo nída'iidzííł ; Peter ałdó' ákwii atah sizį́įgo ná'iidzííł .
PRED:	So the soldiers went into the middle of the night , and the soldiers met him with a walking stick to Peter .
GOLD:	Because it was cold , the household servants and the guards had made a charcoal fire . They stood around it , warming themselves , and Peter stood with them , warming himself .

ID:	2981
INPUT:	Christ bee t'áá ła' <unk> jée'go ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níi doo .
PRED:	Love each other with each other .
GOLD:	Keep on loving each other as brothers and sisters .

ID:	2982
INPUT:	Dáda'ak'eh yaa ádahalyáanii danohłíinii , ádaa yádanohdzįįh ; ch'il na'atł'o'ii yaa ádahalyáanii danohłíinii , tł'oh naadą́ą́' áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í baa daohchxa , háálá nídaohi<unk> ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	You rulers of your harvest , your officials , and your prophets have destroyed the vineyards of wheat , for the harvest is gone .
GOLD:	Despair , all you farmers ! Wail , all you vine growers ! Weep , because the wheat and barley — all the crops of the field — are ruined .

ID:	2983
INPUT:	Áko ashkii bił baa jíkai , nít'éé' níłch'i bi'iiníziinii éí Jesus yiyiiłtsą́ągo t'áá áko ashkii ahaniiní'ą́ , áko naa'ajíígo'go hazhéé' hahagháahgo nidzimaas .
PRED:	When the boy saw him , he bowed down to the boy and bowed down before him . Then he bowed down and bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	So they brought the boy . But when the evil spirit saw Jesus , it threw the child into a violent convulsion , and he fell to the ground , writhing and foaming at the mouth .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	Áádóó díí naaltsoos biyi'dóó saad ádahodooníiłii bee baa dahóóne'ígíí ła'da bizhdíí'ą́ągo , iiná tsin sikaadii índa diyingo kin haal'áii díí naaltsoos biyi' baa hane'ii łahjį' hóó' dooleeł yę́ę Diyin God hats'ą́ą́' nahjį' kwíidoolííł .
PRED:	Then he wrote this letter to the people of Israel : “ Write this letter in the book of God , and bring it to the holy city . ”
GOLD:	And if anyone removes any of the words from this book of prophecy , God will remove that person 's share in the tree of life and in the holy city that are described in this book .

ID:	2985
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Yee hadahaasdzíi'ii yá'át'éehgo yee hadaasdzíí' .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ He has done good things ! ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord said to me , ‘ What they have said is right .

ID:	2986
INPUT:	1Kgs . 8 : <unk>
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Solomon 's Prayer of Dedication

ID:	2987
INPUT:	Dine'é t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bada'ahódlíii yah ahidookah biniyé dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó ąą ádaohłe' .
PRED:	The godly will enter the gates of the godly , and those who enter the gates .
GOLD:	Open the gates to all who are righteous ; allow the faithful to enter .

ID:	2988
INPUT:	Éímas áádóó Amazáíyah
PRED:	Uzziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Amos and Amaziah

ID:	2989
INPUT:	táá' góne' éí łį́į́łgaii bighą́ą́h dínil , índa dį́į́' góne' éí łį́į́stł'inii bidziilii bighą́ą́h dínil .
PRED:	The fourth row was pulled by a bear , and the fourth was the power of a bear .
GOLD:	the third by white horses , and the fourth by powerful dappled-gray horses .

ID:	2990
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah ííyáago índa be'iina' nidahidoot'ihígíí baa ákoniizį́į́' .
PRED:	But when God went to the Temple of God , he went to the house of God and his life .
GOLD:	Then I went into your sanctuary , O God , and I finally understood the destiny of the wicked .

ID:	2991
INPUT:	Hazhó'ó ábizhdííniidgo ájíní , Férisii danilíinii bidíík'ǫsh bee taos'nii' niilyółí índa Hérad bidíík'ǫsh bee taos'nii' niilyółí bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ .
PRED:	Then Jesus called to the Pharisees , “ Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees . ”
GOLD:	As they were crossing the lake , Jesus warned them , “ Watch out ! Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and of Herod . ”

ID:	2992
INPUT:	Áádóó ánihidííniid , Ámor dine'é bidził daní'áhígóó éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaa hodiní'áníjį' nooná .
PRED:	Then he said to us , “ The mountains of the Amorites , the Lord your God has brought us into the wilderness .
GOLD:	I said to you , ‘ You have now reached the hill country of the Amorites that the Lord our God is giving us .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	Diné doo áhályáanii hoł yílįįdii éí tsé bee aditł'į́į́h bídziistł'ónígíí nahalin .
PRED:	Wise words are like a fool , and the rocks gushed out for a stone .
GOLD:	Honoring a foolis as foolish as tying a stone to a slingshot .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	éí yoołkáałdi diné shá nidaal'a'ígíí índa asdzání shá nidaal'a'ígíi nidit'áá biláahgo shiNíłch'i baa dideesh'áałgo , shá dahalne' dooleeł .
PRED:	“ In that day I will tell you the Holy Spirit and women , ‘ I will tell you what I am saying . '
GOLD:	In those days I will pour out my Spiriteven on my servants — men and women alike — and they will prophesy .

ID:	2995
INPUT:	Háálá ałk'idą́ą́' David haa halne'go ádííniid : Bóhólníihii t'áá áłahjį' shilą́ąjį' hojílǫ́ǫgo hweesh'į́ , háálá shinish'náájí hojílǫ́ , áko doo shił na'ii'náa da doo .
PRED:	About that time David told David , “ Lord , I am going to see my right hand , for I am going to live . ”
GOLD:	King David said this about him : ‘ I see that the Lord is always with me.I will not be shaken , for he is right beside me .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	Nihí Diyin God baa dayoohnéehii , k'ad díí baa ntsídaohkees ; doo ádaoht'į́į́góogo t'óó nanihidiyeeshdlałgo doo ła'da yisdánihidiyoonił da .
PRED:	O God , do n't forget this ! Do n't be afraid of what I am saying .
GOLD:	Repent , all of you who forget me , or I will tear you apart , and no one will help you .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	Nídísdzihígíí nidi shich'į' yaa nichį'got'áá íiyisí shił niiłch'iihgo áshósin .
PRED:	I am praying to myself , but I am filled with bitter sorrow .
GOLD:	He will not let me catch my breath , but fills me instead with bitter sorrows .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	Hodiyingo haz'ánígi bich'į' yah e'etiinígi ch'é'étiin siláii ánoolninígíí índa agháago hodiyingo haz'ání ánoolninígíí t'áá áłah dik'ą́ągo ádaalyaa .
PRED:	The entry room of the sanctuary is the Temple of the Lord , the heavens and the entry room of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	There were square columns at the entrance to the sanctuary , and the ones at the entrance of the Most Holy Place were similar .

ID:	2999
INPUT:	Jó'akon , nináshidee'aahígíí k'ad kwe'é shił hólǫ́ǫgo bikáá' adání yik'i dah déesnii' .
PRED:	“ Look , my disciple is here , ” he said . “ I have placed my table on the table . ”
GOLD:	“ But here at this table , sitting among us as a friend , is the man who will betray me .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí bi'aláahgo naat'áanii bá bee yisdáhóót'i'ii ayóó át'éii nilį́ ; ak'ah bik'i yaadziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii David áádóó ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii yaa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	The king of Israel is His faithful love endures forever . His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	You give great victories to your king ; you show unfailing love to your anointed , to David and all his descendants forever . ”

ID:	3001
INPUT:	áádóó Líyah ba'áłchíní yił áháníjį' hach'į' niikaigo ałdó' yaa ánáádaadzaa , áádóó bik'ijį' Jóseph índa Réíchel áháníjį' niní'áazhgo yaa ánáánádzaa .
PRED:	So Leah and his children went to Rachel , and they went to Rachel . Then they went to Rachel and took Rachel to Rachel .
GOLD:	Next came Leah with her children , and they bowed before him . Finally , Joseph and Rachel came forward and bowed before him .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	T'áá háiida éí dé'éyóní , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii , doodaii' sáanii bąąh ádahasdįįdii bá bee nihodiit'aahii bits'ą́ą́' dzidiiłgęęzii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Anyone who dishonors father or mother or a male or female or a person must reply , ‘ Amen . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who denies justice to foreigners , orphans , or widows . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	3003
INPUT:	K'adę́ę haiłkaahgo t'áá ádzíłtso ch'iyáán ła' dazhdooyį́įłgo Paul yaa náhooskan kóníigo , K'ad dį́į́'ts'áadah yiiłkaah ; t'óó át'ah danohsingo t'áadoo da'ohsání .
PRED:	On the day of dawn , Paul went to the night and said , “ Be careful to eat the Passover meal . ”
GOLD:	Just as day was dawning , Paul urged everyone to eat . “ You have been so worried that you have n't touched food for two weeks , ” he said .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	índa bee ádít'oodí , hatsiits'iin bik'ídeesdiz nít'é'ígíí , éí doo na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idígíí sinilígíí bił sinil da , nidi t'áá sahdii yisdisgo siłtsooz .
PRED:	He put his head on his head , and he put it on his head . He put it on his head , but he healed it .
GOLD:	while the cloth that had covered Jesus ' head was folded up and lying apart from the other wrappings .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	Áyąądą́ą́' Judíyagi kéédahojit'ínígíí dziłjį' choda'iizhdooł'įįł , áádóó kin hadaas'áagi kéédahojit'ínígíí ch'íhizhdookah , índa binaagóó kéédahojit'ínígíí éí doo ákóne' adahizhdookah da ,
PRED:	Then everyone in Judea will know that Jesus will go out to the hills , and they will go out to the towns of Judea .
GOLD:	Then those in Judea must flee to the hills . Those in Jerusalem must get out , and those out in the country should not return to the city .

ID:	3006
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nánídlíní da
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Everything Is Meaningless

ID:	3007
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ání , Maikéíyah daosiłgo kin haal'áádóó naat'áanii Éíman áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii biye' Jó'ash bich'į' bił nídadohkááh .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat , “ Get up and kill him . ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	3008
INPUT:	Riihobówam nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah

ID:	3009
INPUT:	nidi tsin bineest'ą' bits'ą́ą́dóó yá'át'ééhjí índa doo yá'át'ééhjí bééhózin dooleełii ts'ídá doo dííyį́įł da , háálá bąąhdóó ííníyą́ą́' bijį́įdi t'áá aaníí dadíítsaał .
PRED:	But you will never eat good fruit from the trees of your own trees . You will never eat the fruit of the trees . ”
GOLD:	except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil . If you eat its fruit , you are sure to die . ”

ID:	3010
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bich'į' chánahgo ahééh nisin doo ; t'áá aaníí , diné t'óó ahayóí bitahgóó baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will thank the Lord , and I will praise you among the people .
GOLD:	But I will give repeated thanks to the Lord , praising him to everyone .

ID:	3011
INPUT:	Áádóó ashkii éí Jánathan k'aa' yee adziist'ohíjį' yílwodgo Jánathan ábidííniid , Da' niláahdiísh k'aa' doo ahineezdee' da ?
PRED:	Jonathan ran out to Jonathan and told Jonathan , “ Are you going to kill us ? ”
GOLD:	When the boy had almost reached the arrow , Jonathan shouted , “ The arrow is still ahead of you .

ID:	3012
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3013
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yá'át'éehgo hináago t'áá kin haal'áá nít'éé' diné bił dahózhǫ́ǫ łeh , áádóó diné doo yá'áshóonii bikéé' áhádįįhgo diné bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dadilwosh łeh .
PRED:	When the godly take joy of the godly , the city will be filled with joy and joy .
GOLD:	The whole city celebrates when the godly succeed ; they shout for joy when the wicked die .

ID:	3014
INPUT:	Áádóó Éísahel éí Ábner yikéé' nídiilwodgo nishtł'ajigo índa nish'náajigo t'áadoo haalyeedí Ábner yikéé' yilwoł .
PRED:	When Abner left Abner and ran out to Abner 's left Abner and Abner 's left Abner .
GOLD:	and he began chasing Abner . He pursued him relentlessly , not stopping for anything .

ID:	3015
INPUT:	Zerowáíyah biyáázh Jó'ab bik'is Abísheiyai éí akéédę́ę́' táa'go nibidee'nilígíí ajítahgo aláahgo hóhólnííh ; éí bitsiidétáán néidiitą́ągo yee táadi neeznádiin diné neistseed , áko diné tált'éhígíí atah jílį́ ho'di'ní .
PRED:	Joab son of Zeruiah were killed by Joab 's brother Abishai son Abishai son of Zeruiah , and he killed fifty men . He also killed fifty men .
GOLD:	Abishai son of Zeruiah , the brother of Joab , was the leader of the Thirty . He once used his spear to kill 300 enemy warriors in a single battle . It was by such feats that he became as famous as the Three .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	Díí éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áhóót'įįdjí nááhániihii át'é ; t'áádóo nídí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdígíí bee Bóhólníihii bik'ijį' dzizlį́į́' nít'éé' .
PRED:	This is what the Lord had done . He did what was evil in the presence of the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	This is a guilt offering , for you have been guilty of an offense against the Lord . ”

ID:	3017
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' David nídii'na'go tsé'áándę́ę́' haayáago Saul yikéé' hadoolghaazhgo ání , Bóhoníshníihii , aláahgo shinanit'a'í nílíinii . Áko nít'éé' Saul t'ą́ą́' nídéét'į́į'go hoołtsą́ , t'áá áko David yaa ádziidzaago ni'jį' tsé'yaa jineeshjool .
PRED:	When David got up from the cave , he cried out to Saul , “ O Lord , my lord ! ” So David bowed down and bowed down to the ground and bowed before the ground .
GOLD:	David came out and shouted after him , “ My lord the king ! ” And when Saul looked around , David bowed low before him .

ID:	3018
INPUT:	Díí <unk> doo tł'oh naadą́ą́' dadiigaii da ? Bóhólníihii baa néideeshkąąłgo adi'níigo nahałtingo íidoolííł , áko baa ákodadínóohsįįłígíí índa dadínóoł'įįłígíí éí ts'ídá ayóó át'éego doo yá'áshónígi ádaot'įįdígíí yee' Bóhólníihii binááł ádaot'įįd ; jó , aláahgo naat'áanii ádá dayínóokeed .
PRED:	“ Do n't you think the Lord will punish you ? ” they asked . “ If you do what is right , you will ask for what the Lord has done for you , and you will have done . ”
GOLD:	You know that it does not rain at this time of the year during the wheat harvest . I will ask the Lord to send thunder and rain today . Then you will realize how wicked you have been in asking the Lord for a king ! ”

ID:	3019
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá Jónah éí Níneveh dine'é yá bee ééhózinii silį́'ígi át'éego , t'áá ákót'éego Diné Silį́į'ii ałdó' , díí k'ad ahoolchíłígíí bá bee ééhózinii dooleeł .
PRED:	For the Son of Jonah has made this miraculous sign : “ The Son of Man will also be like a sign for the Son of Man . ”
GOLD:	What happened to him was a sign to the people of Nineveh that God had sent him . What happens to the Son of Man will be a sign to these people that he was sent by God .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	Áko hánaaíké áádóó hatsilíké áádóó halahkéí danilíinii índa t'ah doo hąąh dahoo'aah yę́ędą́ą́' hwéédahósinii éí t'áá ałtso haa haaskaigo haghan góne' hoł da'ííyą́ą́' , áádóó Bóhólníihii bíniik'ehgo doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áho'dool'įįdii biniinaa hak'édí daazlį́į́' , áádóó hada'aho'ayoosne' , áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo béeso índa yoostsah óola bee ályaii haa dayiiznil .
PRED:	Then Joseph took his brothers and sisters , his brothers and sisters , and they ate him in the presence of the Lord 's household . Then they took him to the Lord 's house and took him back to them , and he carried off his silver and gold .
GOLD:	Then all his brothers , sisters , and former friends came and feasted with him in his home . And they consoled him and comforted him because of all the trials the Lord had brought against him . And each of them brought him a gift of money and a gold ring .

ID:	3021
INPUT:	John bídahooł'aahii ła' índa Jew dine'é nilíinii hodílzingo táá'ágisígíí biniinaa ałghada'dit'áahgo yaa nídiikai .
PRED:	And when John the Baptist saw that John had been circumcised , he took some of the Jews from the council of the Jews .
GOLD:	A debate broke out between John 's disciples and a certain Jew over ceremonial cleansing .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	Ałtį́į́' nídaołtasii t'áá ánółtso Bábilan dine'é bináłzhíísh ; k'aa' t'áadoo áádaohsįįhí deínółt'óóh , háálá Bóhólníihii yich'į' ádił asiih .
PRED:	“ You will scatter the bow of the bow of the bow of the bow of the Lord , for he has sinned against them .
GOLD:	“ Yes , prepare to attack Babylon , all you surrounding nations.Let your archers shoot at her ; spare no arrows.For she has sinned against the Lord .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih ! Sin ániidíii bee Bóhólníihii bich'į' dahohtaał ; bidiyį́į́' áłah nádleehgi sin bee baa ha'niihii bee dahohtaał !
PRED:	Sing to the Lord ! Praise the Lord for his holy ones ! Praise the Lord with his faithful love .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Sing to the Lord a new song.Sing his praises in the assembly of the faithful .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ! Ha'át'íí lá ahayóí lá ! Ayóó ánóodziilgo índa k'ídíínílnii'go yádił hił índa nahasdzáán íinilaa . Ts'ídá t'áadoo nániłdzilí da .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits the Lord , for he has made you great , for he has made the heavens and the heavens and the earth .
GOLD:	“ O Sovereign Lord ! You made the heavens and earth by your strong hand and powerful arm . Nothing is too hard for you !

ID:	3025
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo ák'ihazdoodzíi' da . Áko aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ninááhódééłkidgo ánááhodi'ní , Da' niísh Aláahgo Baa Ha'niihii biYe' , Christ nílį́ ?
PRED:	But Jesus did n't say , “ The leading priests ? ” And he replied , “ The Son of Man is the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	But Jesus was silent and made no reply . Then the high priest asked him , “ Are you the Messiah , the Son of the Blessed One ? ”

ID:	3026
INPUT:	<unk> hosist'įįd ; doo nááshiidoolkáałjį' baa hoolzhiizh ; yóó'áshidi'doolníiłgi shá hasht'ehoolyaa .
PRED:	I have done nothing for me , for now I have done nothing for me .
GOLD:	“ My spirit is crushed , and my life is nearly snuffed out.The grave is ready to receive me .

ID:	3027
INPUT:	Nihaa a'ááh náádínóodzįįł ; doo ákwii ádeiit'įįdii yik'eh didoodleeł áádóó yee ádił nida'iisíi'ii tónteel ditą́ą́ góyaa ahidííłtł'ił .
PRED:	But we will be ashamed of our sins , and they will be thrown into the sea .
GOLD:	Once again you will have compassion on us.You will trample our sins under your feetand throw them into the depths of the ocean !

ID:	3028
INPUT:	Héízar-shúwal , Béílah , Íízem ,
PRED:	Meshullam , Adullam ,
GOLD:	Hazar-shual , Balah , Ezem ,

ID:	3029
INPUT:	Jó , díí diné doo Diyin God yine' anáníchéehii áyiilaii át'į́ , nidi t'áadoo bee néelą́'ígóó yit'íinii yaa dzólíí nít'éé' áádóó bidoo yá'áshǫ' yee t'óó tsé'édinda áániił nít'éé' .
PRED:	For this is what God created , who made a refuge for a refuge for a fool , but those who have never sinned .
GOLD:	“ Look what happens to mighty warriorswho do not trust in God.They trust their wealth insteadand grow more and more bold in their wickedness . ”

ID:	3030
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí Béíshandóó aláahgo naat'áanii Ag joolyéii áádóó hodine'é t'áá ałtso t'áá bił nihílák'ee hodíí'ą́ , áádóó ałtso nidahosiiltseedgo t'áadoo ła' yisdájííyáhí da .
PRED:	And the Lord our God gave us victory over Bashan , and we destroyed all the people of Bashan and destroyed them .
GOLD:	“ So the Lord our God handed King Og and all his people over to us , and we killed them all . Not a single person survived .

ID:	3031
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí biniyé Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii anídóot'įįłii baa hoolzhiizhgo doo hasht'e'niyiiníił da , áádóó ha'át'íí biniyé anídóot'įįł bijį́įdi áhodooníłígíí diné béédahósinii ts'ídá doo bił béédahózin da ?
PRED:	Why do you know the Almighty is greater than the Almighty ? And what will happen to the day of the Almighty ?
GOLD:	“ Why does n't the Almighty bring the wicked to judgment ? Why must the godly wait for him in vain ?

ID:	3032
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , asdzání t'áá ła' háá'áazhgo t'ááłá'íígíí bimá ;
PRED:	“ Son of man , one of the woman , is your mother 's mother .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , once there were two sisters who were daughters of the same mother .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii beidoołkááł bíká dadínóh'į́į'ii doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Bóhólníihii beidoołkáłígíí ha'át'íísh nihá íidoolííł ? T'óóyee' chahodoołhiłgo doo adinídíin da doo .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the day of the Lord ? Do n't you look for the day of the Lord ? Do n't it be like a light ? ”
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you who say , “ If only the day of the Lord were here ! ” You have no idea what you are wishing for.That day will bring darkness , not light .

ID:	3034
INPUT:	Áko t'óó báhádzidgo até'ésh'íinii binahjį' ádee hadeesdzíi'go ádííniid , Háá'áyį́į́h bee hooł'a'ígíí ts'ídá doo biih dazhdookah da .
PRED:	Then I said to my anger , “ I will never enter my Sabbath days . ”
GOLD:	So in my anger I took an oath : ‘ They will never enter my place of rest . ' ”

ID:	3035
INPUT:	Nidi níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í binahagiz yee átsé asdzą́ą́ Íiv yi'deezlo' yę́ęgi át'éego nihintsíkees t'ááłá'íígíí bee Christ nihił danilíinii bits'ą́ąjį' t'áá ádzaagóó anihidiyoo'ishii éí nihá binásdzid .
PRED:	But if the devil had sexual relations with Christ , he made his wife with Christ , and he made us a prostitute with Christ .
GOLD:	But I fear that somehow your pure and undivided devotion to Christ will be corrupted , just as Eve was deceived by the cunning ways of the serpent .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	Áko hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Diné at'į́į́ léi' bidá'ák'ehgi t'áá íiyisí ná'neest'ą́ ,
PRED:	Then Jesus told them this story : “ A man planted a man with a rich man ,
GOLD:	Then he told them a story : “ A rich man had a fertile farm that produced fine crops .

ID:	3037
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jóseph <unk> dzídzidgo nízhdii'na' , áko Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í áhodííniidii bi'jiilaago , Mary bił ahaa jít'áázh ,
PRED:	So Joseph got up and took the angel of the Lord 's servant , and she brought him to Mary .
GOLD:	When Joseph woke up , he did as the angel of the Lord commanded and took Mary as his wife .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	Mk . 9 : <unk>
PRED:	Discussion about Resurrection
GOLD:	Teaching about Vows

ID:	3039
INPUT:	Áádóó Kaldíya dine'é bisiláo t'áá át'é éí siláo yinanit'a'í yił naakaígíí Jerúsalem ditą́ągo binaagóó ahéé'ítł'inígíí naa'adeiniiskaad .
PRED:	Then the Babylonian army led the walls of the Babylonians to attack Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii asdzání ła' adiléé lágo yik'ídaaskaigo Jesus yaa deizlóóz , áko diné biníi'gi dah hoosį'go ,
PRED:	Then the teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law came to Jesus and tried to be bound by saying ,
GOLD:	As he was speaking , the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in the act of adultery . They put her in front of the crowd .

ID:	3041
INPUT:	Áko nihí éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą́'dóó doo ch'ídoohkah da ; áko doo dínóohnéeł da ; jó , Bóhólníihii bi'ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidii bee danihi'doolzį́į́' . Áko Mózes bizaad k'ehgo ádadziidzaa .
PRED:	You must not go out to the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle . You must not go out to the Lord 's presence , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	But you must not leave the entrance of the Tabernacle or you will die , for you have been anointed with the Lord 's anointing oil. ” So they did as Moses commanded .

ID:	3042
INPUT:	Nidi bídę́ę'go álíleego bee ééhózinii t'áá ádzaaí át'éego yaa nitsídaakees doo ; t'áadoo naaki nilíní ádee hadadeesdzíí' danízin nidi , áhodi'doolníłígíí biniyé doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdii bééhodi'yoolnih .
PRED:	But when the sailors know that they do n't know the miraculous signs they do , they do n't realize that they would be put to death .
GOLD:	The people of Jerusalem will think it is a false omen , because of their treaty with the Babylonians . But the king of Babylon will remind the people of their rebellion . Then he will attack and capture them .

ID:	3043
INPUT:	Ákohgo dah oonéłígíí ahíikaigo Mózes áádóó Éran yik'ijį' daazlį́į'go níbaal bii' dahozdísinii deiníł'į́į́ nít'éé' ; jó , k'os bik'iildoh lá , áko Bóhólníihii bits'ádi'nílíidii yit'íní silį́į́' .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron returned to the camp and went to the Tabernacle . Then the cloud covered the Tabernacle , and the cloud covered the Tabernacle with the Lord .
GOLD:	As the community gathered to protest against Moses and Aaron , they turned toward the Tabernacle and saw that the cloud had covered it , and the glorious presence of the Lord appeared .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	Diné éí asdzání bishchínígíí éí ne'ełdįįhjį' bich'į' nahwii'náa łeh , índa doo lą'í biiłkaah da .
PRED:	When the woman dies , she will die , and many nations will die .
GOLD:	“ How frail is humanity ! How short is life , how full of trouble !

ID:	3045
INPUT:	Peter éí Korníílyas bighandi yáłti'
PRED:	Peter Preaches in the Temple
GOLD:	Peter Visits Cornelius

ID:	3046
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' Jesus nazh'nitingo ájíní , Ha'át'éegoshą' bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii ádaaní , Christ éí David biye' nilį́ ?
PRED:	Jesus went to the Temple and taught them , “ Why are you the teachers of religious law ? ”
GOLD:	Later , as Jesus was teaching the people in the Temple , he asked , “ Why do the teachers of religious law claim that the Messiah is the son of David ?

ID:	3047
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'ayíłniihjį' Jésii hágo bididíínii ł , áádóó ádííníłígíí nił bééhodeesįįł , índa bízhi' bee nił hodeeshnihii ak'ah bik'i yeidííziłgo díísį́į́ł .
PRED:	“ Then present your offering to Jesse , and present them to the name of Jesse . Then I will pour the oil on your name .
GOLD:	Invite Jesse to the sacrifice , and I will show you which of his sons to anoint for me . ”

ID:	3048
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii híti'ígíí t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshíłteeh . Diné doo ádahalyáanii doo shá nidahałt'i'góó áshílééh !
PRED:	Rescue me from the law ; rescue me from those who follow me .
GOLD:	Rescue me from my rebellion.Do not let fools mock me .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	Ákódzaago shiwos dah deesh'ááłáádóó naat'á ch'ah hach'ah ájíléhígi át'éego shitsiinídeesht'ih nít'éé' .
PRED:	And I will make my crown on my head , and I will put my head on my head .
GOLD:	I would face the accusation proudly.I would wear it like a crown .

ID:	3050
INPUT:	Jó , baa ahééh nínízingo yá'át'éehgo sodílzin nidi éí dinéhígíí doo bee bidziilgo ábi'dilnéeh da .
PRED:	For it is good to give thanks to God , but it is good to those who do good .
GOLD:	You will be giving thanks very well , but it wo n't strengthen the people who hear you .

ID:	3051
INPUT:	Náwóne'di ahééhool'áhígíí ha'a'aahdę́ę'go yah a'atiin áhoot'éhígíí t'áá ákót'éego náhookǫsdę́ę́' yah a'atiinígíí binaashiijí yah a'atiin hólǫ́ , áádóó bita' ánízahígíí yí'nééł'ąądgo t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiin ké silá bita' ánízah .
PRED:	Then he measured the road to the east side of the gateway . He measured the road to the east side of the north side of the gateway .
GOLD:	Here on the north side , just as on the east , there was another gateway leading to the Temple 's inner courtyard directly opposite this outer gateway . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	Háálá nihaa dahosidiits'ą́ą'go haash yit'éego Bóhólníihii éí Tónteel Łichíí' tsé'naa nihilą́ąjį' nihá nihoníłtseii éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' náoh'nééł yę́ędą́ą́' áhóót'įįdígíí áádóó Ámor dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nidilt'éego Jórdan tooh wónaanídi bich'į' ádaot'įįdígíí éí Sáíhan índa Ag wolyéii nidasoołtseedii baa dahosidiits'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	When you heard that the Lord was about to cross the Jordan River , the people of the Red Sea and the Jordan River were defeated by the Jordan River . So King Sihon of the Amorites and the Jordan River .
GOLD:	For we have heard how the Lord made a dry path for you through the Red Sea when you left Egypt . And we know what you did to Sihon and Og , the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River , whose people you completely destroyed .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	Nidi ni , diné nílíinii , shoo , tł'óół niniyé nideidooniłgo éí yee nida'dootł'óołgo doo bitaa nináa da doo .
PRED:	But you are saying , ‘ Son of man , ' you can not be tied up with you .
GOLD:	There , son of man , you will be tied with ropes so you can not go out among the people .

ID:	3054
INPUT:	Áko Jesus ádííniid , ShiTaa' , díí yaa naakaígíí t'áadoo bik'ijį' síníł'ání , háálá doo bił béédahózingóó ádaat'į́ . Áádóó ha'éé' ałtaadeis'nii' biniyé yáá'iilt'e' yaa naaskai .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ My Father has done this , for they have n't been healed of the soldiers .
GOLD:	Jesus said , “ Father , forgive them , for they do n't know what they are doing. ” And the soldiers gambled for his clothes by throwing dice .

ID:	3055
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii dólzin éí hódzą́ bína'niltin át'é , áádóó a'ohgo ádaa nitsídzíkeesii éí ił ídlį́ bitsé siláii át'é .
PRED:	The Lord gives wisdom to those who fear him ; he is the foundation of the heavens .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord teaches wisdom ; humility precedes honor .

ID:	3056
INPUT:	Áko diné yá'ádaat'éehii dayíkááhgóó yínáał doo , áádóó diné t'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii ádaat'ínígi ánít'į́į doo .
PRED:	The wicked will go to death , and the godly will live forever .
GOLD:	So follow the steps of the good , and stay on the paths of the righteous .

ID:	3057
INPUT:	Díníyáágóó bínandínéeshtįįł áádóó bínaninishtin doo ; nik'i dísh'į́į'go nineeshtį́įł doo .
PRED:	I will teach you , and I will teach you what I am saying .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ I will guide you along the best pathway for your life.I will advise you and watch over you .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	yá'át'éehii áádóó doo yá'át'éehii nił bééhózingo éí bee nihídzíih doo ; ak'idi'yiitįįh naa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	You will know what is good and good ; you will reward you .
GOLD:	Wise choices will watch over you.Understanding will keep you safe .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bii'góó ayóó ádahonízádígíí bílák'ee silá . Dził aghádahaz'áhígíí ałdó' bí .
PRED:	The foundations of the earth tremble , for the waters of the earth trembles .
GOLD:	He holds in his hands the depths of the earthand the mightiest mountains .

ID:	3060
INPUT:	Dah diinááh ; kéyah náásee índa naaniigo hadiinááh , háálá díí kéyah naa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	“ Go and take your land , for I will give you your special possession .
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	3061
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniih dooígíí tsin nitł'izii bee ádadoohłííł ; tsosts'id ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go áníłnéez doo , áádóó naaniigo tsosts'id ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go áníłtéel doo ; dik'ą́ągo ádadoohłííł , índa dego éí dį́į́' ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go ánízah doo .
PRED:	“ Make the altar of acacia wood , and make it holy . It will be 45 feet long and 27 inches wide .
GOLD:	“ Using acacia wood , construct a square altar 71/2 feet wide , 71/2 feet long , and 41/2 feet high .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	Áko dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' hadanáásdzáago tsé dilkǫǫhii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii íishłaaígíí biih yínil , áko Bóhólníihii shich'į' yee haadzí'ígi át'éego ákwii ninínil .
PRED:	Then I took the mountain into the mountain of the mountain , and the Ark of the Lord had commanded me .
GOLD:	Then I turned and came down the mountain and placed the tablets in the Ark of the Covenant , which I had made , just as the Lord commanded me . And the tablets are still there in the Ark . ”

ID:	3063
INPUT:	Naalte' nilíinii chaha'oh t'áá íiyisí yídin nilínígi át'éegoáádóó adeenáago naalnishí bich'į' nidoolyéełii nayólíhígíí nahalingo ,
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of a slave , without a slave or a fool .
GOLD:	like a worker who longs for the shade , like a servant waiting to be paid .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii danilíinii bąąh da'éébį́į'go ayii'éésh ; diné ayóó ádaat'éii danilínígíí nahjį' hááyii'nííł .
PRED:	“ Bring the crown of the high priest 's head , and the glory of the dead will be taken away from the pit .
GOLD:	He leads priests away , stripped of status ; he overthrows those with long years in power .

ID:	3065
INPUT:	Jew dine'é áádóó Gríik dine'é danilíinii doo ał'ąą át'éego baa nitsáhákees da , háálá t'ááłá'í Bóhólníihii jílínígíí diné t'áá ałtso bee hóhólnííh , áádóó t'áá ałtso hach'į' sodadilzinígíí éí ts'ídá aláahgo bik'iijidlí .
PRED:	It is the Lord and the Gentiles , for he has been encouraged by all the nations of the world . He has been encouraged and encouraged by the Lord .
GOLD:	Jew and Gentile are the same in this respect . They have the same Lord , who gives generously to all who call on him .

ID:	3066
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad bee nahodi'nitinii éí nahonitinii áádóó t'áá ałtso bee jiináanii bił ałts'ą́ą́' ajíłk'iiz doo .
PRED:	Those who obey God 's word will be given to those who obey him .
GOLD:	Those who are taught the word of God should provide for their teachers , sharing all good things with them .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalemgi hondahaz'ą́ągo Léíkish kin haal'áágóó azhnííchą́ą́' , nidi ákǫ́ǫ́ hakéé' ada'as'a'go áadi dahwiisxį́ .
PRED:	So they went to Jerusalem to consult the city of Lachish and killed him .
GOLD:	There was a conspiracy against Amaziah 's life in Jerusalem , and he fled to Lachish . But his enemies sent assassins after him , and they killed him there .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	Áádóó díí Diyin God bikin diyingo nideideez'ą́ągo dóola t'ááłáhídi neeznádiin áádóó deenásts'aa' naakidi neeznádiin índa dibé yázhí dį́įdi neeznádiin náádahaaz'nii' . Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso dadóone'é bik'ehgo ádił ni'iidzííh biniinaa tł'ízíchǫǫh naakits'áadah bá náádahaaz'nii' .
PRED:	He brought a young bull and a ram for the Temple of God . He offered twelve rams and a young bull for the sin offering , and the goat for the sin offering . He will purify the people of Israel .
GOLD:	During the dedication ceremony for the Temple of God , 100 young bulls , 200 rams , and 400 male lambs were sacrificed . And 12 male goats were presented as a sin offering for the twelve tribes of Israel .

ID:	3069
INPUT:	Áádóó áadi jiníyáago siláo dah deínéehii binanit'a'í danilíinii naháaztą́ ; áádóó ání , Siláo binanit'a'í nílíinii , hane' naa ní'ą́ . Jííhu ání , Háí lá ábidiní ? Áko ábijiní , Ni ándishní , siláo binanit'a'í nílíinii .
PRED:	So the officer went to the guard and sat down and sat down . Then he said , “ Son of Man , why should I tell you the Son of Man ? ” So Jehu replied , “ I tell you , ‘ You are you the commander of the guard ! '
GOLD:	When he arrived there , he found Jehu sitting around with the other army officers . “ I have a message for you , Commander , ” he said. “ For which one of us ? ” Jehu asked. “ For you , Commander , ” he replied .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	yéego niníyol ó'oołdįįłii bee naanaajeeh , áádóó niníyoltsoh bee tsídabidíłhéés .
PRED:	The wind is a storm , and the wind covered the wind with terror .
GOLD:	chase them with your fierce storm ; terrify them with your tempest .

ID:	3071
INPUT:	Áko aa náhát'į́į́dóó ch'íininíłkaad .
PRED:	So I threw you into the hand of someone else with a rod .
GOLD:	And he threw them out of the courtroom .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	Jesus kóníigo díí diné naakits'áadahgoígíí ayiis'a' , Doo Jew dine'é danilíinii t'ááká bitahjį' dadohkááh yíila' , áádóó Samériya dine'é ła' bikin haal'áajį' dadohkááh lágo ,
PRED:	Then Jesus sent twelve men back to the tribe of Samaria , and do n't let anyone go to Samaria to Samaria .
GOLD:	Jesus sent out the twelve apostles with these instructions : “ Do n't go to the Gentiles or the Samaritans ,

ID:	3073
INPUT:	Jó ákohgo , k'ad éí shił hózhǫ́ , yínííł biih noodee'ígíí éí doo biniinaa da , nidi yíní biih noodee'ígíí bee łahgo át'éego Diyin God bich'į' tsíńdasidookézígíí bąą shił hózhǫ́ , háálá Diyin God bíniik'ehgo yínííł biih noodee' , áko nihinahjį' ha'át'íhída doo yóó'adasoołdéel da .
PRED:	And now I am telling you , ‘ You have not brought me into the wilderness , for you have not repented of your sins , for you have not sinned against God . You have not sinned against me because you have not sinned against me . '
GOLD:	Now I am glad I sent it , not because it hurt you , but because the pain caused you to repent and change your ways . It was the kind of sorrow God wants his people to have , so you were not harmed by us in any way .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	Áko kóhóót'įįd : éí haz'ání góne' asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh Esther dzizį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii hoołtsą́ągo bił jíílįįd , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bi'óola naat'á gish bílák'ee sitánígíí Esther yich'į' yideeztsih . Ákohgo Esther éí aláahgo naat'áanii bit'áahjį' jideeyáago óola naat'á gish bílátahdę́ę́' bizhdeelchid .
PRED:	When the queen of Esther saw the king 's wife , she hurried out to Queen Esther . When she saw her , she hurried out to Queen Esther , she hurried out to Queen Esther and held it up to the king .
GOLD:	When he saw Queen Esther standing there in the inner court , he welcomed her and held out the gold scepter to her . So Esther approached and touched the end of the scepter .

ID:	3075
INPUT:	Nihitsilí akéédę́'ígíí áádę́ę́' bił shaa noohkaigo índa t'áá aaníígóó dahoołne' doo , áko doo dínóohnéeł da . Áko ákódadziidzaa .
PRED:	“ All right , ” the youngest brother said , “ and you will die , and you will die . You will die ! ” So you will die .
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . This will prove that you are telling the truth , and you will not die. ” To this they agreed .

ID:	3076
INPUT:	Ałtso bis yik'i na'a<unk> go da' doósh dil áádóó kámin wolyéii bílástsii' áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' <unk> wolyéii nihiidiyoołkał da ?
PRED:	Do n't n't you open the door of the trees ? Do n't you stop the wheat , grain , wheat , wheat , wheat , wheat , barley , olive oil , olive oil , and olive oil .
GOLD:	Does he not finally plant his seeds — black cumin , cumin , wheat , barley , and emmer wheat — each in its proper way , and each in its proper place ?

ID:	3077
INPUT:	Diné naakigo nitsídzíkeesii éí t'áá ałtsojį' doo bééhózingóó nijighá .
PRED:	A wise person knows what is going to do .
GOLD:	Their loyalty is divided between God and the world , and they are unstable in everything they do .

ID:	3078
INPUT:	Nidi Jáshowa bich'į' handziihgo chánah ánílééh áádóó bidziilgo ánílééh , háálá díí dine'é yoo'ishgo ha'naa nidoogááł , áko kéyah íí' dooleełii ádíí' ádeidoolíiłgo íidoolíłígíí yidííłtsééł .
PRED:	“ Get up and take your ears to them , for you will cross the land you are about to occupy . Then you will see the land you will see .
GOLD:	Instead , commission Joshua and encourage and strengthen him , for he will lead the people across the Jordan . He will give them all the land you now see before you as their possession . '

ID:	3079
INPUT:	Éí bąą sodizin bee nik'i dah díshnii'dą́ą́' Diyin God yee nik'ijisdli'go niih yiyííláhígíí nídiiłtłáadgo yéego diltłi'go íínísin dooleełígíí bééniyiishnííh .
PRED:	Therefore , I prayed to God as a warning to you , and do n't understand what I am saying .
GOLD:	This is why I remind you to fan into flames the spiritual gift God gave you when I laid my hands on you .

ID:	3080
INPUT:	Éí tséhígíí Ízrel biye'ké bee bééhániih biniyé íífad wolyéii bikáa'gi awostisgi t'áá ałch'ijí sinilgo Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the sacred ephod in front of the ephod and placed it in front of the ephod at the front of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	He fastened these stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that the priest represents the people of Israel . All this was done just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	3081
INPUT:	Béílam éí Béílak yaa nádzá , áko didlidgo nááhániihígíí yíighahgi sizį́ ; bí áádóó Mó'ab dine'é binanit'a'í t'áá ałtso yił naazį́ .
PRED:	Balak went to Balak and stood beside the burnt offering . He stood beside all the leaders of Moab and all the other leaders of Moab .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	3082
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh áádóó até'él'į́ ts'ídá doo hwiih yileeh daígi át'éego diné bináá' yee dayiiłtse'ii ts'ídá doo hwiih daaleeh da .
PRED:	The violence of death will disappear , and the words of the grave will never eat it .
GOLD:	Just as Death and Destruction are never satisfied , so human desire is never satisfied .

ID:	3083
INPUT:	Diné doo da'oo'íinii bá anáá' nishłį́į́ nít'éé' , índa diné doo nidaakaii bá ajáád nishłį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ I am a blind man who was blind , and I was not jealous of all people .
GOLD:	I served as eyes for the blindand feet for the lame .

ID:	3084
INPUT:	éí hwe'ana'í danilíinii áádóó hazéé'deidoot'įįłgo hádaat'íinii bílák'ee hodideesh'ááł , áko hats'íís daneeznáanii éí tsídii índa nihokáá'góó naaldlooshii dabich'iyą' doo .
PRED:	I will destroy their enemies , and I will destroy them with their enemies . I will destroy the vultures and wild animals . ”
GOLD:	I will give you to your enemies , and they will kill you . Your bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals .

ID:	3085
INPUT:	Oodlání jílį́įgo hak'éí ła' bąąh ádahasdįįdgo éí baa ádahojilyą́ą doo , áko da'oodlání áłah nádleehii t'ah yówehgo doo biyéél ánáhojidléeh da doo , nidi bąąh ádahasdįįdii ts'ídá t'áadoo baa ádahólyą́'í daígíí t'éiyá yaa ádahalyą́ą doo .
PRED:	Those who are not guilty of the church must be put to death , and those who are not ready to eat the Passover meal . But if they do n't eat the Passover meal , they will be able to eat .
GOLD:	If a woman who is a believer has relatives who are widows , she must take care of them and not put the responsibility on the church . Then the church can care for the widows who are truly alone .

ID:	3086
INPUT:	Kót'éego Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go kóní , Wáin t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí<unk> íinii át'éego díí bee adlání bee dah yishkáłígíí nídiikaah áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bitahgóó díkaahgo dabidiyííłdlį́į́ł .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord : “ This is what the God of Israel says : I will pour out the cup of wine and the wine of the nations .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , said to me : “ Take from my hand this cup filled to the brim with my anger , and make all the nations to whom I send you drink from it .

ID:	3087
INPUT:	Áko Peter , ídahooł'aahii ła'ts'áadahígíí bił nidzizį́įgo , áłah nilínígíí yéego bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Judíyadóó diné danohłíinii , áádóó Jerúsalemgi kéédahoht'íinii t'áá ánółtso , shizaad dayínółts'ą́ą'go díí nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	Then Peter and the twelve disciples stood at Jerusalem . Then he said to them , “ Listen to the people of Judea , you people of Judea , and everyone in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then Peter stepped forward with the eleven other apostles and shouted to the crowd , “ Listen carefully , all of you , fellow Jews and residents of Jerusalem ! Make no mistake about this .

ID:	3088
INPUT:	Ch'il hísap wolyéhígíí nídadidoołjołgo łeets'aa' háámazí biyi'jį' dił yadahooziidígíí ch'é'étiin siláii ałts'ą́ą́hjí áádóó naadasitánígi bee daashdlish doo . Hoos'įįdjį' nihí t'áadoo tł'óó'góó nidaahkaí .
PRED:	“ You must be smashed by the weight of the grain offering and the blood of the cart . It will be held in front of all sides of the lions .
GOLD:	Drain the blood into a basin . Then take a bundle of hyssop branches and dip it into the blood . Brush the hyssop across the top and sides of the doorframes of your houses . And no one may go out through the door until morning .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí níłch'i bee ánihwiit'aahii áádóó níłch'i ąąh ha'diiłk'ą́ąhii bee Záíyan bich'é'éké chin yąąh tánéízgizgo áádóó Jerúsalemgi dine'é bidił yá nináninídee'ii doo bąąh chinígóó ánáyiidlaago ,
PRED:	“ The Spirit of the Lord has made you ceremonially unclean for Jerusalem . He makes you ceremonially unclean for the sins of the Lord 's people .
GOLD:	The Lord will wash the filth from beautiful Zionand cleanse Jerusalem of its bloodstainswith the hot breath of fiery judgment .

ID:	3090
INPUT:	Díí íí' dooleełii Júdah dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	These are the clans of Judah . The homeland allocated to the clans of Judah .
GOLD:	This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	3091
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham éí t'áá íiyisí t'ah abínígo nízhdii'na'go Bóhólníihii binááł dzizį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi jiníyá ,
PRED:	So Abraham bowed low before the Lord 's presence before the Lord .
GOLD:	Abraham got up early that morning and hurried out to the place where he had stood in the Lord 's presence .

ID:	3092
INPUT:	télii ałchinii honoojíidi íneesdinii éí télii biką' dooleełii haintáago níłch'i yił ahidziihígíí nahonílin ; ch'íná'náago háí doo ákót'į́į́góó íidoolííł ? Hadabintáii éí doo ch'ééh hadabidínóotaał da ; biką'ii bidiigháahgo índa hasht'edit'eeh .
PRED:	The donkey is like a wild donkey , a desert desert desert desert desert desert desert , a fool who is like a cart . Who can search for a fool to search for a fool ? ”
GOLD:	You are like a wild donkey , sniffing the wind at mating time.Who can restrain her lust ? Those who desire her do n't need to search , for she goes running to them !

ID:	3093
INPUT:	Áádóó Adonáíjah éí Zerowáíyah biyáázh Jó'ab áádóó náá'iiłniihii Abáíyathar ałdó' bił ahił nidahodzisne' , áko Adonáíjah bikéé' nizhní'áazhgo bíká ahizhnoolchą́ą́' .
PRED:	Adonijah 's son Abishai , the priest of Zeruiah , and he fled to Adonijah .
GOLD:	Adonijah took Joab son of Zeruiah and Abiathar the priest into his confidence , and they agreed to help him become king .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	Nihighandóó dóola índa nihidibé bighandóó tł'ízíchǫǫh doo ła' dínéesįįł da .
PRED:	I will not take your male goat and goats .
GOLD:	But I do not need the bulls from your barnsor the goats from your pens .

ID:	3095
INPUT:	T'áá shí hwiideestsééł ; shináá' bee hwiideestsééł ; t'áá háiida éí dooda .
PRED:	I will see you , and I will never see you .
GOLD:	I will see him for myself.Yes , I will see him with my own eyes.I am overwhelmed at the thought !

ID:	3096
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán kódaat'éii doo nisxin da ; ch'iyáán kódaat'éii ná shiigha' .
PRED:	“ Do n't waste your food from eating ; it is my food .
GOLD:	My appetite disappears when I look at it ; I gag at the thought of eating it !

ID:	3097
INPUT:	Áko Mózes áádóó náá'iiłniihii Éran éí Dził Sáínai honoojíigi Ízrel dine'é yiyííłta' yę́ędą́ą́' éí díí dayéélta'ígíí bitahdóó doo ła' hoł da'éélta' da nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the priests in the wilderness of Sinai as Moses and Aaron had commanded them to bring them out of the wilderness .
GOLD:	Not one person on this list had been among those listed in the previous registration taken by Moses and Aaron in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	3098
INPUT:	Áádóó David dah náázdiidzáago Mó'ab kéyahgi Mízpeh kin haal'áajį' jiníyá , áádóó Mó'ab dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í ábizhdííniid , Nánooshkąąh , bíni' shimá áádóó shizhé'é kwe'é doo'ashgo Diyin God shá ádooníłígíí shił bééhoozinjį' kwe'é nił naháaztą́ą doo .
PRED:	So David left Mizpah and went to Mizpah to Mizpah at Mizpah . He said , “ Please know that I am going to live in the land of Moab . ”
GOLD:	Later David went to Mizpeh in Moab , where he asked the king , “ Please allow my father and mother to live here with you until I know what God is going to do for me . ”

ID:	3099
INPUT:	Nidi náásgóó kwe'é t'áadoo hane' yá'át'éehii baa nááhóshne'ígi da hazlį́į́' , áádóó lą'í nááhaídą́ą́' nihaa jóya' laanaa ch'ééh níízįįd .
PRED:	But there was no Good News for a little time for a little time , and a few years later , a few years later .
GOLD:	But now I have finished my work in these regions , and after all these long years of waiting , I am eager to visit you .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	Éí t'áá ániid naagháádą́ą́' bahastiin nilį́įgo hoolzhiizh yę́ę yóó'iidíí'ą́ , áádóó Diyin God binááł aha'deet'áanii yaa yooznah .
PRED:	He has abandoned the husband of God , and he has abandoned his covenant .
GOLD:	She has abandoned her husbandand ignores the covenant she made before God .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	áádóó diné chahałheeł nideinishin doo biniyé t'áá ákogi át'éego dahonít'i' yits'ádahaaskaii yits'ą́ąjį' yisdándoołtééł .
PRED:	Let the darkness stay in darkness , and let the godly be saved .
GOLD:	These men turn from the right wayto walk down dark paths .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Féro bił yah anináahgo bił hólne' , Hííbrew dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shidine'é béé'níłnííh , áko shich'į' nidahałáa doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go to Pharaoh and tell him , ‘ Go to Pharaoh , and let my people go to worship me . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Go back to Pharaoh , ” the Lord commanded Moses . “ Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	3103
INPUT:	Áko áádóó ha'át'éegoda ashja'iilaago nináhozhdidoo'áałgi baa nitsídzíkeesgo hodeeshzhiizh .
PRED:	So I 'll tell you what I 've decided to do .
GOLD:	From that time on , Judas began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus .

ID:	3104
INPUT:	Shich'į' ééhonísįįh ! Ayóó'ííní'níinii yisdádooltééł biniyé nigaan nish'náájí bee shíká anilyeed .
PRED:	Save me , O God , for he has rescued me from his right hand .
GOLD:	Now rescue your beloved people.Answer and save us by your power .

ID:	3105
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán yiniyé nidaakai áádóó doo hwiih daaleehgóó bii' nidahodi'ni' doo .
PRED:	They have plenty of food and food , and we will eat it .
GOLD:	They scavenge for foodbut go to sleep unsatisfied .

ID:	3106
INPUT:	Éídar yiziłígíí binih táá'ts'áadahgóó yoołkáałgo ádahóót'įįd . Áko dį́į́'ts'áadah yoołkááł góne' t'óó háádaasyį́į́' áádóó éí bijį́ ída'azįįdgo índa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo yaa naaskai .
PRED:	On March 7 , during the fourteenth day of the fourteenth day of the fourteenth day of the month . So they celebrated the festival and gladness .
GOLD:	This was done throughout the provinces on March 7 , and on March 8 they rested , celebrating their victory with a day of feasting and gladness .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	Áko ábijiní , Jó , bee ak'e'ashchį́ , Shikin éí kin bii' sohodizin wolyée doo , nít'éé' nihí aghada'ii'níiłii be'a'áán ádaahłaa lá .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ The Scriptures say , ‘ You have been called the Temple of my Temple , for you have been called the den of thieves . ' ”
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves ! ”

ID:	3108
INPUT:	Áádóó David yił dahoolne'go ádaaní , Shoo , Filístiya dine'é éí Kii'áílah kin haal'áagi yik'iijée'go ha'ínída'al'isígi haghada'iis'nil .
PRED:	Then David told his men , “ Look , you are going to fight the Philistines of Keilah . ”
GOLD:	One day news came to David that the Philistines were at Keilah stealing grain from the threshing floors .

ID:	3109
INPUT:	Diyin God ánáádoo'niid , Doo danoodlą́ą́góogo , doodaii' átsé bee ééhózinii doo dayoodlą́ą́góó akée'di bee ééhózinii deizhdoodląął .
PRED:	Then God said , “ If you do n't believe the miraculous signs or wonders in the wilderness , you will believe in the Scriptures .
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ If they do not believe you and are not convinced by the first miraculous sign , they will be convinced by the second sign .

ID:	3110
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii áádóó Férisii danilíinii Mózes dah sidáá nít'éé' yę́ęgi dah naazdá ;
PRED:	Then the teachers of religious law and Pharisees arrived at the distance .
GOLD:	“ The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees are the official interpreters of the law of Moses .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	K'ad Bóhólníihii ánínígíí deísółts'ą́ą́' : Nídoohjeeh , dził daní'áii bidááhdóó aghada'dooht'ááh , dah daask'idii bíni'dii nihiinéé' deidiits'į́į́h .
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord : Pay attention to the mountains , O mountains !
GOLD:	Listen to what the Lord is saying : “ Stand up and state your case against me.Let the mountains and hills be called to witness your complaints .

ID:	3112
INPUT:	Áadi ła' Ananáíyas yolyéé léi' , diné hodísinii , bee haz'áanii Mózes baa deet'áanii yik'eh hół'íinii nilį́ , Jew dine'é ákwe'é kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá át'é yá'át'éehgo baa ch'ídahwii'aah .
PRED:	There was a man named Simon ( who was a man named Simon ) , a man named Moses ) , “ He is a good thing . ”
GOLD:	A man named Ananias lived there . He was a godly man , deeply devoted to the law , and well regarded by all the Jews of Damascus .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	éí bąą k'ad , t'áadoo shiníníłtł'aaí díí diné hach'į' t'áá íiyisí hashké nísdzingo áhodeeshdįįł , áádóó nits'ą́ą́dóó diné ayóó át'éego náás ahoolchíiłgo ádeeshłíí ł .
PRED:	So now , do n't let me be able to be able to make you strong , and I will destroy you as a huge crowd .
GOLD:	Now leave me alone so my fierce anger can blaze against them , and I will destroy them . Then I will make you , Moses , into a great nation . ”

ID:	3114
INPUT:	Áko t'áá bí bídadéét'i'ii Mózes éí náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízar áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa índa Ízrel dine'é dabizhé'é á naazíinii ída'doolíłígíí yee hach'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	So Joshua gave the following instructions to Joshua son of Nun and Joshua son of Nun , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of Israel .
GOLD:	So Moses gave orders to Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of the clans of Israel .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	háálá łá'í nidi doo ła' bee haleeh da lá , nidi Bóhólníihii Jesus bízhi' t'éí bee tó bee dabi'doolzį́į́' lá .
PRED:	For no one can say , for the name of the Lord Jesus Christ was baptized with water .
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit had not yet come upon any of them , for they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii bínda'nołtinii áádóó Férisii danohłíinii , t'óó ádahodoł'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Háálá dajishcháá' doo daat'íinii nidahonohłin , áko éí diné t'áadoo bił béédahóziní yikáá' naaldeeh .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and Pharisees and Pharisees ! For you do n't know what is going to do .
GOLD:	Yes , what sorrow awaits you ! For you are like hidden graves in a field . People walk over them without knowing the corruption they are stepping on . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :

ID:	3118
INPUT:	T'áadoo nánídlíníii , t'áadoo nídandlíní da , ní halne'í ; t'áá ałtsoní t'áadoo nídandlíní da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid of all your prophets . They are worthless , worthless , and they are worthless .
GOLD:	“ Everything is meaningless , ” says the Teacher , “ completely meaningless . ”

ID:	3119
INPUT:	Nahagizgo yáníłti'ígíí nahjį' nidiní'aah , índa t'áá naaki nahwiiláago yáníłti'ígíí doo deeghánígóó áts'ádinít'aah .
PRED:	“ If you are guilty , you will be judged , and you will be judged .
GOLD:	Avoid all perverse talk ; stay away from corrupt speech .

ID:	3120
INPUT:	Nihí naakigo dah wohnéłígíí háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' doo nidaołnishígíí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' aláahgo naat'áanii baa ádahołyą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ Be careful to celebrate the Sabbath day of the Lord 's Temple . You will guard the Sabbath days of the Lord .
GOLD:	The other two units who are off duty on the Sabbath must stand guard for the king at the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	Diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Ízrel dine'é dajílínígíí t'áá hó hadah na'at'a'í bíighahgi dahazhé'é yę́ę ba'áłchíní bił bidah na'at'a'í bíighahgi ninádaji'néeh doo ; níbaal bii' dahozdísinii binaadi ninádaji'néeh doo .
PRED:	So each of the men of Israel went to their camp beside the camp of their enemies . Their registered troops will camp at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ When the Israelites set up camp , each tribe will be assigned its own area . The tribal divisions will camp beneath their family banners on all four sides of the Tabernacle , but at some distance from it .

ID:	3122
INPUT:	Áko Iiláíjah bibeeldládí éé' ádeidiiltsoozgo yizdisgo yee tooh néidíí'ahgo tó ałts'áálk'ol , áko t'áá ájíłah hóółtseigóó ha'naa nizhní'áázh .
PRED:	Then Elijah picked up his cloak and ran out to the river , and the water covered the river with water . Then they crossed the Jordan River to the river .
GOLD:	Then Elijah folded his cloak together and struck the water with it . The river divided , and the two of them went across on dry ground !

ID:	3123
INPUT:	bíni'dii <unk> yeedgo shił dah dii'aash ; bee hinishnánígíí bíni' yik'i naaghá , áádóó bee ił nishłíinii ni'jį' kwíílééh . Síilah .
PRED:	“ Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Do n't let me walk in your presence ? Interlude
GOLD:	then let my enemies capture me.Let them trample me into the groundand drag my honor in the dust.Interlude

ID:	3124
INPUT:	Da' niísh nihizhé'é Éíbraham yę́ę biláahgo ayóó ánít'é ? Éí daaztsą́ , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii nít'é'ígíí ałdó' daneezná ! Ákoshą' háí í'díl'į́ ?
PRED:	“ Are you the King of Abraham ? Are you the prophets of Abraham ? Who is the dead ? ”
GOLD:	Are you greater than our father Abraham ? He died , and so did the prophets . Who do you think you are ? ”

ID:	3125
INPUT:	Átsé nídízídígíí binih , neeznáá jį́į́ góne' Jórdan tooh ha'naa ninínáago Jériko bihoodzo ha'a'aahjígo Gílgal hoolyéegi niníná .
PRED:	On the first day of the first day of the Jordan River , they left Gilgal and camped at Gilgal .
GOLD:	The people crossed the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month . Then they camped at Gilgal , just east of Jericho .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	ATaa' shiníł'a'ígíí t'áá bí ałdó' shaa hoolne' . Éí biinéé' nidi ts'ídá t'ah doo dadoohts'į́įh da , ázhnoolninígíí nidi ts'ídá doo daołtséeh da ,
PRED:	The Father has not heard me , but you will never see the voice of the Father .
GOLD:	And the Father who sent me has testified about me himself . You have never heard his voice or seen him face to face ,

ID:	3127
INPUT:	Badahojoobá'íii daachago bich'į' jé'áhozhdilkałii t'áá hó ałdó' jicha doo , nidi t'áadoo hodidoots'į́łí da .
PRED:	The wicked cry out to the wicked , but the wicked will cry out , but the wicked will cry out .
GOLD:	Those who shut their ears to the cries of the poorwill be ignored in their own time of need .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	Ákondi dine'é ła' t'áá ákogi ádaa<unk> gi át'éego áádóó Diyin God bibik'eh hoogáałii doo nahjį' nideideez'áaniigi át'éego éí t'áá ákwíí jį́ há dashidéez'į́į́' índa shik'ehgo iináanii shił bééhodoozįįł danízingo yaa bił dahózhǫ́ ; t'áá ákogi át'éego bik'eh hoogáałii shídayókeed ; t' áá áháníjį' Diyin God yich'į' nidadookahígíí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	But if you are righteous , I will give justice to God and obey my decrees and regulations , they will know that I am innocent , and they will know that I am innocent .
GOLD:	Yet they act so pious ! They come to the Temple every dayand seem delighted to learn all about me.They act like a righteous nationthat would never abandon the laws of its God.They ask me to take action on their behalf , pretending they want to be near me .

ID:	3129
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bee hódzáanii eidiyii'aah ; ił ééhózin áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįh yee hahadziih .
PRED:	For the Lord gives wisdom to knowledge and knowledge .
GOLD:	For the Lord grants wisdom ! From his mouth come knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3130
INPUT:	Áádóó bá nidaal'a'í áyidííniid , Shoo , shidá'ák'eh bíighahgóó t'áá áhą́dígi Jó'ab bidá'ák'eh ákwii bitł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í hólǫ́ ; nílááh , ákǫ́ǫ́ dohkáahgo biih dah hodohnííł , áko Ábsalam bá nidaal'a'í éí dá'ák'ehgi tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í yíl'áii yiih dah hodeeznil .
PRED:	He said to his servants , “ Look , go out to the valley of Joab , and go out to the valley of Joab . Go to the threshing floor of wheat , and go to the threshing floor of Moab . ”
GOLD:	So Absalom said to his servants , “ Go and set fire to Joab 's barley field , the field next to mine. ” So they set his field on fire , as Absalom had commanded .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	Háálá diné nihich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii bá yóó'adahidoh'aahgo nihiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii bich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaot'įįdii ałdó' nihá yóó'iidii'aah doo ,
PRED:	For you will forgive your sins , but your Father will forgive your sins .
GOLD:	“ If you forgive those who sin against you , your heavenly Father will forgive you .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	Áko kéyah ayóó áhonóolnin góne' yah adoogáałgo kéyah t'óó ahayóí yik'eh didoodleeł , nidi Íídam dine'é áádóó Mó'ab dine'é índa Áman dine'é dah da'í'éeshii ałdó' hayaa hadookah .
PRED:	The land of Edom will go out to the land of Edom , and Edom will be defeated by the Ammonites .
GOLD:	He will enter the glorious land of Israel , and many nations will fall , but Moab , Edom , and the best part of Ammon will escape .

ID:	3133
INPUT:	Lą'í shízhi' yee ádadójíigo nidahidookah , Shí Christ ásht'į́ ! daaníigo , áko lą'í yóó'adeidínóo'ah .
PRED:	Many will come to me in the name of Christ , and many will be saved .
GOLD:	for many will come in my name , claiming , ‘ I am the Messiah . ' They will deceive many .

ID:	3134
INPUT:	Áko ánáábizhdoo'niid , Da' nihíísh Néíhor binálí Léíban wolyéii béédahonohsin ? Áko áhodííniid , Aoo' , béédahoniilzin .
PRED:	“ Are you the father of Bethuel ? ” Laban replied . “ Yes , ” Laban replied . “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Yes , ” he replied .
GOLD:	“ Do you know a man there named Laban , the grandson of Nahor ? ” he asked. “ Yes , we do , ” they replied .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	T'ahdii shijéí biyi'dóó hódzą́ shoolóosgo , Haa lá yit'éego shits'íís éí wáin bee bił honishǫ́ǫ dooleeł lá , nisingo shintsíkees nisíłkáá' , áádóó , Haa lá yit'éego doo hóshkał yideestsoł lá , niizį́į́' . Yádiłhił biyaagi diné ba'áłchíní nida'iisdįįd bijį́įjį' ha'át'íí yá'át'ééh shį́į́ yaa nidaakai dooleeł lá éí shił bééhodoozįįł , niizį́į́' .
PRED:	“ But if I am in my heart , I 'll know how much I am ? ” I said , “ How terrible it is better to be like this man to be better off than to be ! ”
GOLD:	After much thought , I decided to cheer myself with wine . And while still seeking wisdom , I clutched at foolishness . In this way , I tried to experience the only happiness most people find during their brief life in this world .

ID:	3136
INPUT:	Áko t'áá da'ał'ąą dah naazhjaa'go há nidaal'a'í bá ats'á'dziiznil , áádóó há nidaal'a'í ábizhdííniid , Shilą́ąjį' tsé'naa nihohnééh ; nihita' honí'ą́ągo danóołkaad .
PRED:	So he called his servants to the villages and told them , “ Go ahead and cross the Jordan River to the ground . ”
GOLD:	He divided these animals into herds and assigned each to different servants . Then he told his servants , “ Go ahead of me with the animals , but keep some distance between the herds . ”

ID:	3137
INPUT:	Háálá shikin biyi'dóó shitsésǫ'gi tsin yistł'ǫ́ǫgo dáádiníbaalígíí biníká dínísh'į́į'go
PRED:	For I looked at my window , and I looked at my window .
GOLD:	While I was at the window of my house , looking through the curtain ,

ID:	3138
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shijéí t'áá át'é bee naa hashniih , diyin dabidi'níinii binááł nich'į' hashtaałgo naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise you with all my heart , O Lord , and I will praise you before you .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	3139
INPUT:	Nóah áádóó biye'ké
PRED:	The sons of Noah
GOLD:	Noah 's Sons

ID:	3140
INPUT:	bikáá' adání áádóó tsin níyizii bee naat'áa dooígíí áádóó beedí chodao'į́į dooleełígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá bił , Diyin God bich'į' bááh nááhániih dooleełígíí ,
PRED:	the table and its utensils ; the Bread of the Presence ; all its utensils ;
GOLD:	the table , its carrying poles , and all its utensils ; the Bread of the Presence ;

ID:	3141
INPUT:	Áádóó Bétheldóó dah náázhdii'ná , áko Éfrath t'áá áyídí hadziihgo Réíchel awéé' bídii'na'go t'áá íiyisí bich'į' nahwiisnáá' .
PRED:	As she left Bethel , she got up and went to Bethany with her son , and her eyes were filled with her eyes .
GOLD:	Leaving Bethel , Jacob and his clan moved on toward Ephrath . But Rachel went into labor while they were still some distance away . Her labor pains were intense .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	Diné t'óó ahayóí éí bił béédahoozingo , hakéé' yíkai , áko baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫgo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bee bich'į' hadzoodzíí' , áádóó hadaałt'é nídeeshdleeł danízinígíí éí hadaałt'é áńdajiidlaa .
PRED:	When they saw him , they followed him and told him what he had happened to the Kingdom of God , and he gave them authority to the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	But the crowds found out where he was going , and they followed him . He welcomed them and taught them about the Kingdom of God , and he healed those who were sick .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	Honoojíidi dahootsogóó nidi bee áda'azįįd . Áádóó dah daask'idígíí bił nidahoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	They rejoice in the wilderness of Heaven 's Armies , and they rejoice in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The grasslands of the wilderness become a lush pasture , and the hillsides blossom with joy .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	Bábilan bich'é'é bízháán naagháii nílíinii , wóshdę́ę́' hadanináahgo ni'dóó łeezh dibahí bii' nídaah ; Kaldíya dine'é bich'é'é nílíinii , bikáá'dóó nahat'áii ná ádin , áko yilzhólí áádóó ayóó ánóolninígíí doo nándi'níi da doo .
PRED:	“ Come , O Babylon , ” says the Lord , “ let your enemies fall into the dust , O Babylon , and you will never again be your brother .
GOLD:	“ Come down , virgin daughter of Babylon , and sit in the dust.For your days of sitting on a throne have ended.O daughter of Babylonia , never again will you bethe lovely princess , tender and delicate .

ID:	3145
INPUT:	Áádóó biiskání siláo bighangóó anídahaas'náago łį́į́' nidabiyéhígíí t'éiyá hoł dah náádii'ná .
PRED:	So the next day of the Babylonian army went to the camp .
GOLD:	They returned to the fortress the next morning , while the mounted troops took him on to Caesarea .

ID:	3146
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad t'éiyá bee haz'áanii t'áágééd Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii k'ad nihich'į' ííshją́ą́ ályaa . Éí bee haz'áanii índa Diyin God bá dahojilne'ii yę́ę baa ch'ídahodziiz'ą́ .
PRED:	But now the law of God is revealed to us , and he has given us the law of God .
GOLD:	But now God has shown us a way to be made right with him without keeping the requirements of the law , as was promised in the writings of Moses and the prophets long ago .

ID:	3147
INPUT:	Éran éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee naakáhígíí bii' tsííd hadeezbingo bikáá' náá'iiniihí si'ánídóó Bóhólníihii binááł néidiikáah doo , índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii áłts'íísígo yitseedígíí bílák'ee hadeezbingo néidiijihgo aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ání góne' yah anéíkáah doo .
PRED:	Aaron must take the incense incense burner and burn it in the presence of the Lord . He will enter the altar and burn incense in front of the Temple of the Lord . Then he will enter the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	he will fill an incense burner with burning coals from the altar that stands before the Lord . Then he will take two handfuls of fragrant powdered incense and will carry the burner and the incense behind the inner curtain .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	Táá' náhááh góne' nínádanołt'į́įhii t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' t'áá éí yihahígíí binih nihikin hadaas'áá góne' nooh ná'áchíihgi hasht'e'nidahohnííł .
PRED:	“ On the third year of the third year of the year of the year of my harvest , you will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	“ At the end of every third year , bring the entire tithe of that year 's harvest and store it in the nearest town .

ID:	3149
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí t'áá ákogi ádaaníiłii nízhi' yich'į' ahééh dadínóozįįł ; t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii honílǫ́ǫgi kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	I will thank the godly , and those who live in your name will live forever .
GOLD:	Surely righteous people are praising your name ; the godly will live in your presence .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Ízrel dine'é bitahgóó ashiiké alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í bee nídadeezidóó yówehgo béédááhaii yíníłta' , áádóó dabízhi' ałkéé' dadíízoh .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ The Israelites are among the firstborn sons of Israel , and twenty years old or older among them .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Now count all the firstborn sons in Israel who are one month old or older , and make a list of their names .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	háálá dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náázhdidoodáałgo Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchį́įgo yaa halne'ígíí t'ah doo yik'ida'diitįįh da .
PRED:	For the dead will be raised from the dead , but the Scriptures not understand what he said .
GOLD:	for until then they still had n't understood the Scriptures that said Jesus must rise from the dead .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	aa hwiinít'į́įgi t'áá ádzaagóó ak'ihodii'aahii , índa ałk'isgóó dandlíinii yił hááhoniłcha'ii éí Bóhólníihii bijoołxá .
PRED:	Those who love them will be faithful to them , for the Lord hates those who love them .
GOLD:	a false witness who pours out lies , a person who sows discord in a family .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	Nidi Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí tádiindóó ba'aan naaki siláo binanit'a'í danilíinii éí hatsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí bee bídahólníihii yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Ádaałts'ísígíí , doodaii' ayóó ádaat'éhígíí t'áadoo bił da'ahohgání , nidi Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii t'éiyá .
PRED:	But when the king of Aram had fifty chariots , the king of Aram said , “ Do n't bother the king of Israel ! Do n't bother the king of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the king of Aram had issued these orders to his thirty-two chariot commanders : “ Attack only the king of Israel . Do n't bother with anyone else ! ”

ID:	3154
INPUT:	Nidi nihaa niikai yę́ędą́ą́' nihá ádahwiinít'į́'ígo nihitaa siikai , t'áá amá ba'áłchíní yaa áhályánígi át'éego nihitaa deiikai nít'éé' .
PRED:	But when we arrived , we took our mother and gave us a mother of our mother .
GOLD:	As apostles of Christ we certainly had a right to make some demands of you , but instead we were like children among you . Or we were like a mother feeding and caring for her own children .

ID:	3155
INPUT:	Áko Sháílohdi diné bitahgi níbaal bii' hodílzinii niiní'ą́ągo bii' bighanígíí yóó'iidíí'ą́ .
PRED:	Then the Ark of the Tabernacle was taken from Shiloh and abandoned it .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	Shá nahazt'i'ígíí bik'ee atídiníshdlį́į́' , áko t'áá íiyisí yínííł naashá . Shik'édí hodoodleeł niizį́į́' , nidi t'áadoo shik'édí silį́'í da . Bee ha'ahóníinii biniyé tádííyá , nidi t'áadoo ła' bik'íníyáa da .
PRED:	He has made my covenant with my people , and I did not spare my enemies . But I did n't let them be afraid of my enemies .
GOLD:	Their insults have broken my heart , and I am in despair.If only one person would show some pity ; if only one would turn and comfort me .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	Nihijéí bii' nihá hosiil'ą́ , nidi nihí aají danihijéí bii' doo nihá nidahosooł'ą́ą da .
PRED:	We have sinned against us , but we have not sinned against us .
GOLD:	There is no lack of love on our part , but you have withheld your love from us .

ID:	3158
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é dayííłkiin dooígíí
PRED:	The priests and Levites
GOLD:	Provisions for Temple Worship

ID:	3159
INPUT:	Éí asdzání ákót'éii nízaadi bits'ąą nidaahkai , índa bich'é'étiin bit'áahjį' dohkááh lágo .
PRED:	“ Get away from this distance from the distance and stay away from the distance .
GOLD:	Stay away from her ! Do n't go near the door of her house !

ID:	3160
INPUT:	Agháhóó'áadi hat'oh ájíléehgo índa doo yá'át'éehii bibee adziilii bits'ą́ąjį' yisdá'ázhdílteehgo biniyé doo yá'át'éehii ha'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bá bidázhnoolníinii éí doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who live in heaven , and those who do good things from their own children . They do n't let their children be born to their children .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you who build big houseswith money gained dishonestly ! You believe your wealth will buy security , putting your family 's nest beyond the reach of danger .

ID:	3161
INPUT:	Nihich'į' bee haasdzí'ígíí ádaa daahsįįhgo bida'íínóhsin ; doo ła' bíidooh'áał da , doodaii' doo ła' bididooh'áał da .
PRED:	Be careful to obey what I am saying , and do not obey it .
GOLD:	“ So be careful to obey all the commands I give you . You must not add anything to them or subtract anything from them .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	Ch'ó sikaadii nílíinii , nichxa , háálá gadtsoh naazkaadii naa'adahineezkaad , háálá tsin ayóó ánóolningo naazkaadii dááchxǫ' . Béíshandóó chéch'iltsoh danohłíinii , cha nidahohłe' , háálá tsin bee hodíłch'ilii ałtso heesne' .
PRED:	You saw the trees of the trees , for the trees of the trees have scattered the trees of the trees , for the trees are filled with empty trees .
GOLD:	Weep , you cypress trees , for all the ruined cedars ; the most majestic ones have fallen.Weep , you oaks of Bashan , for the thick forests have been cut down .

ID:	3163
INPUT:	hakee' éí béésh da'ahólzha'í yee hadeideesnih . Béésh da'ahólzha'í yee dah dahwiiztł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	They bound him with bronze chains and bound him in chains .
GOLD:	They bruised his feet with fettersand placed his neck in an iron collar .

ID:	3164
INPUT:	Bíla' yee naanish áyoolíiłii éí t'áá aaníí áádóó t'áá ákogi ádaat'é . Bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá ałtso bada'ahódlí .
PRED:	He gives justice to those who do right , and his commands are true .
GOLD:	All he does is just and good , and all his commandments are trustworthy .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	Ákohgo Áman dine'é éí David doo bíłdin da áda'diilyaago yaa ákódaniizį́į́' , áko dah da'diił'a'go Beth-rííhob kin haal'áádóó Síriya dine'é bisiláo áádóó Zóba kéyahdóó Síriya dine'é bisiláo t'áá ni' nidaabaahígíí naadiindi míilgo índa aláahgo naat'áanii Méíyakah bisiláo t'ááłáhídi míilgo índa Íshtab dine'é bisiláo éí naakits'áadahdi míilgo yik'é nida'iizláago yíká ada'iis'a' .
PRED:	So David realized that David had not gone , and he sent his troops into the hill country of Ephraim and the troops of the tribe of Samaria . He sent 200 men to fight the troops of the Jordan River , and the troops of the tribe of Ephraim .
GOLD:	When the people of Ammon realized how seriously they had angered David , they sent and hired 20,000 Aramean foot soldiers from the lands of Beth-rehob and Zobah , 1,000 from the king of Maacah , and 12,000 from the land of Tob .

ID:	3166
INPUT:	Áko áyidííniid , Táá' yiską́ągo shaa nínáádoohkah . Áko diné anídahaaskai .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Get up for three days . ” So they went to me .
GOLD:	Rehoboam replied , “ Come back in three days for my answer. ” So the people went away .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́ Héíman bił hózhǫ́ǫgo índa bijéí bił nihoozhǫǫhgo dah diiyá . Nidi aláahgo naat'áanii bich'é'étiingóó dáń'dítį́hígi Mórdiikai doo t'áá k'ad yiizį'góó índa doo t'áá k'ad hideesnáá'góó éí Héíman yiyiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí Mórdiikai yich'į' báhóóchįįd .
PRED:	When Haman and his heart saw that Mordecai was filled with joy , he stood at the entrance of the palace gate and stood at the entrance of the palace . But the king was very angry with Mordecai .
GOLD:	Haman was a happy man as he left the banquet ! But when he saw Mordecai sitting at the palace gate , not standing up or trembling nervously before him , Haman became furious .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	Áko David éí Saul hákantáago hoł bééhoozin . David éí Zif honoojíigi tsintahgi nijigháá nít'éé' .
PRED:	So David realized that David was waiting for him in the wilderness of Ziph .
GOLD:	One day near Horesh , David received the news that Saul was on the way to Ziph to search for him and kill him .

ID:	3169
INPUT:	Éíbraham áádóó Áízak índa Ízrel ninaal'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę béénílniih ; éí bich'į' ádee hahidíínídzíi'go ádabidííníniid , Yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ'ígi ánéelą́ą'go niha'áłchíní ts'ídá t'óó ahayóigo nídínéesht'į́į́ł , áádóó díí kéyah t'áá át'é niha'áłchíní baa dideesh'ááł , diníigo bee háínídzíí' , áko éí hool'áágóó bíí' dadooleeł .
PRED:	“ Remember what Abraham and the armies of Israel , ” Isaac said . “ I will remember the stars of the sky and the stars of the sky and the stars of the sky , and I will give them this land . ”
GOLD:	Remember your servants Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . You bound yourself with an oath to them , saying , ‘ I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars of heaven . And I will give them all of this land that I have promised to your descendants , and they will possess it forever . ' ”

ID:	3170
INPUT:	Diyin God bits'ą́ądi nízaadi honohłǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę Christ jiníyáago hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į́' jiníigo nihił hojoolne' , índa hwíighahgi dahólóonii ałdó' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į́' jiníigo bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	God had been given a great wisdom from a distance , and he was filled with joy and joy . He also saw that he was filled with joy .
GOLD:	He brought this Good News of peace to you Gentiles who were far away from him , and peace to the Jews who were near .

ID:	3171
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalemdi náájíkai . Áko kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' joogáałgo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii haa yíkaigo
PRED:	Then they went to Jerusalem and went to Jerusalem to the leading priests and teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	Again they entered Jerusalem . As Jesus was walking through the Temple area , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders came up to him .

ID:	3172
INPUT:	Áko kojį' nidashiyoołnii'ígíí t'áadoo bąąh danihíni'í , índa t'áadoo ách'į' nihá nídahachįįhí . Háálá Diyin God t'áá nihítséedi shiníł'a'go dahináanii dadoodzih biniyé ádzaa lá .
PRED:	Do n't let me be afraid of my enemies , for you have rebelled against me . For God has sent me to speak for you .
GOLD:	But do n't be upset , and do n't be angry with yourselves for selling me to this place . It was God who sent me here ahead of you to preserve your lives .

ID:	3173
INPUT:	Nidi nihí éí nihá áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii áádóó nida'ídíłkidii áádóó t'áá nihí nideisooyeelii áádóó iiníziin nihá yee dahaniihii índa nihá da'diłgąshii éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í doo bá nidaał'a' da doo , danihiłníigo t'áadoo deísółts'ą́'í ,
PRED:	But you must not listen to the prophets of the prophets . You must not listen to the meaning of the beast and the cast lots . You must not listen to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Do not listen to your false prophets , fortune-tellers , interpreters of dreams , mediums , and sorcerers who say , “ The king of Babylon will not conquer you . ”

ID:	3174
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God ání , Bóhólníihii Diyin God t'áá bí ádee hadoodzíi'go ádííniid , Jéíkab bibee ádaa hodzódli' t'óó shił baa'ih ; bidziilgo bił nahaz'ánígóó t'óó hojooshłxá ; kin haal'áii áádóó bii' dahólóonii t'áá bił ninádideesh'ááł .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies says : I will punish Israel , and I will punish them with pride and arrogance .
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord has sworn by his own name , and this is what he , the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ I despise the arrogance of Israel , and I hate their fortresses.I will give this cityand everything in it to their enemies . ”

ID:	3175
INPUT:	Azhą́ ał'ąą dine'é bitahdóó bíká adoojahii dayoozkan nidi , k'ad áłah áhodeeshłííł áádóó bídahólníihii binanit'a'í nilíinii hade ádahósingo biniinaa ájíłch'į́į́dí jooleeł .
PRED:	But the nations have forgotten them , but now I will punish them for their enemies , but they will have no fear of trouble .
GOLD:	But though they have sold themselves to many allies , I will now gather them together for judgment.Then they will writheunder the burden of the great king .

ID:	3176
INPUT:	Nílááh , Heziikáíyah bich'į' dínáahgo ábidiní , Bóhólníihii éí nizhé'é yę́ę David biDiyin God ání , Nisodizin diséts'ą́ą́' , ninák'eeshto' yiiłtsą́ ; jó , nááhiní'náa dooleełígíí ashdla'áadah nááhai nábínéideeshnił .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to Hezekiah , “ Go and pray to the Lord , the God of David , the God of your ancestors , for I have never been able to live there . ”
GOLD:	“ Go back to Hezekiah and tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of your ancestor David , says : I have heard your prayer and seen your tears . I will add fifteen years to your life ,

ID:	3177
INPUT:	Háálá biyęęzhii t'áá ni'góó niyiiníiłgonahasdzáán éí ayęę<unk> gíí deineesdogo
PRED:	For when he saw that the Messiah was born , he was born to the earth .
GOLD:	She lays her eggs on top of the earth , letting them be warmed in the dust .

ID:	3178
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá díkwííhígo haz'ą́ t'éí bee nihik'íhásh'ááh , jó , éí Béílam bina'nitin Ízrel dine'é dabidínóołtł'ahígíí , éí e'elyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii deiyą́ą doogo , índa na'ageh yee tsi'nidaakai doogo Béílak yee neineeztą́ą'ii nihitahgi ła' dayótą' .
PRED:	But if I have shown you a command , I will teach you what you have done to Baal , and if you want to worship other gods to worship other gods , they will eat any other gods . ”
GOLD:	“ But I have a few complaints against you . You tolerate some among you whose teaching is like that of Balaam , who showed Balak how to trip up the people of Israel . He taught them to sin by eating food offered to idols and by committing sexual sin .

ID:	3179
INPUT:	Dilyéhé t'áá ahídahidííłtł'óołgoósh bíninil'ą́ ? Doodaii' t'áá bá níhánígóó sǫ' náánáshjaa'ígíí éí ałch'į' kódabósinígíísh t'áá k'e'díí'ałgo bíninil'ą́ ?
PRED:	“ Can you make a small robe to you ? Can you tie it up to the stars ?
GOLD:	“ Can you direct the movement of the stars — binding the cluster of the Pleiadesor loosening the cords of Orion ?

ID:	3180
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' dabitsi'ké danilíinii danihiye'ké bá nídahidoohnííł lágo , áko dabitsi'ké bidiyin dabidi'níinii bił tł'éé' na'aldeehii danihiye'ké ałdó' t'ááká yił tł'éé' naaldeeh yíila' .
PRED:	“ Do n't let your sons marry their daughters , and do n't let them be afraid of their gods .
GOLD:	Then you will accept their daughters , who sacrifice to other gods , as wives for your sons . And they will seduce your sons to commit adultery against me by worshiping other gods .

ID:	3181
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Gag bik'ijį' nílį́įgo handziihgo kóbidiní , Gag yinílyéii , Mííshek dine'é índa Túbal dine'é agháago binanít'áii , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Nik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon ;
PRED:	“ Son of man , give this message from the Lord : ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am your enemy , and I am your enemy . I am the Sovereign Lord . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy against Gog . Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : I am your enemy , O Gog , ruler of the nations of Meshech and Tubal .

ID:	3182
INPUT:	T'áá aaníinii áádóó t'áádóo nídíii díí jį́ Jerabéíyal áádóó bighandóó danilíinii bił bich'į' bee ádanoht'éé nít'ée'go Abímelek baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doo índa bí ałdó' bíni'dii nihaa bił nihoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	In the same day you will be ashamed of Baal and all the people of Israel . Let them rejoice in the presence of Abimelech , and let them rejoice at Abimelech .
GOLD:	“ If you have acted honorably and in good faith toward Gideon and his descendants today , then may you find joy in Abimelech , and may he find joy in you .

ID:	3183
INPUT:	a'áán áhojiilaaígíí éí bilį́į́' ílíinii yá'át'éehgo béeso baazhdoonił , áko alį́į́' daaztsánígíí éí hó dooleeł .
PRED:	He gave the money to the rich , and he received the money he had been planted .
GOLD:	The owner of the pit must pay full compensation to the owner of the animal , but then he gets to keep the dead animal .

ID:	3184
INPUT:	Áádóó Samériya kin haal'áagi tł'óół bee í'neel'ąąhí índa Éíhab ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii k'éhézdon tł'óół náát'i'ígíí éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áii bee bídadí'néesh'ąął , áádóó diné éí łeets'aa' yi<unk> go yaa nii'áhígi át'éego Jerúsalem t'áá át'é bii' hahodeesht'oł .
PRED:	“ I will make you an object of measuring line from Samaria to the family of Ahab . I will bring it to the city of Samaria , and I will make Jerusalem an object of horror to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	I will judge Jerusalem by the same standard I used for Samaria and the same measure I used for the family of Ahab . I will wipe away the people of Jerusalem as one wipes a dish and turns it upside down .

ID:	3185
INPUT:	íídą́ą́' ła'da <unk> <unk> naadą́ą́' naadiindi yikááł bíighahgo yanáa'á jinízingo biniyé jiníyáá nít'éé' t'áá neeznání yikááł lá ; ła'da ch'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizhgi ashdladiindi yikááł bíighahgo jinízingo biniyé jiníyáá nít'éé' t'áá naadiiní yikááł lá .
PRED:	When they learned that they had gone , they went out to the vineyard . When they learned what had happened to the vineyard , they went to the vineyard .
GOLD:	When you hoped for a twenty-bushel crop , you harvested only ten . When you expected to draw fifty gallons from the winepress , you found only twenty .

ID:	3186
INPUT:	Óola t'áá bízhání bik'ídadííłtih ; bikáá'dę́ę́' áádóó booshk'iizh naaz'áhígíí índa bidee' hadaaz'áa dooígíí ákódíílííł , áádóó ałdó' bibąąhgóó óola ahénálch'ah dooígíí ádíílííł .
PRED:	“ Make the gold from pure gold , and make atonement cover the bones of the earth with gold .
GOLD:	Overlay the top , sides , and horns of the altar with pure gold , and run a gold molding around the entire altar .

ID:	3187
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá nizhé'é David yę́ę shinááł naayáhígi át'éego nijéí doo bina'adlo'góó áádóó t'áá ákóne' ánít'éego shinááł yínáałgo áádóó bee nich'į' haasdzí'ígíí bik'eh honíł'į́įgo ááníiłgo índa bee nihoní'áanii áádóó bee nihodiish'aahii baa honíyáago
PRED:	And if you follow my advice , follow my decrees and regulations and regulations , follow my decrees and regulations and regulations and regulations .
GOLD:	“ As for you , if you will follow me with integrity and godliness , as David your father did , obeying all my commands , decrees , and regulations ,

ID:	3188
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii kóshíłníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then another message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3189
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí nihokáa'gi diné ájiilaaígíí bąąh háni' , índa hajéí biyi'di t'áá íiyisí háni' yiyiił'a' .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent his heart on the eyes of the people , but he sent them down in his heart .
GOLD:	So the Lord was sorry he had ever made them and put them on the earth . It broke his heart .

ID:	3190
INPUT:	Háálá shá bíighah shide áhoot'éé nít'éé' áádóó t'áá ákwíí abíní shich'aho'dishkéego nashidi'nitin nít'éé' .
PRED:	For if I were thieves , they would listen to me .
GOLD:	I get nothing but trouble all day long ; every morning brings me pain .

ID:	3191
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bá atídoot'įįł , áádóó baa nahozdeeskaii éí Bóhólníihii áhodoołdįįł .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish them , and he will destroy them .
GOLD:	For the Lord is their defender.He will ruin anyone who ruins them .

ID:	3192
INPUT:	Nizhé'é nishchíinii yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , áádóó nimá haastihgo t'áadoo ni'íní .
PRED:	“ Listen to your father and mother , my mother .
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	3193
INPUT:	Diné doo ádahalyáanii éí bąąhági át'éii t'óó <unk> dahałt'i' , nidi diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bitahgóó ach'oha'né yá'át'éehii dahólǫ́ .
PRED:	The lips of the godly give justice to the wicked , but the godly are filled with justice .
GOLD:	Fools make fun of guilt , but the godly acknowledge it and seek reconciliation .

ID:	3194
INPUT:	Síriya dine'é naalyéhé t'óó ahayóí nee hólónígíí bąą nił ahaa nida'iilniih nít'éé' ; tsé ílíinii émerald wolyéii áádóó na'at'ą́hí tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa na'at'ą́hí bibąąhgóó nidaashch'ąą'ii áádóó áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii índa yoo' łichí'í índa tsé ílíinii ágat wolyéii nidayiijáahgo ninaalyéhé yił ałgháá' da'ii'nííł nít'éé' .
PRED:	You also brought a vast amount of silver and precious jewels , purple , purple , and scarlet thread . He also made a blue lapis lazuli , purple , purple , purple , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Syria sent merchants to buy your rich variety of goods . They traded turquoise , purple dyes , embroidery , fine linen , and jewelry of coral and rubies .

ID:	3195
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é dah diikaigo ákódaadzaa . Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' yee haadzí'ígi ádaadzaa .
PRED:	So the Israelites did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel did just as the Lord had commanded through Moses and Aaron .

ID:	3196
INPUT:	Áko Íísa ání , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'óó ahayóí shidááh da'niiskaad ? Áádóó ázhdííniid , Shinanit'a'í nílíinii , díí ajooba' bee shich'oha'néego shaa nitsíníkees doo biniyé danéelkaad .
PRED:	“ Why are you going to meet me ? ” Esau asked . “ Why are you looking for me ? ” And he said , “ I want you to know that you are so much . ”
GOLD:	“ And what were all the flocks and herds I met as I came ? ” Esau asked.Jacob replied , “ They are a gift , my lord , to ensure your friendship . ”

ID:	3197
INPUT:	Diyin God bidááhdóó hool'áágóó hojílǫ́ǫgo ahool'áa doo . Aa a'ááh hasinii áádóó t'áá aaníinii haa áhályą́ą doo biniyé hasht'ehólééh !
PRED:	Give thanks to God forever and ever , for he is faithful to him forever .
GOLD:	May he reign under God 's protection forever.May your unfailing love and faithfulness watch over him .

ID:	3198
INPUT:	Síírag jiináago tádiin honááhaigo Néíhor há yizhchį́ .
PRED:	When he was 30 years old , he became the father of Amminadab .
GOLD:	When Serug was 30 years old , he became the father of Nahor .

ID:	3199
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Christ bii' hojílónígíí bąąhági át'éii doo t'áá náás joołt'ih da doo ; t'áá háiida bąąhági át'éii t'áá náás joołt'ihígíí Christ t'ah doo jiiłtséeh da , doo nidi bééhojísin da .
PRED:	Anyone who believes in Christ is not right with Christ , and anyone who believes in Christ is not right with Christ .
GOLD:	Anyone who continues to live in him will not sin . But anyone who keeps on sinning does not know him or understand who he is .

ID:	3200
INPUT:	t'áá ákót'éego Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Ííjip dine'é áádóó Iithiyópiya dine'é yidoołnééł ; ániid nidaakaii áádóó hadaastihii t'áá daalchí'ígo áádóó bikee' t'áádaagéedgo bitł'aa' nidi t'áá daalchí'ígo iidiyoo'ish , áko Ííjip dine'é bich'į' t'óó baa yáhásin dooleeł .
PRED:	“ This is what the king of Assyria says : The king of Assyria will die , and all the people of Egypt will die . The Egyptians will die , and they will be covered with hunger .
GOLD:	For the king of Assyria will take away the Egyptians and Ethiopians as prisoners . He will make them walk naked and barefoot , both young and old , their buttocks bared , to the shame of Egypt .

ID:	3201
INPUT:	Zúrishádai éí Símiyan dine'é nilį́įgo biye' Shiilúmiyel ,
PRED:	leader of the tribe of Simeon , leader of the tribe of Simeon ,
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai

ID:	3202
INPUT:	Yisnááh danilíinii t'áá ałtso bich'į' í'ííléehgo kóbidiní , Bóhólníihii kóní , Niihélam hoolyéédóó naagháii Shiiméíyah t'áadoo yíł'aadgóó nihił hoolne'ígíí biniinaa wooch'ííd baa da'jíísóolíí' ;
PRED:	Then all the captives and told him , “ This is what the Lord says : You are the prophet who told you , ‘ You are a prophet who told you . '
GOLD:	“ Send an open letter to all the exiles in Babylon . Tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite : Since he has prophesied to you when I did not send him and has tricked you into believing his lies ,

ID:	3203
INPUT:	Éí bąą díí shizaadígíí nihijéí bii' índa nihii' sizíinii bii' hazhó'ó hasht'e'nidahidohnííł , áádóó díí saad bee ééhózinii át'éego nihíla' índa nihináta'gi bídahaastł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	“ Therefore , take your heart into the heart of my heart and your heart . This is a covenant between you and the heart of a covenant .
GOLD:	“ So commit yourselves wholeheartedly to these words of mine . Tie them to your hands and wear them on your forehead as reminders .

ID:	3204
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí diné bide ádahólzinígíí t'áá ałtso yaa áhályą́ índa t'áá ákogi át'éego yá ó'oolííł .
PRED:	The Lord protects the humble , and he protects the godly .
GOLD:	The Lord gives righteousnessand justice to all who are treated unfairly .

ID:	3205
INPUT:	Naaki góne' bá yizhchínígíí éí Kíliyab wolyé ; éí Kármeldóó dine'é Néíbal be'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí Ábigeil wolyéii biyáázh jílį́ áádóó táá' góne' bá yizhchínígíí éí Ábsalam wolyé ; Gíísher kéyahgi aláahgo naat'áanii Tálmai bitsi' Méíyakah wolyéii biyáázh jílį́ .
PRED:	The oldest son of Eliab , the daughter of Eliab , the daughter of Eliab , the daughter of Eliab , the daughter of Eliab , the daughter of Shallum , the daughter of Shallum , the daughter of Makir .
GOLD:	The second was Daniel , whose mother was Abigail , the widow of Nabal from Carmel.The third was Absalom , whose mother was Maacah , the daughter of Talmai , king of Geshur .

ID:	3206
INPUT:	Shoo , ádahodineestł'isii bik'ijį' t'ah biláhígo áhodíníltł'isgo áádóó doo ła' nijóle' át'éégóó ániishłaa .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending the foundation of the wall , and I will never again be angry with you .
GOLD:	But look , I have made you as obstinate and hard-hearted as they are .

ID:	3207
INPUT:	Dibé naazhjéé' bitahgóó danohjahgo hasbídí bit'a' béésh łigaii bik'ésti' nahalinígíí , áádóó bits'os nineezígíí éí óola łitsoii bik' <unk> ti' nahalinígíí nidahonohłin .
PRED:	“ You are the shepherds of the flock , but you are like gold , but you are like a calf of smoke .
GOLD:	Even those who lived among the sheepfolds found treasures — doves with wings of silverand feathers of gold .

ID:	3208
INPUT:	Háálá nił bééhózingo diné ákót'éii honít'i'ii yits'áníyáago ádił ni'iisííh índa t'áá bí bibąąhági át'éii yee ádá nihoot'ą́ .
PRED:	For you know what is right to sin , and sin is wrong with sin .
GOLD:	For people like that have turned away from the truth , and their own sins condemn them .

ID:	3209
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ab éí diné bił hoolne'ígíí áyidííniid , Áko , jó , yinił tsą́ą́ léi' doo haniih ni'jį' abídzíłxaał da , áko béésh łigaii neeznáá bíighahgo áádóó sis bił naadeeshnił nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then Joab said to the man , “ I 'm going to eat the meat of the man who had been defiled . I 'm going to eat ten pieces of silver , and I will give you ten silver . ”
GOLD:	“ What ? ” Joab demanded . “ You saw him there and did n't kill him ? I would have rewarded you with ten pieces of silver and a hero 's belt ! ”

ID:	3210
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii yéego nikéé' ahidíízį́ ; ninish'náájí bee nisdzilgo áshíínísin .
PRED:	I have followed your right hand ; I have followed your right hand .
GOLD:	I cling to you ; your strong right hand holds me securely .

ID:	3211
INPUT:	Nidi nihida'ana'í ayóó'ádeínóh'ní , áádóó yá'át'éehgo ádaaht'į́ , áádóó t'áadoo le'é ada'iyohnííł , t'áadoo k'ééshidi'doolnííł danohsiní , áko yá'ąąshdi nihaa dahidoolyéełii ayóó ádaat'ée dooleeł , áádóó nihí Ts'ídá Aláahgo Át'éii ba'áłchíní danohłį́į dooleeł , háálá éí doo ahééh danízinii índa doo yá'ádaashóonii yaa jooba' .
PRED:	But do n't love your enemies and love them . Do n't be good and good ! Do n't let them be disgraced , and do what will happen to me , for I will give you pleasure in heaven . ”
GOLD:	“ Love your enemies ! Do good to them . Lend to them without expecting to be repaid . Then your reward from heaven will be very great , and you will truly be acting as children of the Most High , for he is kind to those who are unthankful and wicked .

ID:	3212
INPUT:	Jó , t'ááłáhídi náá'ázdiisnii'ii bee diné dadiyingo ádajiilaaígíí éí hool'áágóó doo bee bich'į' anáhóót'i'góó ájiilaa .
PRED:	He has made a covenant with the people , and he has made them holy .
GOLD:	For by that one offering he forever made perfect those who are being made holy .

ID:	3213
INPUT:	Peter , Dooda , náádoo'niidgo t'áá áko naa'ahóóhai biką'í ádííniid .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ You 've been very old . ”
GOLD:	Again Peter denied it . And immediately a rooster crowed .

ID:	3214
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá ałtso hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Eii diné sołhé , Barábasgo nihich'į' ch'ééníłt'e' .
PRED:	But everyone cried out to Jesus , “ release a man to release Jesus . ”
GOLD:	Then a mighty roar rose from the crowd , and with one voice they shouted , “ Kill him , and release Barabbas to us ! ”

ID:	3215
INPUT:	Áko tł'ée'go Paul bił áhát'į́įgo Bóhólníihii ábidííniid , T'áadoo náníldzidí áádóó t'áadoo áhodiilzéhí yáníłti' ,
PRED:	So Paul went to the night and told him , “ Do n't be afraid of the Lord . Do n't be afraid of you ? ”
GOLD:	One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision and told him , “ Do n't be afraid ! Speak out ! Do n't be silent !

ID:	3216
INPUT:	Siláo éí díí ájínínígíí naat'áaniishchíín danilíinii yee yił hoolne'go Rome dine'é jílį́į́ láígíí deidiizts'ą́ą'go nídaasdzííd ,
PRED:	When the soldiers heard about the city , the commander of the city was terrified .
GOLD:	When the police reported this , the city officials were alarmed to learn that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens .

ID:	3217
INPUT:	Áko diné tált'éego Job yił ahił dahalne'ígíí éí Iiláíhu yilą́ąjį' nidaakaígíí bąą t'ah índa Job bich'į' hadeesdzih jinízingo ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	Then Job spoke to Job and said to Job , “ I 'm talking to Job and Job . ”
GOLD:	Elihu had waited for the others to speak to Job because they were older than he .

ID:	3218
INPUT:	nidi Jesus éí Christ , Diyin God biYe' nilį́įgo deidoohdląąłígíí biniyé díidíígíí bik'inídaháasdzo , áko éí deinohdlą́ągo baa dadzíínóhłíigo bízhi' biniit'aa iiná nihee dahólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	But Jesus Christ is the Son of God , who is the Son of God 's Son , and trust in him in the name of the Son of God .
GOLD:	But these are written so that you may continue to believe that Jesus is the Messiah , the Son of God , and that by believing in him you will have life by the power of his name .

ID:	3219
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é éí bee adlání óola bee ályaaígi át'éego Bóhólníihii dah yoo'áałgo nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso yii'dóó nínáda'dí'nídlį́į́h nít'éé' ; ał'ąą dine'é éí Bábilan biwáin deidlą́ą́ nít'éé' ; éí bąą tsi'deeskai .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You are the gold of the church in the presence of the Lord , and you ate the wine of all the nations .
GOLD:	Babylon has been a gold cup in the Lord 's hands , a cup that made the whole earth drunk.The nations drank Babylon 's wine , and it drove them all mad .

ID:	3220
INPUT:	Diné ła' da'oołch'íihii Bábilan kéyahgóó deesh'aałgo yąąh da'iidoołch'ihgo bikéyahgi doo siláhígóó ádeidoolííł , háálá bich'į' nahwii'ná beiníłką́ądi t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' bik'ijį' danilį́į doo .
PRED:	I will send you out into exile , and I will send you into the land of Babylon . I will send you out in the land of Babylon .
GOLD:	Foreigners will come and winnow her , blowing her away as chaff.They will come from every sideto rise against her in her day of trouble .

ID:	3221
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Payment of the Temple Tax

ID:	3222
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhígíida yidáanii , doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhígíida yidláanii éí Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii doo bídéét'i' da , nidi ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é áádóó k'é hwiindzin índa ił hózhǫ́ Níłch'i Diyinii eidii'aahii bídéét'i' .
PRED:	And if you do n't understand what is right , you will be made right with God and the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	For the Kingdom of God is not a matter of what we eat or drink , but of living a life of goodness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit .

ID:	3223
INPUT:	Jó'akon , tł'iish índa séígo' bik'i naałdeeh doo biniyé bee óhólnííh nihaa diní'ą́ , áádóó ana'í bibee adziilii t'áá át'é bee nihídahólníih doo biniyé nihaa diní'ą́ , áko ts'ídá t'áadoo atídanihidoolíłí da .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you a poisonous snake with a poisonous snake , and he has given us victory over all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	Look , I have given you authority over all the power of the enemy , and you can walk among snakes and scorpions and crush them . Nothing will injure you .

ID:	3224
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii David bił hóóne'go áhodoo'niid , Bóhólníihii éí Óbed-íídam bighandóó danilíinii áádóó bídadéét'i'ii t'áá ałtso yik'ijisdli' , háálá Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii ba'ałk'ee si'ą́ą́ nít'éé' , áko David ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníyáago hániik'ehgo Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii Óbed-íídam bikindóó ch'ídeiz'ą́ągo David bikin haal'áajį' nát'ą́ągo yaa bił nihoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	Then King David told David , “ The Lord has blessed both of the men of Sodom and the entire community of Sodom . He blessed the Ark of the Covenant of God and the Covenant of Sodom and the Ark of God at the City of David .
GOLD:	Then King David was told , “ The Lord has blessed Obed-edom 's household and everything he has because of the Ark of God. ” So David went there and brought the Ark of God from the house of Obed-edom to the City of David with a great celebration .

ID:	3225
INPUT:	Áádóó díidí bee hadziidziihgo , bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa Férisii danilíinii hádahodiilchįįł danízingo índa tsístł'ah dahodíníilchééł danízingo t'áá bizáákáágóó nidahódééłkid ,
PRED:	The people of religious law said , “ We know how we are trying to kill us . We know how we are going to know that we are going to ask him . ”
GOLD:	As Jesus was leaving , the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees became hostile and tried to provoke him with many questions .

ID:	3226
INPUT:	Lébanah , Héígabah índa Ákab bada'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii ,
PRED:	From the family of Lebanon , Lebanon ,
GOLD:	Lebanah , Hagabah , Akkub ,

ID:	3227
INPUT:	Áádóó béégashii t'áá ákǫ́ǫgo Iiláíjah yikéé' nídiilwodgo ání , T'áá shǫǫdí , shíni'dii shizhé'é áádóó shimá deests'ǫs , áko índa nikéé' yisháał doo . Áko ábijiní , Nílááh , t'ą́ą́' nídídááh , haashą' niishłaa ?
PRED:	So he ran away and told him , “ Please let me go with my father , my mother , and let me go with you . ” So he asked him , “ Yes , why should I go with you ? ”
GOLD:	Elisha left the oxen standing there , ran after Elijah , and said to him , “ First let me go and kiss my father and mother good-bye , and then I will go with you ! ” Elijah replied , “ Go on back , but think about what I have done to you . ”

ID:	3228
INPUT:	Háálá azhą́ doo nihił honishłǫ́ǫ da nidi , t'áá áłahjį' nihaa nitséskeesgo hasht'ehodít'éego baa naahkaígíí , áádóó Christ baa dadzíínóhłíhígíí haleebee nisoozį́įgo shił bééhózingo baa shił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	For I am not blameless in you , but I trust in you in Christ . I want you to know that I am writing to you in Christ .
GOLD:	For though I am far away from you , my heart is with you . And I rejoice that you are living as you should and that your faith in Christ is strong .

ID:	3229
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' aláahgo naat'áanii kóní , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God baa ha'niih le' , bí éí díí jį́ shibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' ła' dah néineesdá ; t'áá shináá' bee yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Then the king said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I have seen my eyes and seen my eyes .
GOLD:	and he said , ‘ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who today has chosen a successor to sit on my throne while I am still alive to see it . ' ”

ID:	3230
INPUT:	Áko nídzíldzid nidi , t'áá íiyisí hoł hózhǫ́ǫgo tséní'ootsééldóó tsxį́įłgo dashdii'áázh , áko bídahooł'aahii hane' baa nízhdoo'ááł biniyé dah ahizhdíníilchą́ą́' .
PRED:	As they were afraid of him , they rushed out to the tomb of the tomb of his disciples and fled to the tomb of his disciples .
GOLD:	The women ran quickly from the tomb . They were very frightened but also filled with great joy , and they rushed to give the disciples the angel 's message .

ID:	3231
INPUT:	Da' deenásts'aa' daamííl bíighahgoósh , doodaii' ak'ah éí neeznáadi mííl tooh danílį́ bíighahgoósh Bóhólníihii bił hóshǫ́ǫ doo ? Da' alą́ąjį' shá yizhchíiniísh éí ádił ni'iisíihii bik'é nááhidoonihgo ninádideesh'ááł ? Da' shits'íís bineest'ą'ásh éí shii' sizíinii ádił ni'iisíihii bik'é nááhidoonihgo ninádideesh'ááł ?
PRED:	“ Should I take a young bull or a ram from the Lord ? Should I bring the fat of the Nile with the fat of the Nile ? Should I drink the blood of the blood of the Lord ? Should I drink wine ? ”
GOLD:	Should we offer him thousands of ramsand ten thousand rivers of olive oil ? Should we sacrifice our firstborn childrento pay for our sins ?

ID:	3232
INPUT:	Záíyan kin haal'áagi deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí bee ída' dohsooł ; hodílzingo doo adą́ ats'ánó'aah .
PRED:	Raise a signal flag on the heights of Zion , O Zion ! Get up !
GOLD:	Blow the ram 's horn in Jerusalem ! Announce a time of fasting ; call the people togetherfor a solemn meeting .

ID:	3233
INPUT:	Nidi áshidííniid , Daniel yinílyéii , nílááh yínááł . Shą́ą́' , nihodoogáałjį' saad ałch'į' ánályaago bidá'deeljée' ni' .
PRED:	But he said to Daniel , “ Go and stand in front of what is happening to him . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Go now , Daniel , for what I have said is kept secret and sealed until the time of the end .

ID:	3234
INPUT:	Diltłish éí bizis biih nánítįįh . Áni'diilyaa yę́ędi , kéyah bii' ni'dizhchį́ yę́ędi atíndeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will destroy the sword of your sword , but I will destroy the land of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ Now return the sword to its sheath , for in your own country , the land of your birth , I will pass judgment upon you .

ID:	3235
INPUT:	Bee nahaz'áanii doo yik'ehgo át'éii doo bééhózin da yę́ę t'áá íídą́ą́' naalnish , k'ad t'ą́ą́' ábósinii t'áá nahjį' kóbi'diilyaaíjį' yilnish doo .
PRED:	Even if you do n't know the law of God , you do n't know what is right .
GOLD:	For this lawlessness is already at work secretly , and it will remain secret until the one who is holding it back steps out of the way .

ID:	3236
INPUT:	Áádóó Jónah dashdiiyáago kin haal'áá góne' ajííyáago ła'a jį́ oodááł ánízahgóó nizhníyá , áko jidilwoshgo ájíní , Dízdiin jį́ t'ah hadziih áádóó índa Níneveh kin haal'á ałtso ádooldįįł !
PRED:	So Jonah went to the town of Nineveh and killed a day of a day . As he was walking along the road , he called the town of Nineveh and all the people of Nineveh .
GOLD:	On the day Jonah entered the city , he shouted to the crowds : “ Forty days from now Nineveh will be destroyed ! ”

ID:	3237
INPUT:	áádóó naat'áaniishchíín danilíinii , éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'íinii atídeidoolííł áádóó yá'át'ééh ádajooníiłii haa daha'niih doo biniyé nihich'į' nabidi'nilgo bídahwíínółnííh .
PRED:	And if you do n't worry about the city , you will be filled with violence , and you will praise you .
GOLD:	or the officials he has appointed . For the king has sent them to punish those who do wrong and to honor those who do right .

ID:	3238
INPUT:	Áko éí nitsidinígo'go nábooskango ábíłní , Ha'íínílní , t'áadoo tsį́į́ł shíł'íní , t'áá ná niná'deeshdléełgo át'é .
PRED:	Then he cried out to her , “ Do n't be taken away from your home . I will give you everything you need . ”
GOLD:	“ His fellow servant fell down before him and begged for a little more time . ‘ Be patient with me , and I will pay it , ' he pleaded .

ID:	3239
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Díí oochíłígíí éidí t'áá ałtso yá nandeeh dooleeł .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , this is the way of judgment .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , this judgment will fall on this very generation .

ID:	3240
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Yádiłhił éí shibik'i dah asdáhí bikáá'dóó nahash'áii át'é , áádóó nahasdzáán éí shibik'i dah adées'eezí át'é ; háadish kin shá ádaohłééh ? Índa háadish éí shihóoghahgo hanáshyį́įh doo ?
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The heavens are my table , and my people are my fortress , and I will care for my people . Where are you looking for me ?
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Heaven is my throne , and the earth is my footstool.Could you build me a temple as good as that ? Could you build me such a resting place ?

ID:	3241
INPUT:	Diné bitsii' yiigaii éí naat'á ch'ah bee aa ha'niihii át'é ; éí t'áá ákogi át'éego honít'i'góó hináago bééhózin .
PRED:	The crown of the godly are made right , and the crown of the godly will be shown .
GOLD:	Gray hair is a crown of glory ; it is gained by living a godly life .

ID:	3242
INPUT:	áko Júdah kéyahdóó Shiyáltiyel biye' Zerábabel naat'áanii nilíinii éí Bóhólníihii áhoniisį́į́' áádóó Jásedek biye' Jéshuwa alą́ąjį' náá'iiłniihii nilíinii índa diné daadziihígíí éí Bóhólníihii ádabiniisį́į́' , áko nidahaaskaigo biDiyin God éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin yidadeeshnish .
PRED:	Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the prophet of Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of the people of Judah , and they went to the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	So the Lord sparked the enthusiasm of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , governor of Judah , and the enthusiasm of Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the high priest , and the enthusiasm of the whole remnant of God 's people . They began to work on the house of their God , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ,

ID:	3243
INPUT:	Shich'į' ééhosínísįįdgo bee yisdéíyáii sínílį́'ígíí bąą naa hashniih doo .
PRED:	“ Because of my covenant , I will praise you because of my covenant .
GOLD:	I thank you for answering my prayerand giving me victory !

ID:	3244
INPUT:	Záíyan bináhkááh ; binaagóó nidaahkai ; bikin yadaa'áhígíí deínółta' .
PRED:	“ Each of you must celebrate the Temple of Zion .
GOLD:	Go , inspect the city of Jerusalem.Walk around and count the many towers .

ID:	3245
INPUT:	Áko Jóram éí Eihazáíyah ííłní , Eihazáíyah nílíinii , nihizéé' deest'ą́ą́ lá , níigo naa ná'ásbą́ązgo dah díníichą́ą́' .
PRED:	But Ahaziah said to Ahaziah , “ The king of Judah will die , for he has fled . ”
GOLD:	Then King Joram turned the horses around and fled , shouting to King Ahaziah , “ Treason , Ahaziah ! ”

ID:	3246
INPUT:	Nidi biiskání Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso Mózes áádóó Éran yich'į' saad dahasłį́į'go ádaaní , Bóhólníihii bidine'é nisoołtseed .
PRED:	But the next day the entire community of Israel went to fight against Moses and Aaron . They said , “ We have killed the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But the very next morning the whole community of Israel began muttering again against Moses and Aaron , saying , “ You have killed the Lord 's people ! ”

ID:	3247
INPUT:	Méígag dine'é áádóó tónteel bibąąhgóó bohoníłdzilgo kéédahojit'íinii kǫ' hak'ijį' yeideeshnił , áádóó índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will remember what I am determined to destroy the nations , and I will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will rain down fire on Magog and on all your allies who live safely on the coasts . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	3248
INPUT:	Jóseph dine'é , t'áá éí Manáseh dine'é bitahdóó <unk> biye' Gádai .
PRED:	Joseph son of Joseph began to give birth to the tribe of Joseph .
GOLD:	Manasseh son of JosephGaddi son of Susi

ID:	3249
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ał'ąą dine'é ádeinilaii t'áá ałtso nidááhdę́ę́' nidahakáahgo nich'į' nidahałáa doo , áádóó nízhi' bee ni'dójíigo naa dahaniih doo .
PRED:	O Lord , all nations who worship you , will worship you in front of all nations .
GOLD:	All the nations you madewill come and bow before you , Lord ; they will praise your holy name .

ID:	3250
INPUT:	Shił anílį́įgo áádóó ił nílį́įgo índa ayóó'áníínísh'níigo bąą diné danilíinii nik'é nináníshdlá índa dadine'é ne'iina' bik'é nináníshdlá .
PRED:	You love me , my life , my life , and my life is my life .
GOLD:	Others were given in exchange for you.I traded their lives for yoursbecause you are precious to me.You are honored , and I love you .

ID:	3251
INPUT:	Shí Paul , Jesus Christ yá naal'a'í nishłíinii , deesh'aałgo shíká áhodoo'niidii , Diyin God baa hane' yá'át'éehii baa hodeeshnihgo ats'áshiníłtį́ .
PRED:	I am sending Paul to the servant of Christ Jesus Christ , who sent me to preach the Good News .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of Christ Jesus , chosen by God to be an apostle and sent out to preach his Good News .

ID:	3252
INPUT:	Shich'į' nahwii'náago t'áadoo shits'ą́ąjį' kónít'éhí ! Shich'į' dah díníit'aah ; nánooshkąąhgo t'áá tsį́łígo shich'į' ééhodíísįįł !
PRED:	Do n't let me turn away from trouble ; do n't let me cry for help .
GOLD:	Do n't turn away from mein my time of distress.Bend down to listen , and answer me quickly when I call to you .

ID:	3253
INPUT:	Diné aghada'ii'níiłii bizajííyáhígíishą' diné tált'éhígíí háí hoł kééhat'íinii nilį́įgo baa nitsíníkees ?
PRED:	“ Who can compare with a rod ? Who is a member of the wise man ?
GOLD:	“ Now which of these three would you say was a neighbor to the man who was attacked by bandits ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	3254
INPUT:	Nidi diné éí , Díí t'áá ha'át'éegoda náhideesh'nih , nízingo éí ashdla' aháádzooígíí t'ááłá'í yínéidoozohgo naaldlooshii bą́ą́h aníłį́ bik'ehgo yił ninéidoodlééł .
PRED:	But if the man has not been bought , he must pay the price of the field , and he must pay the price of the field .
GOLD:	If you want to buy back the animal , you must pay the value set by the priest , plus 20 percent .

ID:	3255
INPUT:	Honílónígíí bits'ą́ąjį' áshólééh lágo , áádóó niNíłch'i Diyinii <unk> ą́ąjį' kóole' yíila' .
PRED:	Do n't let me be afraid of your own nature . Do n't worry about the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Do not banish me from your presence , and do n't take your Holy Spirit from me .

ID:	3256
INPUT:	Jew dine'é bizází yę́ę bi'é'él'į'
PRED:	Jesus Teaches about the Jews
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Inner Purity

ID:	3257
INPUT:	Áko Josáíyah éí kédaayah t'áá át'é Ízrel dine'é daabíhígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó doo daaldinii t'áá át'é nahjį' kóyiilaago Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi nidajikaígíí t'áá ádzíłtso haBóhólníihii Diyin God yá nidaal'a'go áyiilaa . Áádóó Josáíyah bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Bóhólníihii t'áadoo yits'ákáhí , dabizhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God yá nidaal'a' nít'éé' .
PRED:	This is what the Lord gave the people of Israel from all the tribes of Israel . They also served the Lord their God in the land of Josiah , who served the Lord , the God of Josiah , who served the God of Israel .
GOLD:	So Josiah removed all detestable idols from the entire land of Israel and required everyone to worship the Lord their God . And throughout the rest of his lifetime , they did not turn away from the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	3258
INPUT:	Alámelek kin shijaa' , Éí<unk> kin shijaa' , Méíshal kin shijaa' , e'e'aahjígo Kármel kin shijaa' índa Sháí<unk> nath tó níł<unk> ígíí
PRED:	Now Abimelech gave me this message from the group of Bani : Maaseiah , Rehum , and the other towns of Carmel .
GOLD:	Allammelech , Amad , and Mishal . The boundary on the west touched Carmel and Shihor-libnath ,

ID:	3259
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , ha'át'íísh biniinaa hool'áágóó yóó'anihiníníłkaad ? Ha'át'íísh biniinaa náhóóchįįdígíí łid nahalingo nidibé hootsogóó naakaígíí bik'ijį' nítsxaaz ?
PRED:	O God , why are you waiting for us ? How long will your enemies fall like sheep ?
GOLD:	O God , why have you rejected us so long ? Why is your anger so intense against the sheep of your own pasture ?

ID:	3260
INPUT:	Nidi díí béédaołniih : Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' danohłį́į́ nít'éé' áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'ą́ą́' náánihiisnii' ; éí bąą díí nihich'į' bee haasdzíi'ii bida'íínóhsin doo .
PRED:	But remember that I am giving you the slaves of the land of Egypt . You must not return to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Always remember that you were slaves in Egypt and that the Lord your God redeemed you from your slavery . That is why I have given you this command .

ID:	3261
INPUT:	Siláo binanit'a'í danilíinii éí diné yich'į' hadadoodzihgo ádadidooniił , Háísh diné shį́į́ bighan áyiilaago t'áadoo da'azhdlish da ? Bíni' éí bighangóó nídoodáałgo da'doodlish ; éí doodaii' anaa'di bi'diisyį́įgo diné náánáła' éí hooghan da'doodlish .
PRED:	“ Who will say to the Son of Man , ‘ Who will say to the soldiers , ‘ Who will throw it into battle ? '
GOLD:	“ Then the officers of the army must address the troops and say , ‘ Has anyone here just built a new house but not yet dedicated it ? If so , you may go home ! You might be killed in the battle , and someone else would dedicate your house .

ID:	3262
INPUT:	Áko Tííman bik'ijį' kǫ' ádeeshłíiłgo Bázra bidziilgo bił nahaz'áanii ałtso adidook'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	I will break down the fire of Edom , and I will destroy it with fire .
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on Teman , and the fortresses of Bozrah will be destroyed . ”

ID:	3263
INPUT:	Háni'dii Ízrel dine'é ádaaní , Aa a'ááh nízingo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	Give thanks to the people of Israel : His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Let all Israel repeat : “ His faithful love endures forever . ”

ID:	3264
INPUT:	Dan éí honít'i'gi tł'iish sitínígíí jílį́į doo ; Łį́į́' be'atiinígíí bikáá' tł'iish na'ałtseedii jílį́į doo ; Éí łį́į́' bikétalígíí ahijiiłháashgo biniinaa bik'i dah nidadzizdáhígíí t'ą́ąjigo adahizhnidéeh dooleeł .
PRED:	“ It will be like a serpent who will be like a poisonous snake in the streets of Dan . It will be like a poisonous snake into the field , and it will be ceremonially unclean because of the sea .
GOLD:	Dan will be a snake beside the road , a poisonous viper along the paththat bites the horse 's hoovesso its rider is thrown off .

ID:	3265
INPUT:	Łóód na'ałtseedii t'áá át'é hakáá'góó niníkę́ęzgohats'íís bidziilii bidi'niiłdzid .
PRED:	An open open open open open open open open open flowers ; the strength of the earth is as weak as a deer .
GOLD:	Disease eats their skin ; death devours their limbs .

ID:	3266
INPUT:	Néthinim ła' : Záíha ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Hashúfa ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Tabéíyath ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	From the family of exile : The family of exile , exile ,
GOLD:	The descendants of the following Temple servants returned from exile : Ziha , Hasupha , Tabbaoth ,

ID:	3267
INPUT:	Baa hoł hózhóonii t'áá át'é éí áda'azįįd nídeit'aahii áádóó dah yiitą́ągo háá'áyį́į́h jį́ áádóó hoháá'áyį́į́h jį́ índa dahozdísingo áłah nída'adleehii t'áá ałtso nahjį' kódeeshłííł .
PRED:	On the day of peace , I will bring the Sabbath day of rest of the Sabbath days of the Lord and the Sabbath days .
GOLD:	I will put an end to her annual festivals , her new moon celebrations , and her Sabbath days — all her appointed festivals .

ID:	3268
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéíkab éí Ííjip kéyahdi ch'iyáán hólǫ́ǫgo yiyíínii'go biye'ké áyidííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'óó nída'ahinół'įįh .
PRED:	When Jacob heard this , he said to his sons , “ Why do you want to eat this food ? ”
GOLD:	When Jacob heard that grain was available in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why are you standing around looking at one another ?

ID:	3269
INPUT:	Tsézéí yee shiwoo' niyiizti' índa łeeshch'iih bii' shishjoolgo áshiilaa .
PRED:	He has broken my mouth with ashes , and he has made me ashes .
GOLD:	He has made me chew on gravel.He has rolled me in the dust .

ID:	3270
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' Íílai náhást'édiindóó ba'aan tseebíí binááhai ; haná'oh halbáago doo hazhó'ó ajoo'į́į da .
PRED:	One day Eli was eight years old , and he had gone to bed .
GOLD:	who was ninety-eight years old and blind .

ID:	3271
INPUT:	Áko Peter éí yiyiiłtsą́ągo diné yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , ha'át'íishą' biniyé díí bik'ee t'óó nihił adahayóí ? Ha'át'íishą' biniyé t'áá hó habee adziilii bee , éí doodaléi' hozdísinígíí bee , diné naagháago ájiilaa danihíínóh'níigo ayóogo danihinół'į́ ?
PRED:	When Peter saw this , he said to the people of Israel , “ What are you doing ? Why do you want you to do this ? ”
GOLD:	Peter saw his opportunity and addressed the crowd . “ People of Israel , ” he said , “ what is so surprising about this ? And why stare at us as though we had made this man walk by our own power or godliness ?

ID:	3272
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' yádiłhił biyaagi ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bitahdę́ę́' Jew dine'é dahodísinii Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	In the days of all the nations in the presence of all the nations in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	At that time there were devout Jews from every nation living in Jerusalem .

ID:	3273
INPUT:	Áko awáalyaadóó ch'ízhní'áazhgo , Lídiya bighandi yah ajíí'áázh , áko ałk'isóó danilíinii bił nída'ahijiiltsą́ągo hada'ólníigo ájiilaa , áádóó dashdii'áázh .
PRED:	So Jacob left Leah and went to meet him . But when he saw his brothers , he mobilized his brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	When Paul and Silas left the prison , they returned to the home of Lydia . There they met with the believers and encouraged them once more . Then they left town .

ID:	3274
INPUT:	Ła'da na'ageh doo yee tsi'naagháa da dooleeł , doodaii' Íísa doo hodísin da yę́ęgi át'éego t'ááká doo ádá dahodíínółzin da yíila' . Jó , éí átsé yizhchíinii jílį́įgo bee hóhólníih dooleeł yę́ę t'ááłáhídi oodą́'ígíí bee haa nahaaznii' .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone be sexual relations with sexual immorality or sexual relations with sexual immorality . Do n't be afraid of these things , for it is the first to be born .
GOLD:	Make sure that no one is immoral or godless like Esau , who traded his birthright as the firstborn son for a single meal .

ID:	3275
INPUT:	éí bit'ąą' nizhóní áádóó bineest'ą' t'óó ahayóí bąąh hazlį́į'ii índa t'áá ałtso deiyą́ą doogo bá át'éii éí halgaigóó naaldlooshii nidaakaii yiyaa chaha'oh anídaakahii índa wódahgo tsídii nidaat'a'ii tsin bits'ádaoz'a' bąąh bit'oh áńdayiil'įįhígíí
PRED:	The tree of a tree will be filled with fruit , and the birds of the earth will be filled with smoke and wild animals .
GOLD:	It had fresh green leaves and was loaded with fruit for all to eat . Wild animals lived in its shade , and birds nested in its branches .

ID:	3276
INPUT:	<unk> bichaha'ohjį' iigháahgo t'iis bit'ąą' bich'ą́ą́h yíl'áa łeh . Tooh nílį́įgi tábąąhgóó k'ai' yíl'áago ákóne' iigháahgo k'ai' bich'ą́ą́h yíl'áa łeh .
PRED:	When the tree falls into a tree , it takes its fruit from the river , its fruit was hidden from the river .
GOLD:	The lotus plants give it shadeamong the willows beside the stream .

ID:	3277
INPUT:	Hasht'ehodít'é , t'áá ałtsogóó hasht'ehodít'é , daaníigo shidine'é adadeeznihii t'óó t'įįhdígo nídayííłdzíí' . Nidi doo hasht'ehodít'ée da .
PRED:	You have prepared peace for all my people , but there is no peace . But there is no peace .
GOLD:	They offer superficial treatmentsfor my people 's mortal wound.They give assurances of peacewhen there is no peace .

ID:	3278
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii éí Héíman áyidííniid , Nílááh tsį́įłgo , naat'á éé' nizhóníii ła' nídiinííł áádóó łį́į́' ałdó' nídiilóosgo t'áá ádínínígi át'éego ákónínééh áádóó Mórdiikai éí Jew dine'é nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii bich'é'étiingi dáń'dítį́hígi dah sidáhígíí ákónílééh . Bee yáníłti'ígíí doo ła' t'áadoo bi'ohí ánílééh .
PRED:	So the king said to Haman , “ Go to the palace and get it . Go to the king and take it into the palace . Take it to the king of the Jews , and do n't go to the palace . ”
GOLD:	“ Excellent ! ” the king said to Haman . “ Quick ! Take the robes and my horse , and do just as you have said for Mordecai the Jew , who sits at the gate of the palace . Leave out nothing you have suggested ! ”

ID:	3279
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , K'ad lą́ą índa Jéíkab bits'ą́ą́dóó oochíiłii yisnááh danilíinii nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo daabíí' nít'éé' yę́ę bíi'go áńdeeshdlííł , áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso baa a'ááh dínéesįįł áádóó shízhi' Diyinii baa łe'nisingo hánígo baa áháshyą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will rescue Israel from all the descendants of Jacob , the descendants of Jacob , the people of Israel , and I will show mercy to your mercy and mercy .
GOLD:	“ So now , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will end the captivity of my people ; I will have mercy on all Israel , for I jealously guard my holy reputation !

ID:	3280
INPUT:	Dabizhé'é yę́ę éí shizaad doo t'áá k'ad deidiizts'ą́ą'ii doo ákwii é'ét'éii yaa nidaaskai yę́ę éí yich'į' t'ą́ą́' anáákaigo diyin dabidi'níinii yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' . Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é dabizhé'é yę́ę bił ahada'dinisht'áanii dayiizti' .
PRED:	But now my ancestors refused to listen to me and worshiped other gods . They turned to their gods and worshiped the gods of Judah .
GOLD:	They have returned to the sins of their ancestors . They have refused to listen to me and are worshiping other gods . Israel and Judah have both broken the covenant I made with their ancestors .

ID:	3281
INPUT:	T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Diné yee bąąhági ádaat'íinii ts'ídá t'áá ałtso , áádóó Diyin God baa'ihgo bá yáti' t'áá ałtso éí bá yóó'anídahidit'aah dooleeł ,
PRED:	I tell you the truth , the truth will be forgiven , and your sins will be forgiven .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , all sin and blasphemy can be forgiven ,

ID:	3282
INPUT:	Bee hódzáanii hádaat'íinii ła' <unk> yan danilínígíí índa ła' <unk> <unk> danilínígíí ałdó' haa haaskaigo hoł ałgha'dadit'ááh . Áko ła' ádaaní , Díí ha'diłch'ałí lá , ha'át'íí níí lá ? Náádaała' ádaaní , Ha'át'íí shį́į́ dadiyin doo béédahózin da léi' yaa halne'gi át'é ? Háálá Jesus índa aninéédę́ę́' náádi'doojahgi yaa nahalne' .
PRED:	But some of the wise men who heard him and heard him . “ What do you mean ? ” And they said , “ There is no one who is no one like a prophet or a prophet or a prophet or a prophet or a prophet . ”
GOLD:	He also had a debate with some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers . When he told them about Jesus and his resurrection , they said , “ What 's this babbler trying to say with these strange ideas he 's picked up ? ” Others said , “ He seems to be preaching about some foreign gods . ”

ID:	3283
INPUT:	Jó , bee na'óhontaahii át'é , ákoshą' naat'á gish yiz'įįdígíí ts'ídá ádoodįįł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	But if you are pure , why do n't you be crushed ? ” says the Sovereign Lord , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	It will put them all to the test.What chance do they have ? says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	3284
INPUT:	T'ah doo e'e'aahgóó , t'ah doo chaha'oh iildóóhgóó shich'į'go náníyisgo shaa nínááh , ayóó'ánósh'níinii . <unk> her dził daní'áágóó jádí , doodaii' bįįhką' naagháhígíigi ánít'ée doo .
PRED:	As surely as the sun was rising up , the waters covered me . As surely as the waters stopped , the mountains would burst out from the valley of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Before the dawn breezes blowand the night shadows flee , return to me , my love , like a gazelleor a young stag on the rugged mountains .

ID:	3285
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ aleeh góne' Íífreiyim dine'é naat'áanii nilíinii Amáíhad biye' Iilíshama náá'iisnii' :
PRED:	On the third day of the tribe of Ephraim , leader of the tribe of Ephraim , presented his offering .
GOLD:	On the seventh day Elishama son of Ammihud , leader of the tribe of Ephraim , presented his offering .

ID:	3286
INPUT:	Áko Sídim honíteelgi łeejin dijé'ígíí t'óó ahayóigo bee nidahodits'ǫ' , áko Sádam dine'é binanit'a'í índa Gomárah dine'é binanit'a'í dazhnéechéehgo ła' ákwii biishníídee' ; nidahaasdzí'ígíí éí dziłgóó yóó'adahaazhjéé' .
PRED:	The governor of Edom was filled with great difficulty and ran out to the valley of Sodom and Gomorrah . There were no longer living in the valley of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	As it happened , the valley of the Dead Sea was filled with tar pits . And as the army of the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled , some fell into the tar pits , while the rest escaped into the mountains .

ID:	3287
INPUT:	áádóó éí hoodzooígíí yé'iitsoh biyíldzis náhookǫsjígo nineel'ánídi Hínam biye' biyíldzisígíí binaashii dziłígíí bitsį́įjį' hoodzo , áádóó Hínam biyíldzis góyaa índa Jííbas dine'é bikéyah bíighahgóó shádi'ááhjí áádóó Enrógel tó háálíní góyaa hodeesdzo .
PRED:	Then the boundary began to Topheth in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , the garbage dump in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the garbage dump in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom , which was on the south side of the valley of Ben-Hinnom .
GOLD:	and down to the base of the mountain beside the valley of Ben-Hinnom , at the northern end of the valley of Rephaim . From there it went down the valley of Hinnom , crossing south of the slope where the Jebusites lived , and continued down to En-rogel .

ID:	3288
INPUT:	Nidi Gíbiyah dine'é k'ad kódahodiilníił ni : yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo bich'į' hidiikah .
PRED:	But now we will go to Gibeah to the tribe of Gibeah . ”
GOLD:	Instead , this is what we will do to Gibeah ; we will draw lots to decide who will attack it .

ID:	3289
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' niha'áłchíní yázhí , Yisnááh dadooleeł , dadooniid yę́ę , éí íídą́ą́' doo yá'át'éehii índa yá'át'éehii doo yaa ákodanízinii , éí kéyah yiih dahidoonééł áádóó baa dideesh'áałgo bíí' dadooleeł .
PRED:	Then he said , “ Get away from your own children , and bring good news to the good things you have done . I will bring you back to this land . ”
GOLD:	I will give the land to your little ones — your innocent children . You were afraid they would be captured , but they will be the ones who occupy it .

ID:	3290
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii aa a'ááh nízinii hool'áágóó baa hashtaał doo ; náás oochííłgóó na'ahódlíigo ná baa hashne' doo .
PRED:	I will sing your unfailing love to the Lord forever .
GOLD:	I will sing of the Lord 's unfailing love forever ! Young and old will hear of your faithfulness .

ID:	3291
INPUT:	Naa a'ááh hwiindzingo índa nik'édí nilį́įgo díí ła' ná yaa nidoo<unk> go t'áadoo ninééł'į́į' da , háálá ni'dizhchį́ yę́ędą́ą́' éí bijį́į́dóó t'óó naa'ihgo nąąh tsíhodeeskéezgo biniinaa t'áá ádzaajį' andi'yoolghan .
PRED:	I will see you because of your love and love you . If you see this , you will see that I am going to see you , and you will be thrown into your homes .
GOLD:	No one had the slightest interest in you ; no one pitied you or cared for you . On the day you were born , you were unwanted , dumped in a field and left to die .

ID:	3292
INPUT:	Áko Léíban éí Jíí<unk> <unk> hoolyée doo , dííniid , nidi Jéíkab éí Galíid hoolyée doo , dííniid .
PRED:	( Laban replied , “ Your name will be named Jacob ( which means “ Jacob ” ) .
GOLD:	To commemorate the event , Laban called the place Jegar-sahadutha ( which means “ witness pile ” in Aramaic ) , and Jacob called it Galeed ( which means “ witness pile ” in Hebrew ) .

ID:	3293
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii bídahooł'aahígíí éí Jérikodę́ę́' dadéez'į́'ígíí ádaaní , Iiláíjah biníłch'i Iiláísha bik'i hoole' lá . Áko ákǫ́ǫ́ hadááh yíkaigo ni'jį' hach'į' yaa ádaadzaa .
PRED:	As soon as Elisha was walking along the road , Elisha said , “ Elijah is coming to meet Elisha . ” So Elisha went to meet him and bowed down to meet him .
GOLD:	When the group of prophets from Jericho saw from a distance what happened , they exclaimed , “ Elijah 's spirit rests upon Elisha ! ” And they went to meet him and bowed to the ground before him .

ID:	3294
INPUT:	áádę́ę́' hadoogáałgo t'áá dį́į́'góó ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'áanii , éí Gag índa Méígag wolyéhígíí yi'doolohgo , anaa' ádeidoolííł biniyé áłah íidoolííł ; éí ánéelą́ą'gi tábąąhgóó séigi ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	I will send terror on the four corners of the nations , and the land of the nations will be remembered . I will gather the heads of many nations on the seashore .
GOLD:	He will go out to deceive the nations — called Gog and Magog — in every corner of the earth . He will gather them together for battle — a mighty army , as numberless as sand along the seashore .

ID:	3295
INPUT:	Áko jideezghal nít'éé' , shoo , tsííd bikáa'gi łees'áán sit'éé lá , áádóó jinées'ání bíighahgi tóshjeeh yázhí bee tó si'ą́ . Áko ajííyą́ą́dóó tó joodlą́ą'go názneeztį́ .
PRED:	Then he looked up and covered the water , and the water covered it with water . Then he ran out to the water and ran out to the water . Then he sat down beside the water .
GOLD:	He looked around and there beside his head was some bread baked on hot stones and a jar of water ! So he ate and drank and lay down again .

ID:	3296
INPUT:	Áádóó dah náhást'ánígíí bich'į' tsosts'idgo ałk'i hoo'niłí haaz'á ; wóne'di éí yah ahóót'i' ch'é'étiindóó tł'óo'di éí tsin ałts'ą́ą́hjí íí'áhígíí éí t'áá áłah bąąhjį' páam sikaadii bééda'alyaago nidaask'ęę' .
PRED:	On the third side of the entry room , the entry room was decorated with the entry room of the entry room . The entry room was decorated with a palm tree .
GOLD:	This gateway also had a stairway of seven steps leading up to it , and an entry room at the inner end , and palm tree decorations along the dividing walls .

ID:	3297
INPUT:	Diné ła' atł'ááh nástł'inii bikáá'dóó óola , béésh łigaii , tsé da'ílíinii deitł'in , náánáła' éí tsin , tł'ohda , ehégoda deitł'in .
PRED:	The work of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the Temple , and there was no wood .
GOLD:	Anyone who builds on that foundation may use a variety of materials — gold , silver , jewels , wood , hay , or straw .

ID:	3298
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí hastóí danilíinii kót'éego dahałnínígíí doo bázhniizį́į́'góó t'áá na'níle'dii diné bich'į' hadziisdzíí' ,
PRED:	When the king heard the advice of the wise men , they grabbed him and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to the people , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	3299
INPUT:	<unk> néíyah haz'ánídóó diné táadi mííldóó ba'aan hastą́ądi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin .
PRED:	The citizens of Harim320
GOLD:	The citizens of Senaah3,630

ID:	3300
INPUT:	Jórdan tooh bibąąhgóó halgai hóteel wolyéhígíí Sákath haz'ání áádóó <unk> déíthah haz'ání bita' gónaa hashtł'ish dits'idí hólónígi ákwe'é aláahgo naat'áanii béésh deidííłhį́į́' .
PRED:	The people of the Jordan spread out the middle of the Jordan River , and the bones of the Jordan River , which is left in the middle of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The king had them cast in clay molds in the Jordan Valley between Succoth and Zarethan .

ID:	3301
INPUT:	Áko éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' David yá sodoolzin , áádóó ch'iyáán ła' ya'níłtsood , índa Filístiya diné Goláíyath bidiltłish yeinítą́ .
PRED:	Then David prayed to the Lord and gave him some food to the Philistines . Then the Philistine rulers and the Philistine rulers of Moab .
GOLD:	Ahimelech consulted the Lord for him . Then he gave him food and the sword of Goliath the Philistine . ”

ID:	3302
INPUT:	Nida'ídółkidgo ádadohní , Ha'át'éegoshą' ? Ániid nanináádą́ą́' ne'asdzą́ą́ bina'ílo'go biniinaa nihita'gi Bóhólníihii oo'íinii nilį́į́ nít'éé' . Éí t'ahdii nich'ooní át'é nidi , bee aha'deet'áanii binahjį' ne'asdzą́ą́ silį́į́' nít'éé' nidi , ákódaohdzaa .
PRED:	“ What do you want ? ” they asked . “ Why do n't you get rid of the wife of the Lord 's wife ? ”
GOLD:	You cry out , “ Why does n't the Lord accept my worship ? ” I 'll tell you why ! Because the Lord witnessed the vows you and your wife made when you were young . But you have been unfaithful to her , though she remained your faithful partner , the wife of your marriage vows .

ID:	3303
INPUT:	Nidi nídzízyizgo dzideezteh . [ Áádóó ázhdííniid , Ádanoht'éii doo nihił béédahózin da ,
PRED:	But he turned and said to them , “ You do n't know what is right . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus turned and rebuked them .

ID:	3304
INPUT:	Éí bąą danihiideestséełgo ałch'į' hadadiidzih biniyé hágo danihidííniid , háálá Ízrel dine'é nidayólíii biniinaa díí béésh da'ahólzha'í bee dashi'diistł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	So we can say to you , ‘ We have been able to speak to you , for I am writing to you . '
GOLD:	I asked you to come here today so we could get acquainted and so I could explain to you that I am bound with this chain because I believe that the hope of Israel — the Messiah — has already come . ”

ID:	3305
INPUT:	Nitł'iz ałtaas'éí da'ahól<unk> go nitsii' názt'i'go niniitsį' bik'ijį' nidahaazhjée'go bee nízhóní ; yoo' nizhóníii nizénázt'i' .
PRED:	Wise words are allowed to throw you into the sky to throw you into the middle of the trees .
GOLD:	How lovely are your cheeks ; your earrings set them afire ! How lovely is your neck , enhanced by a string of jewels .

ID:	3306
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Christ bee ahee daniildzilgo índa diyingo ats'ánihinínil ;
PRED:	We have made us holy by God , and you have made us holy .
GOLD:	It is God who enables us , along with you , to stand firm for Christ . He has commissioned us ,

ID:	3307
INPUT:	Hool'áágóó Diyin God nilíinii bine' nidaohdzi'ii nilį́ ; éí hool'áágóó bigaan bits'áhoníyée'ii yee nanihijaah ; nihinááł nihi'ana'í ch'íiniiłkaad doo , áko ádidooniił , Ádaołdįįh .
PRED:	“ O God , you are your strong arm , O God , the one who saves you , and you will say , ‘ You will surely destroy your enemies ! '
GOLD:	The eternal God is your refuge , and his everlasting arms are under you.He drives out the enemy before you ; he cries out , ‘ Destroy them ! '

ID:	3308
INPUT:	Ákohgo nááts'ó'oołdísii biyi'dę́ę́' Bóhólníihii éí Job yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Job ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord answered Job from the whirlwind :

ID:	3309
INPUT:	Diné danilíinii nihitsiits'iin bik'i łį́į́' bił nidaazhjée'go íinilaa . Kǫ' áádóó tó bii' ch'ínii'ná , nidi t'áá ałtsoní hózhǫ́ǫgo bee áda'azįįdjį' anihííní'eezh .
PRED:	You made the horses for your head , and you brought us out of the fire and filled us with joy .
GOLD:	Then you put a leader over us.We went through fire and flood , but you brought us to a place of great abundance .

ID:	3310
INPUT:	Na'nitiní , Mózes yę́ę kót'éego nihá ak'e'ashchį́ , Diné ła'da bił hajíí'áázh ba'áłchíní t'áadoo haleehí be'asdzą́ą́ yąąh daaztsą́ągo , hak'is be'asdzą́ą́ nít'éé' yę́ę hwe'asdzą́ą dooleeł , áko hak'is yę́ę bá áłchíní hwee hodooleeł , níí nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Teacher , ” Moses told him , “ I 'm not a brother to marry anyone . She was taken to his brother 's wife , and he would have children to marry her . ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , Moses gave us a law that if a man dies , leaving a wife without children , his brother should marry the widow and have a child who will carry on the brother 's name .

ID:	3311
INPUT:	Dá'ák'ehgóó nínáníłt'į́įhii deidooyį́į́ł ; niye'ké índa nitsi'ké deidooldił . Nidibé deíl'áii índa nibéégashii deíl'áii deidooldił . Nich'il na'atł'o'ii deíl'áii índa fig deíl'áii yaa nahodidookah . Nikin hadaas'áago binída'azt'i'go baa dadzíínílíii diltłish yee ádeidoołdįįł .
PRED:	You will eat your flocks and herds , your sons , herds , herds , flocks , herds , and vineyards , and vineyards , and vineyards and vineyards .
GOLD:	They will devour the food of your harvest ; they will devour your sons and daughters.They will devour your flocks and herds ; they will devour your grapes and figs.And they will destroy your fortified towns , which you think are so safe .

ID:	3312
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , Sí<unk> ch'ííníyá yę́ędą́ą́' , Íídam kéyahdóó ch'ííníyá yę́ędą́ą́' nahasdzáán ditsxiz , índa yádiłhiłdę́ę́' nahóółtą́ ; k'os ałdó' bits'ą́ą́dóó nahóółtą́ .
PRED:	O Lord , you have banished the land of Edom , from the sky , from the sky , from the sky , from the sky .
GOLD:	“ Lord , when you set out from Seirand marched across the fields of Edom , the earth trembled , and the cloudy skies poured down rain .

ID:	3313
INPUT:	Hozéíya áádóó asdzání adiléii
PRED:	Hosea Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Hosea 's Wife Is Redeemed

ID:	3314
INPUT:	Shéífan biye' Gemaráíyah biye' Maikáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bizaad naaltsoos yisdisii bikáa'gi bee bik'e'ashchínígíí t'áá át'é yidiizts'ą́ą'go
PRED:	Zedekiah son of Shaphan and grandson of Shaphan heard what was written in charge of the Lord 's command .
GOLD:	When Micaiah son of Gemariah and grandson of Shaphan heard the messages from the Lord ,

ID:	3315
INPUT:	Áko Stephen daaztsánígíí Saul bił t'áá áko . Éí bijį́į́dóó Jerúsalemgi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii t'áá íiyisí atídabidil'į́įgo hodeeshzhiizh . T'áá ádzíłtso Judíya índa Samériya kéyahgóó tahodi'nooskaad , t'áá hazhó'ó daal'aadii éí t'áá dooda .
PRED:	So Barnabas and Saul agreed to the church in Jerusalem . As soon as the church gathered in Jerusalem , they decided to be very old , and they will be scattered in Samaria .
GOLD:	Saul was one of the witnesses , and he agreed completely with the killing of Stephen.A great wave of persecution began that day , sweeping over the church in Jerusalem ; and all the believers except the apostles were scattered through the regions of Judea and Samaria .

ID:	3316
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' náánáła' ch'ikéí yę́ę ałdó' yíkaigo ádaaní , Bóhólníihii , Bóhólníihii , nihá ąą ánílééh .
PRED:	Then another young servant came and said , “ Lord , let 's open ! ”
GOLD:	Later , when the other five bridesmaids returned , they stood outside , calling , ‘ Lord ! Lord ! Open the door for us ! '

ID:	3317
INPUT:	Áádóó , shoo , Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii yidááh yíkaigo aláahgo naat'áanii ádeidííniid , Ha'át'íísh biniyé nihik'isóó Júdah dine'é danineez'į́į'go aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó ba'áłchíní índa David bidiné danilíinii t'áá ałtso Jórdan tooh ha'naa yił ná'ná ?
PRED:	When all the people of Israel arrived , the king of Israel asked him , “ Why are your brothers and Judah ? Why did you see the king of Judah ? ”
GOLD:	But all the men of Israel complained to the king , “ The men of Judah stole the king and did n't give us the honor of helping take you , your household , and all your men across the Jordan . ”

ID:	3318
INPUT:	Áko Heziikáíyah haa ákoniizį́į'go Senákerib éí Jerúsalem kin haal'á bich'į' nideeshbah jinízingo jiníyáá lá ;
PRED:	Hezekiah realized that Hezekiah was very merciful , and he mobilized his way to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	When Hezekiah realized that Sennacherib also intended to attack Jerusalem ,

ID:	3319
INPUT:	Tsin ałnáoszid bąąhjį' Christ bił o'oolkaalígíí baa hane'
PRED:	Jesus Christ Is the Messiah
GOLD:	Paul 's Message of Wisdom

ID:	3320
INPUT:	Bohoníłdzilgo kin haal'áajį' háishą' shił doo'ash ? Íídamgóoshą' háí shił doo'ash ?
PRED:	Who will bring me into the fortified city ? Who will bring me victory over Edom ?
GOLD:	Who will bring me into the fortified city ? Who will bring me victory over Edom ?

ID:	3321
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí Saul yił nát'áázh áádóó Saul éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' nahodzisá .
PRED:	So Saul and Saul went to Saul and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	So Samuel finally agreed and went back with him , and Saul worshiped the Lord .

ID:	3322
INPUT:	Áyąądą́ą́' náás deekaígíí t'áá éí bik'ehgo náás yiikah doo .
PRED:	In the same way , there will be many of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But we must hold on to the progress we have already made .

ID:	3323
INPUT:	Zedekáíyah nant'áago ła'ts'áadah náhááh góne' áádóó dį́į́' nídízííd binih índa náhást'éí jį́į́ góne' kin haal'áago tsé binaago ahénátł'inii łahgo yigháda'aznil .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of Zedekiah 's reign , during the fourth year of King Zedekiah 's reign , on that day of King Zedekiah 's reign .
GOLD:	Two and a half years later , on July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , a section of the city wall was broken down .

ID:	3324
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nílíinii , Ííjipdę́ę́' nidine'é nibee adziilii bee ch'ííní'eezhgo díí jį́ át'éhígi át'éego nízhi' bééhózingo íinilaa . Ádił nida'ayeelzíí' ; ts'ídá doo yá'áshónígi ádeiit'įįd .
PRED:	And now , O Lord your God , you have brought you out of Egypt , O people of Egypt , and you have sinned against us .
GOLD:	“ O Lord our God , you brought lasting honor to your name by rescuing your people from Egypt in a great display of power . But we have sinned and are full of wickedness .

ID:	3325
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	This is another message that came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3326
INPUT:	Diné éí hak'isóó t'óó ahayóigo t'áá éí ła' náháłchǫǫh , nidi bił hajíí'áázh biláahgo náánáła' áhánígo k'é hó'níinii hólǫ́ .
PRED:	A large crowd followed him , but one of his brothers had been purchased with him .
GOLD:	There are “ friends ” who destroy each other , but a real friend sticks closer than a brother .

ID:	3327
INPUT:	Éí bąą ałk'isóó danilínígíí nihich'į' shilą́ąjį' wohkah bidideeshniiłgi t'áá ákónéehee dooleełgo baa nitsísíkééz , béeso adahidoohniłgo bee nidahosoo'áanii t'áá áłdįįłt'éego ádadoohłííł biniyé , áko ahees'nilii doo nihílák'ee haa'nilii át'ée da doo , nidi t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo adahisoonilii át'ée doo .
PRED:	Therefore , dear brothers and sisters , I will lead you to the price of your fellow Israelites . If you do n't want to die , you wo n't need to die .
GOLD:	So I thought I should send these brothers ahead of me to make sure the gift you promised is ready . But I want it to be a willing gift , not one given grudgingly .

ID:	3328
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí bidine'é yik'ijį' bi'didooltsééł , índa bik'aa' éí atsiniltł'ish anáháta' nahalin doo ; Bóhólníihii Diyin God deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádidooniił , áko shádi'ááhjígo nááts'ó'oołdísii yee yigáał doo .
PRED:	The Lord will see the nations of the Lord , like a clay pot with a sharp arrow that will be like a clay pot . Then the Ark of the Lord will reply , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives ! '
GOLD:	The Lord will appear above his people ; his arrows will fly like lightning ! The Sovereign Lord will sound the ram 's hornand attack like a whirlwind from the southern desert .

ID:	3329
INPUT:	T'ááká diyin dabidi'níinii béésh łigaii bee eda'alyaii , doodaii' óola bee eda'alyaii shí daóltą'go doo ádá ádadoohłíił da .
PRED:	Do not make yourselves holy by worshiping idols of silver or gold or gold .
GOLD:	Remember , you must not make any idols of silver or gold to rival me .

ID:	3330
INPUT:	Áko nikin haal'á binaa wódahgo ahééda'astł'inii éí bighą́ą'di bine' nanidzi'ígíí ni'góó łeeshtahjį' hadeidoołkałgo wóyahdi nidadeeztąąd doo .
PRED:	They will lie in the streets of the city , but they will lie in the streets of the grave .
GOLD:	The high walls of Moab will be demolished.They will be brought down to the ground , down into the dust .

ID:	3331
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá da'níł'ąą át'éego bee nidajilnish , nidi Diyin God t'ááłá'íígíí t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá ałtsoní hwee ła'yoolííł .
PRED:	He gives everything to others , but everyone else is given to God .
GOLD:	God works in different ways , but it is the same God who does the work in all of us .

ID:	3332
INPUT:	Háishą' hach'į' ninádadoodleeł biniyé Bóhólníihii bazh'nílá ?
PRED:	Who gives them to the Lord ? Who is able to answer ?
GOLD:	And who has given him so muchthat he needs to pay it back ?

ID:	3333
INPUT:	Diyingo naal'a'í ashdla' góne'ígíí bileets'aa' biyi'ígíí naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bikáa'jį' yayiiką́ , áko bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ągi bił chahóółhéél . Diné t'áá íiyisí bił dahoneezgaigo bitsoo' dei'aał ,
PRED:	The fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast , and the fourth beast was filled with the sky . And the Kingdom of God came upon him .
GOLD:	Then the fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast , and his kingdom was plunged into darkness . His subjects ground their teeth in anguish ,

ID:	3334
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí ak'áán nááhániihii ak'áán áádóó ak'ah ła' índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii fránkinsens wolyéii t'áá át'é bóóltą'go bílák'ee hadeezbingo hanéíjihgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidi<unk> go łikání halchingo bee ééhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' nááyiiłniih doo .
PRED:	Then the priest will take part of the grain offering and grain offerings , olive oil , along with olive oil , and burn it on the altar . This is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest on duty will take from the grain offering a handful of the choice flour moistened with olive oil , together with all the frankincense . He will burn this representative portion on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	3335
INPUT:	Áko Bethséyida kin haal'áhídi jíkai . Áko diné doo oo'į́į da léi' haa deizlóozgo , Bididííłchił , dahałníigo nídahookąąh .
PRED:	When he returned from Bethsaida , he did n't let anyone go to the town of Bethsaida . They begged him to let him go with him .
GOLD:	When they arrived at Bethsaida , some people brought a blind man to Jesus , and they begged him to touch the man and heal him .

ID:	3336
INPUT:	Bee nihoyíní'áanii bóhwiideesh'áłígíí biniyé shich'į' nahwii'náá nít'é'ígíí shá yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	I am telling you what I am saying , for you are good to me .
GOLD:	My suffering was good for me , for it taught me to pay attention to your decrees .

ID:	3337
INPUT:	Ákohgo Béíyasha éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ada'iishxaazhígi át'éego i'jííłhaazhgo Térzahgi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áádóó haye' Íílah hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	When Baasha died , he was buried in his father 's home , he became the next king . His son of Elah became the next king .
GOLD:	When Baasha died , he was buried in Tirzah . Then his son Elah became the next king .

ID:	3338
INPUT:	Áko <unk> éí bik'isóó áyidííniid , Nihitsilí daseelyį́įgo índa bidił nídadeel'į́įgoshą' ha'át'íí bits'ą́ą́dóó nídadidiilyééł ?
PRED:	Then he said to his brothers , “ What are you doing ? Why are you looking for a man to die ? ”
GOLD:	Judah said to his brothers , “ What will we gain by killing our brother ? We 'd have to cover up the crime .

ID:	3339
INPUT:	áádóó aláahgo nihindanit'a'í áádóó nihinanit'a'í danilíinii áádóó nihá nááda'iiłniihii índa danihizhé'é yę́ę nibee haz'áanii doo yik'eh dahóół'įįd da , áádóó nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii índa bee hahínídzíi'ii éí bee hak'ijį' nílį́įgo háínídzí' ígíí doo dayíists'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	“ You have refused to obey your decrees and priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , and the priests . You must listen to your commands .
GOLD:	Our kings , leaders , priests , and ancestors did not obey your Law or listen to the warnings in your commands and laws .

ID:	3340
INPUT:	Azhą́ yádił hił yaa ninísą́ą nidi , azhą́ k'os yaa ninísą́ągo bitsiits'iin yee yé<unk> náah nidi ,
PRED:	Even while he was hungry , he held some of them in a cloud , and there was no rain in the cloud .
GOLD:	Though the pride of the godless reaches to the heavensand their heads touch the clouds ,

ID:	3341
INPUT:	nít'éé' asdzání éí ałjiłnii k'ehgo hadít'éii índa bijéí biyi'dóó nítséékosii hadááh níyá , jó'akon .
PRED:	As a prostitute approached her heart , she went out to meet the prostitute .
GOLD:	The woman approached him , seductively dressed and sly of heart .

ID:	3342
INPUT:	Áko ákódzaago diné dahoołtsą́ągo dabik'isóó tádiingo nídeiizh'eezhgo yił haa áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	When they saw the men , they took their brothers and brought them to the valley .
GOLD:	When the bride 's parents saw him , they selected thirty young men from the town to be his companions .

ID:	3343
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi Ííjipdę́ę́' Asíriya kéyahgóó atiin áhodoolnííł , áádóó Asíriya dine'é Ííjipgóó ałnáádaakah doo , áádóó Ííjip dine'é Asíriyagóó ałnáádaakah doo , índa Ííjip dine'é éí Asíriya dine'é yił nidahałáa doolee ł .
PRED:	In that day , when Egypt will return to Egypt , Egypt will return to Egypt , Egypt , Egypt , and Egypt will return to Egypt .
GOLD:	In that day Egypt and Assyria will be connected by a highway . The Egyptians and Assyrians will move freely between their lands , and they will both worship God .

ID:	3344
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hánaaíké bééhodzísin nidi bí t'éí doo hwéédahósin da .
PRED:	Joseph did n't know that Joseph was afraid of Joseph .
GOLD:	Although Joseph recognized his brothers , they did n't recognize him .

ID:	3345
INPUT:	Áádóó índa Diyin God hach'į' yáłti' yę́ę hats'ą́ą́' dah náhodiidle' .
PRED:	Then God turned his ears to him and began to answer him .
GOLD:	Then God went up from the place where he had spoken to Jacob .

ID:	3346
INPUT:	Da' díísh doo kin ííł'íní biye' át'į́į da ? Da' bi<unk> doo Mary wolyée da ? Áádóó da' dabitsilíísh doo James índa Jóseph áádóó Sáíman índa Júdas daolyée da ?
PRED:	“ Is n't he the Messiah ? ” he asked . “ No , ” ( the name of James ) , James , James , James , James , James , James , and John .
GOLD:	Then they scoffed , “ He 's just the carpenter 's son , and we know Mary , his mother , and his brothers — James , Joseph , Simon , and Judas .

ID:	3347
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'ah yáłti'go , áłah ná'ádleehgo á dah názhnídaahígíí haghandę́ę́' diné ła' níyáago áháłní , Nitsi' daaztsą́ ; Na'nitiní éí t'áadoo kót'é náábidi'níní .
PRED:	When Jesus was speaking , he went out to the synagogue and saw a man coming from his home . “ Teacher , ” he said . “ Teacher , ” he said . “ Teacher , ”
GOLD:	While he was still speaking to her , a messenger arrived from the home of Jairus , the leader of the synagogue . He told him , “ Your daughter is dead . There 's no use troubling the Teacher now . ”

ID:	3348
INPUT:	áko k'ad , shiTaa' nílíinii , nił honishłǫ́ǫgo nahasdzáán t'ah doo álnééhdą́ą́' ayóó át'éii bee nił honishłǫ́ǫ́ nít'é'ígíí bee ayóó ánísht'éego áshílééh .
PRED:	And now , O Father , I am with you before I am with you .
GOLD:	Now , Father , bring me into the glory we shared before the world began .

ID:	3349
INPUT:	Áko Jeremáíyah éí t'ah doo yah abi'dilt'e'góó diné yitaaghá .
PRED:	Jeremiah was thrown into prison .
GOLD:	Jeremiah had not yet been imprisoned , so he could come and go among the people as he pleased .

ID:	3350
INPUT:	Áízak éí kéyah yikáá' k'i'díílá , áko t'áá éí yihahígíí biyi' neeznádiindi ánánéelą́ą'go há bilááh násdlį́į́' , áádóó Bóhólníihii hak'ijisdli' .
PRED:	So Isaac blessed the land of Canaan , for the Lord blessed them . Then he blessed them , and he blessed them .
GOLD:	When Isaac planted his crops that year , he harvested a hundred times more grain than he planted , for the Lord blessed him .

ID:	3351
INPUT:	Áízak éí ch'ikę́ę́h yił dah dii'áazhgo bimá Sárah yę́ę biníbaal góne' yił yah íí'áázh , áádóó be'asdzą́ą́ dzizlį́į́' , áko Áízak ayóó'áhó'níigo bimá daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' ha'oosniid .
PRED:	So Isaac took his mother 's mother 's sister , Sarah , and he became the wife of Isaac . Then he became the wife of Isaac .
GOLD:	And Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah 's tent , and she became his wife . He loved her deeply , and she was a special comfort to him after the death of his mother .

ID:	3352
INPUT:	Iiláíjah doo ła' bich'į' abi'dool'a' da , nidi Sáídan kéyahdi Zárefathgóó t'éiyá asdzání bąąh áhásdįįd léi' bich'į' abi'dool'a' .
PRED:	Elijah sent a message to Sidon , but a woman from Sidon will return to Sidon .
GOLD:	Yet Elijah was not sent to any of them . He was sent instead to a foreigner — a widow of Zarephath in the land of Sidon .

ID:	3353
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi háí dine'é nilíinii t'áá nidine'é Ízrel nilíinii nahalin ? Éí Diyin God bidine'é dooleeł biniyé ádá t'ą́ą́' nááyiisnii' , áko yízhí bee béého'dílzinii íidoolííł , áádóó ayóó át'éego índa t'óó báhádzidgo ída'iinilaaígíí nikéyahgi nidine'é binááł ádíílííł biniyé Ííjip dine'é áádóó ał'ąą dine'é índa bidiyin dabidi'níinii bits'ą́ąjį' t'ą́ą́' nááhíníłnii' .
PRED:	“ Who is the God of Israel ? Who will bring charges against the people of Israel ? He will bring them back to Egypt , and he will rescue them from all the nations of Egypt . Then he will rescue them from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	What other nation on earth is like your people Israel ? What other nation , O God , have you redeemed from slavery to be your own people ? You made a great name for yourself when you redeemed your people from Egypt . You performed awesome miracles and drove out the nations and gods that stood in their way .

ID:	3354
INPUT:	Díí hastą́ągo kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichééh biniyéhígíí Ízrel dine'é áádóó dé'éyóní nilíinii índa t'óó átsééd nihitahgi kéédahat'ínígíí bá át'ée doo , áko t'áá háiida doo t'áá ákójínééhgóó diné jiisxíinii áajį' yisdázhdínóochééł .
PRED:	“ Anyone who is from the town must flee to the town of Israel . Anyone who is living among you must flee to death . Anyone who kills another person must flee to death .
GOLD:	These cities are for the protection of Israelites , foreigners living among you , and traveling merchants . Anyone who accidentally kills someone may flee there for safety .

ID:	3355
INPUT:	Áádóó Léímek ba'ákéí naaki : ła' Éídah wolyé , náánáła'ígíí Zílah wolyé .
PRED:	Lamech was two young women who had two years old .
GOLD:	Lamech married two women . The first was named Adah , and the second was Zillah .

ID:	3356
INPUT:	Doo dashíínółts'ą́ą́'góó índa nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' shízhi' doo baa dahohniih dago ts'ídá hóyé'ígi át'éego bee nihá hadeesdzihii nihik'ijį' kódeeshłííł . Áádóó bee nihik'ihojidlíii hóyée'go bá hadeesdzih ; t'áá aaníí , t'áá íídą́ą́' hóyée'go bá haasdzíí' , háálá t'áadoo bee ádiih tsídasookéez da , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	And if you listen to me and refuse to listen to my name , I will make you an object of horror and curse . I will curse you in my name , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Listen to me and make up your minds to honor my name , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ or I will bring a terrible curse against you . I will curse even the blessings you receive . Indeed , I have already cursed them , because you have not taken my warning to heart .

ID:	3357
INPUT:	Ízrel nílíinii , ał'ąą dine'é bił nidahoozhǫǫhígi át'éego t'áadoo nił nihoozhǫǫhí , háálá niDiyin God bits'éíníyáago íłjił nít'éé' ; da'ool<unk> góó t'áá át'é ałjiłnii nááyííłbįįhii nił ayóó áhoot'éé nít'éé' .
PRED:	O Israel , do n't rejoice in your presence like the nations of Israel , for you have caught up in your presence .
GOLD:	O people of Israel , do not rejoice as other nations do.For you have been unfaithful to your God , hiring yourselves out like prostitutes , worshiping other gods on every threshing floor .

ID:	3358
INPUT:	Éí nideizyeelígíí yee ahił dahalne'go shidine'é éí shízhi' yaa deidiyoonah danízingo yiniyé ádaat'į́ . T'áá ákót'éego dabizhé'é yę́ę ałdó' Béíyal yich'į' nidahałáá nít'éé' yę́ę biniinaa shízhi' yaa dayooznah .
PRED:	They forgot what they had said to me , “ They forgot what they had happened to Baal . They forgot what they had happened to Baal .
GOLD:	By telling these false dreams , they are trying to get my people to forget me , just as their ancestors did by worshiping the idols of Baal .

ID:	3359
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán áádįįłii t'éiyá t'áadoo bíká nidaahkaí , nidi iiná doo ninít'i'ii bá ch'iyáán doo ádįįhii hádaaht'į́ , éí Diné Silį́į'ii nihaididoo'ááł , háálá Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii hwee lą́ asłį́'ígíí bee hwéého'dílzingo áhoolaa .
PRED:	Do n't worry about it , but do n't worry about it . Do n't give it to the Son of Man , for the Son of Man has given him the Son of God .
GOLD:	But do n't be so concerned about perishable things like food . Spend your energy seeking the eternal life that the Son of Man can give you . For God the Father has given me the seal of his approval . ”

ID:	3360
INPUT:	áádóó Gíliyad biye' Ásriyel ba'áłchíní Ásriyel dine'é danilį́ . Gíliyad biye' Shííkem ba'áłchíní Shííkem dine'é danilį́ ,
PRED:	Gilead became the clans of Gilead . Their registered clan , named after their ancestor Shechem .
GOLD:	The Asrielites , named after their ancestor Asriel.The Shechemites , named after their ancestor Shechem .

ID:	3361
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph ánááhodoo'niid , Ánihidishnínígíí éí t'áá aaníí ; naalchi'íga' danohłį́ .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , ” Joseph replied .
GOLD:	But Joseph insisted , “ As I said , you are spies !

ID:	3362
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hádą́ą'da doo Diyin God yiyiiłtsą́ą da ; biYe' t'ááłá'í bá yizhchínígíí éí aTaa' nilíinii ádíyóltą'ii , éí t'éiyá ájít'éegi haa ch'íhoní'ą́ .
PRED:	“ No one who has never seen the Son of God , whom you have seen the Son of God 's Son .
GOLD:	No one has ever seen God . But the unique One , who is himself God , is near to the Father 's heart . He has revealed God to us .

ID:	3363
INPUT:	Áhoołts'óózígo yah ahóót'i'í góne' yah ahohkááh , háálá atí'oolníiłjį' hóteelgo yah ahóót'i' áádóó hóteelgo bich'į' honít'i' , áko diné lą'í ákóne' yah ahikááh .
PRED:	“ Sing to the house of God , for he struck the road into the valley of refuge , where many people went to the valley .
GOLD:	“ You can enter God 's Kingdom only through the narrow gate . The highway to hell is broad , and its gate is wide for the many who choose that way .

ID:	3364
INPUT:	Ásaa' éí łeeshch'iih bii' yadahiikaah dooígíí , áádóó łeeshch'iih bee hadahakaahí , áádóó ásaa' dantsaaígíí , áádóó bíla'táa'ii danineezígíí índa tsííd bee naakáhí ádadoohłííł ; bił chodao'íinii t'áá ałtso béésh łitsoii bee ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Make the ash buckets , lamp snuffers , lamp snuffers , ladles , and all the utensils , and all the small articles made of bronze .
GOLD:	Make ash buckets , shovels , basins , meat forks , and firepans , all of bronze .

ID:	3365
INPUT:	Áko David éí Ábigeil áyidííniid , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God baa ha'niih le' ; jó , éí díí jį́ shaa niníł'a'go shidááh yíníyá .
PRED:	Then David told David , “ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , for I am giving you today .
GOLD:	David replied to Abigail , “ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who has sent you to meet me today !

ID:	3366
INPUT:	Áádóó nááda'iiłniihii Éran biye'ké éí nááhidoonihígíí bitsiits'iin índa bik'ah t'áá bił ałkéé' sinilgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi chizh diltłi'ígíí yikáá' nideidoonił .
PRED:	“ Aaron and his sons will take the fat of the altar and cut it on the altar .
GOLD:	They will arrange the pieces of the offering , including the head and fat , on the wood burning on the altar .

ID:	3367
INPUT:	Záíyandi bąąhági ádaaníiłii nídaaldzid ; doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii éí yéé' yik'ee tsídadoolyiz . Háishą' nihitahgi kǫ' ó'oołdįįłii yił kééhat'į́į doo ? Háishą' nihitahgi hool'áágóó hodook'ą́ąłii yił kééhat'į́į doo ?
PRED:	The people of Jerusalem will fear God , and those who fear him will fear God ? Who will live among you ? Who will live among you ?
GOLD:	The sinners in Jerusalem shake with fear.Terror seizes the godless. “ Who can live with this devouring fire ? ” they cry. “ Who can survive this all-consuming fire ? ”

ID:	3368
INPUT:	Éí bąą yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii díí bił ahąąh naa'nilgo baa nitsáhákees : éí aláahgo naat'áanii léi' bá nidaal'a'í yąąh hadeis'áago éí bá niná'doolyééł biniyé bá yídéeshtah niizį́į́' .
PRED:	So the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies has been put to death , and he killed a young man who had been put to death .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , the Kingdom of Heaven can be compared to a king who decided to bring his accounts up to date with servants who had borrowed money from him .

ID:	3369
INPUT:	Áko diné nidaabaahii éí nááda'iiłniihii adee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádaanínígíí yilą́ąjį' yikah , índa akéé'dóó hada'ídíl'į́'ígíí éí tsits'aa' dílzinii yikéé'dóó yikahgo nááda<unk> niihii náás yikahgo éí adee' bee í'dílzoołí t'ááłáhígi át'éego yee ádaaní .
PRED:	When the blast of the trumpet , the priests blew the trumpets and the horns of the ram 's horn and the ram 's horn , and the horns of the Covenant met with the trumpets .
GOLD:	Some of the armed men marched in front of the priests with the horns and some behind the Ark , with the priests continually blowing the horns .

ID:	3370
INPUT:	Náánáła'ígíí ánéidoo'niid , Nishą' éí díkwíí nąąh háá'á ? Áko ání , Tł'oh naadą́ą́' neeznádiin azis hadeezbingo bee shąąh háá'á . Nít'éé' ánéidoo'niid , Nąąh háá'áhígíí nídiiłtsóosgo t'áá tseebídiinígo ánílééh .
PRED:	“ How long will you get up ? ” the man asked . “ How long will you pick up your clothes ? ” So the man said , “ Get up , and you will be killed . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ And how much do you owe my employer ? ' he asked the next man . ‘ I owe him 1,000 bushels of wheat , ' was the reply . ‘ Here , ' the manager said , ‘ take the bill and change it to 800 bushels . '

ID:	3371
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' łahgo át'éego tsíńdadeezkéezgo diné naalte' índa asdzání naalte' danilį́įgo béédazhdeezhchidii naalte' ánáádajiidlaa , áádóó hanaalte' danilį́įgo hak'eh dahół'į́įgo ánáádajiidlaa .
PRED:	And after this , everyone had repented of their slaves and free free free free free from slavery and slaves .
GOLD:	but later they changed their minds . They took back the men and women they had freed , forcing them to be slaves again .

ID:	3372
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é yee ádaat'éii t'áadoo bídahooł'aahí . Wót'áahdi łahgo áńdahoo'níłígíí t'áadoo bik'ee nitsináhkahí ; jó , éí ał'ąą dine'é yik'ee nitsinákah , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ Do n't be able to build a pagan nation , ” says the Lord. “ There is no part of the nations . “ It 's the Lord , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do not act like the other nations , who try to read their future in the stars.Do not be afraid of their predictions , even though other nations are terrified by them .

ID:	3373
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ábijiní , Díí shił bééhózin : Bóhólníihii éí kéyah nihaididoo'ááł áádóó nihik'eda'íyée'go bik'ee nisiniikai , áádóó kéyah bikáa'gi diné kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá át'é nihik'ee bitah doo dahwiina' da .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ I know that the Lord will give you victory over the land of the earth . We are afraid of the people who live in the land .
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	3374
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí kin haal'áii yich'į' chánahgo biinéé' diits'a' áádóó diné éí nízhi' yidósingo hóyą́ ; tsihał índa éí niinítáanii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ .
PRED:	Listen to the city of the Lord ! Listen to the city of the Lord ! Listen to the noise of the city .
GOLD:	Fear the Lord if you are wise ! His voice calls to everyone in Jerusalem : “ The armies of destruction are coming ; the Lord is sending them .

ID:	3375
INPUT:	Áko Rebékah ałdó' ajííghal , nít'éé' Áízak dziiłtsą́ągo ghą́ą́'ask'idii bik'i nijííyá .
PRED:	So Rebekah saw Isaac 's camels , and he ran out to look for his camels .
GOLD:	When Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac , she quickly dismounted from her camel .

ID:	3376
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bii' neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee bééhániihii bidááhjí ata'naníbaalídóó tł'óó' bich'į'go haz'ánígi Bóhólníihii binááł Éran áádóó biye'ké e'e'ááhdóó abíníjį' bee adinídíinii ninádei'nił doo . Díí hool'áágóó yee nihoní'áanii Ízrel dine'é náás da'ahideeshchį́į́góó yaa dahóyą́ągo yaa ádahalyą́ą doo .
PRED:	When the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant arrived at the entrance of the Tabernacle , they will return to the Lord at the south side of the Tabernacle , and they will return to the Lord .
GOLD:	The lampstand will stand in the Tabernacle , in front of the inner curtain that shields the Ark of the Covenant . Aaron and his sons must keep the lamps burning in the Lord 's presence all night . This is a permanent law for the people of Israel , and it must be observed from generation to generation .

ID:	3377
INPUT:	Hashchíinii éí Jew dine'é yináldzidgo ákódííniid , háálá diné ła'da , T'áá aaníí Christ át'į́ , jiníigo hadzoodzí'ígíí éí Jew dine'é áłah nádleehii bitahdóó ats'áhodi'doolt'eełgo t'áá íídą́ą́' Jew dine'é yee łá'í daazlį́į'go hondahaz'ą́ .
PRED:	The Jewish leaders said to Jesus , “ It 's a man who is the Messiah , ” he said . “ He is a Jew to be saved from the Jews .
GOLD:	His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders , who had announced that anyone saying Jesus was the Messiah would be expelled from the synagogue .

ID:	3378
INPUT:	Áko Paul éí diné ándaha'áii yéego yiníł'į́įgo ádííniid , [ Shahastóí áádóó] shik'isóó , Diyin God binááł yá'át'éhígi ááshníłígíí díí jį́įdi doo ła' shi'diił'áa da .
PRED:	Paul said to the crowd , “ Brothers , I am doing what I am doing . I am innocent in the presence of God .
GOLD:	Gazing intently at the high council , Paul began : “ Brothers , I have always lived before God with a clear conscience ! ”

ID:	3379
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́į́dą́ą́' Mózes ádee hadoodzíi'go ání , T'áá aaníí kéyah bikáá' nisíníyáhígíí ni áádóó na'áłchíní bi ł éí kéyah íí' dooleełii dani<unk> go ahool'áa doo , háálá t'áá sínízį́į́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God bikéé' yínááł nít'éé' .
PRED:	On that day Moses said to Moses , “ You have sworn this message from the Lord : You are the good land you gave to the people of the land of the Lord your God , for you have followed me . ”
GOLD:	So that day Moses solemnly promised me , ‘ The land of Canaan on which you were just walking will be your grant of land and that of your descendants forever , because you wholeheartedly followed the Lord my God . '

ID:	3380
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God nihítséedi kojį' shiníł'a' ; éí niha'áłchíní nahasdzáán bikáá'góó náás da'ahílchíih doo , índa shí shinahjį' ayóó át'éii bee dadoohdzih biniyé ádzaa .
PRED:	But God sent me to tell me , ‘ You are my children , and you will be remembered from generation to generation .
GOLD:	God has sent me ahead of you to keep you and your families alive and to preserve many survivors .

ID:	3381
INPUT:	Hasbídí nahalingo diné ayóó'ííní'níinii bii' sizíinii t'ááká naaldlooshii dahashkéii baa dóó'ááł lágo . Nidine'é badahojoobá'íígíí hool'áágóó doo beidiyíínah da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your people ; do n't let them be afraid of the poor and needy .
GOLD:	Do n't let these wild beasts destroy your turtledoves.Do n't forget your suffering people forever .

ID:	3382
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Jerúsalemdi , kin bii' sohodizin éí Diyin God bá ats'át'ánígíí bee bééhániihgo biniit'aa hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehígíí baa nááhoolzhiizh , áko íídą́ą́' hai ,
PRED:	At that time the Temple of God was about to pray for the Temple of God , for he was ready to preach the Good News .
GOLD:	It was now winter , and Jesus was in Jerusalem at the time of Hanukkah , the Festival of Dedication .

ID:	3383
INPUT:	Héímath kin haal'áádóó índa Árpad kin haal'áádóó dadiyinii éí háájí ? Séfarvéíyim kin haal'áádóó , Híína kin haal'áádóó índa Áívah kin haal'áádóó dadiyiniishą' háájí ? Da' éísh Samériya kéyah shighadeideest'ą́ ?
PRED:	What happened to the town of Hamath and the towns of Hamath ? What happened to the citizens of Samaria ? Are you the citizens of Samaria ?
GOLD:	What happened to the gods of Hamath and Arpad ? And what about the gods of Sepharvaim , Hena , and Ivvah ? Did any god rescue Samaria from my power ?

ID:	3384
INPUT:	Ákót'ée nidi Diyin God yá dahalne'ii éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' ninádahodoo'ish biniyé ayiis'a' , áko éí hak'ijį' danilį́įgo nidahasne' , nidi doo dayíists'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	But the prophets sent messengers to the Lord , but they refused to listen to him . But they refused to listen to their message .
GOLD:	Yet the Lord sent prophets to bring them back to him . The prophets warned them , but still the people would not listen .

ID:	3385
INPUT:	Ákondi Manáseh dine'é éí kin hadaas'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí haa ch'ídahidoojahígíí doo bídazhneel'ą́ą da , nidi éí kéyah biyi' Kéínan dine'é t'áá kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	But the people of Manasseh failed to drive them out of the land of Canaan , but they failed to live in Canaan .
GOLD:	But the descendants of Manasseh were unable to occupy these towns because the Canaanites were determined to stay in that region .

ID:	3386
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Jó , yisdánídeeshtééł biniyé nił honishłǫ́ . Ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó adanihinííłkaadii éí ałtso ádeeshdįįł , nidi doo ałtso ánihideeshdįįł da : doo haada yit'éii bee hasht'éénihideeshdlííł , áádóó t'áá ánóht'é atínánihiish'įįh doo .
PRED:	“ I am the Lord , ” says the Lord. “ I will rescue you from among the nations . I will destroy you , but I will not destroy you . I will destroy you , and I will never destroy you .
GOLD:	For I am with you and will save you , ” says the Lord. “ I will completely destroy the nations where I have scattered you , but I will not completely destroy you.I will discipline you , but with justice ; I can not let you go unpunished . ”

ID:	3387
INPUT:	kéyah yii' kéédahat'ínígíí ábidiní , Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí , Bóhólníihii Diyin God haa yáłti'go kóní , Ákwe'é diné t'áá ałtso t'áá na'níle'dii kéédahat'į́įgo biniinaa éí kéyah bikáá'góó dahólóonii ts'ídá ałtso baa nahodi'dooldahgo doo yidoolaałí da ; éí bąą hoł daayée'go habááh dazhdooyį́į́ł índa t'óó hoł adahayóigo hato' dazhdoodlį́į́ł .
PRED:	They will live in the land of Israel , saying , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will live in the land of Jerusalem , and everyone will eat it and drink it . '
GOLD:	Tell the people , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says concerning those living in Israel and Jerusalem : They will eat their food with trembling and sip their water in despair , for their land will be stripped bare because of their violence .

ID:	3388
INPUT:	Áko Gálilii binaashiijį' Gádara dine'é bikéyahdi hoł aní'éél .
PRED:	So they went to the region of Galilee to the region of Galilee .
GOLD:	So they arrived in the region of the Gerasenes , across the lake from Galilee .

ID:	3389
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo dį́į́' náhááh góne' Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar éí Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígíí bíighahgi Kárkiimish hoolyéegi Ííjip dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Féro-nííko bisiláo yik'eh deesdlį́į́' ; éí bídéét'i'go Diyin God Ííjip dine'é kót'éego yaa haadzíí' .
PRED:	Josiah son of Josiah began to rule over Judah in the fourth year of King Jehoiakim 's reign in the fourth year of King Jehoiakim 's reign in the Euphrates River . He also fought against King Nebuchadnezzar of Egypt , just as King Nebuchadnezzar of Egypt .
GOLD:	This message concerning Egypt was given in the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah , the king of Judah , on the occasion of the battle of Carchemish when Pharaoh Neco , king of Egypt , and his army were defeated beside the Euphrates River by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .

ID:	3390
INPUT:	Áko éí ashkii t'ah hach'į' yigáałgo , níłch'i bi'iiníziinii bik'iilwodgo naa'anáábiyííłhango ditsxizgo anáábiidlaa . Nidi Jesus éí níłch'i nichxǫ́'ígíí yideezteh , áádóó ashkii hadaałt'é ánáyiidlaago bizhé'é yaa néiníłtį́ .
PRED:	When the boy came to him , he took the boy and threw it into the mouth of the demon . But when he saw him , he broke the boy with his father 's heart and laid it on the child 's heart .
GOLD:	As the boy came forward , the demon knocked him to the ground and threw him into a violent convulsion . But Jesus rebuked the evil spirit and healed the boy . Then he gave him back to his father .

ID:	3391
INPUT:	Nihokáá'góó diné ayóó át'é da'at'íinii t'áá ałtso da'dooyį́į́ł áádóó nidahałáa doo ; t'áá ałtso łeeshtahjį' náádleełii hadáahjį' yaa ádadoonííł ; bii' naazíinii dadínóonéełii hach'į' yaa ádadoonííł .
PRED:	All the earth will die , and everyone will eat them in front of the dust . Then they will bow down to the ground .
GOLD:	Let the rich of the earth feast and worship.Bow before him , all who are mortal , all whose lives will end as dust .

ID:	3392
INPUT:	Díí jį́ yee' shí tseebídiin shinááhai . Da' ákoósh yá'át'éehii índa doo yá'át'éehii baa ákonisin ? Da' ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo yishánígíí , doodaii' yishdlánígíísh t'áá yish<unk> ? Da' diné dahataałígíí índa asdzání dahataałígíí biinéé'ésh t'áá diists'a' ? Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ná naal'a'í nishłį́įgo bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' naanishtsoh nishłį́į doo ?
PRED:	“ Why are you looking for me for forty years ? Do you think I am the one who is good and good to you ? Do you think I am the one who sent me to be the king ? Why are you looking for me ? ”
GOLD:	I am eighty years old today , and I can no longer enjoy anything . Food and wine are no longer tasty , and I can not hear the singers as they sing . I would only be a burden to my lord the king .

ID:	3393
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Sáíman , daal'aadii ak'i dah dahidilníhígíí binahjį' Níłch'i Diyinii aa hidit'aahgo yiyiiłtsą́ągo , béeso yee yooskango
PRED:	Then Simon Peter and his disciples saw that the Holy Spirit had compassion on them .
GOLD:	When Simon saw that the Spirit was given when the apostles laid their hands on people , he offered them money to buy this power .

ID:	3394
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Níłch'i Diyinii nihainíł'a' , áko nihits'íís éí Níłch'i Diyinii yii' hináago bikin bii' sohodizin át'éegoósh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Doo t'áá ádíí' danohłį́į da ,
PRED:	And God sent us to be the Spirit of God , so why are you living in the house of our bodies ? You are not living in the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit , who lives in you and was given to you by God ? You do not belong to yourself ,

ID:	3395
INPUT:	Háálá nihí nihaa niikai yę́ędą́ą́' t'áá íiyisí nihich'į' k'é danohdzin nít'ée'ii éí diné t'áá ałtso yee nihaa nidahalne' , áádóó eda'alyaii bits'ą́ąjį' Diyin God bich'į' ninánohkaigo Diyin God hináanii índa t'áá aaníí nilíinii bá nidaał'a'go yee nihaa nidahalne' .
PRED:	For you have been very angry with us , and you will be saved by all who have come to you . Then you will know that God has sent you back to you .
GOLD:	for they keep talking about the wonderful welcome you gave us and how you turned away from idols to serve the living and true God .

ID:	3396
INPUT:	Áłah nídaahdleehgo diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo hatsii' ná'ázti'go sozdilzingo , doodaii' Diyin God bá hojilne'go éí Christ hatsijį' sizíinii doo hoł nilį́į da ájílééh .
PRED:	Then everyone prayed to the church in prayer and prayed to God , and he must not be his head . He must not be the head of Christ .
GOLD:	A man dishonors his head if he covers his head while praying or prophesying .

ID:	3397
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é dabito' diłgo áyiilaa , áko dabiłóó' dayííghą́ą́' .
PRED:	He made the Egyptians out of Egypt , and he killed the fish .
GOLD:	He turned their water into blood , poisoning all the fish .

ID:	3398
INPUT:	Áko bee i'níłníihgo éí nízaadgóó nídiiłts'į́įhgo ha'a'aahjígo dah oonéłígíí dah nídii'néeh doo .
PRED:	When you hear the terms of the trumpet , you will hear the terms of the camp .
GOLD:	“ When you sound the signal to move on , the tribes camped on the east side of the Tabernacle must break camp and move forward .

ID:	3399
INPUT:	Naałniih na'ałtseedii ła' bidoolna'go sitį́ ; dziztį́į́dóó doo náázhdidoodáał da , daaní .
PRED:	They must not be deceived , and no one will appear before him .
GOLD:	“ He has some fatal disease , ” they say. “ He will never get out of that bed ! ”

ID:	3400
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii shizéé' yideelchidgo áshidííniid , Shoo , shizaad ni<unk> lá .
PRED:	Then the Lord touched me and said to me , “ Look , my mouth is here ! ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord reached out and touched my mouth and said , “ Look , I have put my words in your mouth !

ID:	3401
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii éí asdzání haadzí'ígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go ak'ina'ooldláadgo tsé ahénátł'in bikáa'di joogáałgo diné dadéez'į́į́' nít'éé' , jó , tł'oh yishbizh ayaadi bii' dziztį́ .
PRED:	When the king heard this , he tore his clothes and tore his clothes in burlap and put on burlap .
GOLD:	When the king heard this , he tore his clothes in despair . And as the king walked along the wall , the people could see that he was wearing burlap under his robe next to his skin .

ID:	3402
INPUT:	éí bá naal'a'í bizaad t'áá aaníigo áyósinígíí áádóó bá hane' nidei'áii yee yádááłti'ii áyoolíiłii nishłį́ ; t'áá éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áii ííłní , Diné nii' kéédahat'į́į doo , áádóó Júdah kéyah biyi' kin hadaas'áii ííłní , Áńdanihidi'doolnííł índa kints'iilgo nahaz'ánígóó ałdó' áńdadeeshdliił ;
PRED:	He said to his servant , “ I am the one who sent this message to the people of Judah : I am the city of Judah and Jerusalem , says , ‘ The city of Judah , ' says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	But I carry out the predictions of my prophets ! By them I say to Jerusalem , ‘ People will live here again , 'and to the towns of Judah , ‘ You will be rebuilt ; I will restore all your ruins ! '

ID:	3403
INPUT:	Diyin God yá dahalne'ii , Ná<unk> deiłníi dooleeł , daaní yę́ę bohodoolnííł biniyé Názareth kin haal'áagi jinínáago ákwii kééhojit'į́ .
PRED:	They said to Jesus , “ The Scriptures say , ‘ We are going to rebuild the town of God . ' ”
GOLD:	So the family went and lived in a town called Nazareth . This fulfilled what the prophets had said : “ He will be called a Nazarene . ”

ID:	3404
INPUT:	Shi'ana'í danilíinii t'áadoo biniinaanígóó tsídii nanché nahalingo nidashineeshchą́ą́' .
PRED:	When my enemies saw me , they fled from their enemies , they fled to me .
GOLD:	My enemies , whom I have never harmed , hunted me down like a bird .

ID:	3405
INPUT:	áádóó ni' hideesnáá'dóó bik'ijį' éí kǫ' hadíínáád , nidi Bóhólníihii éí kǫ' doo yee honíle' da , áádóó kǫ' hadíínáádóó bik'ijį' éí t'įįhdígo iinéé' diists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The fire of the fire and the fire of the fire , but the fire of the fire had poured out his mouth .
GOLD:	And after the earthquake there was a fire , but the Lord was not in the fire . And after the fire there was the sound of a gentle whisper .

ID:	3406
INPUT:	Naadiin naakidóó náá'áłníí' ké silá ánízáádgóó tó néés'ąądgo dził ałtso yik'i diilkǫ' .
PRED:	The mountains spread the water on the hills , and the water covered it .
GOLD:	rising more than twenty-two feet above the highest peaks .

ID:	3407
INPUT:	Áádóó éí yoołkáałdi Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii díí yee nich'į' ádííniid , Dadoohcha áádóó yínííł danohłį́į doo áádóó nihitsii' dadoohshih índa tł'oh azis danihi'ée' doo .
PRED:	On that day the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies said , “ You must weep and shave your hair in burlap and shave your hair in burlap .
GOLD:	At that time the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , called you to weep and mourn.He told you to shave your heads in sorrow for your sinsand to wear clothes of burlap to show your remorse .

ID:	3408
INPUT:	Fríjiyagi áádóó Pamfíliyagi , Ííjipgi áádóó Líbiyagi Sairíinii binaagóó , índa Romedę́ę́' nidaanéego t'óó átsééd dabighanígíí , Jew dine'é índa Jew dine'é binahagha' yihidiikaígíí ,
PRED:	Paul and Silas in Antioch of Syria , traveled through the province of Asia . ( It was from Cyrene ) to be called to the Jews in Rome . )
GOLD:	Phrygia , Pamphylia , Egypt , and the areas of Libya around Cyrene , visitors from Rome

ID:	3409
INPUT:	Mą'iitsoh éí dibé yázhí yił kééhat'į́į doo , áádóó náshdóítsoh łikizhii éí tł'ízí yázhí yił t'ááłáhígi shitéezh doo , índa béégashii yáázh áádóó náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí biyázhí áádóó alį́į́' neesk'ahii yił t'ááłáhígi shijée' doo , áádóó áłchíní yázhí tábidi'éesh doo .
PRED:	No one will live among the sheep , goats , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , goats , and goats , and goats , and lambs will return to me .
GOLD:	In that day the wolf and the lamb will live together ; the leopard will lie down with the baby goat.The calf and the yearling will be safe with the lion , and a little child will lead them all .

ID:	3410
INPUT:	wáin doo bee tsi'nijigháa da doo , doo ats'ííd ádąąh jit'į́į doo , na'adlo'go bee béeso ál'íinii doo bíchą́yízhdéelni' da doo , nidi ha'jólníi doo , doo saad íjí'áah da doo , índa doo adáninilníi da doo .
PRED:	They will not have sexual relations with wine , for they will not have sexual relations with lies , but they will be filled with violence .
GOLD:	He must not be a heavy drinker or be violent . He must be gentle , not quarrelsome , and not love money .

ID:	3411
INPUT:	Éíbraham éí Abímelek yił aha'deet'ą́
PRED:	Abraham 's Treaty with Abimelech
GOLD:	Abraham 's Covenant with Abimelech

ID:	3412
INPUT:	Féro bits'ą́ą́' ch'ééjíkaigo Mózes áádóó Éran haba' sizį́įgo baa jíkai .
PRED:	So Pharaoh and Aaron returned to the palace and stood before him .
GOLD:	As they left Pharaoh 's court , they confronted Moses and Aaron , who were waiting outside for them .

ID:	3413
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Diltłish nihiniyé deeshtį́įłgo diné áádóó naaldlooshii nihits'ą́ą́dóó nideestsił , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy your sword , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring an army against you , O Egypt , and destroy both people and animals .

ID:	3414
INPUT:	Dah yisk'id bighą́ą'di ályaaígíí bich'į' ałnáádaahkahígíishą' , ha'át'íísh óolyé ? hodííniid . Áko dííshjį́įjį' bízhi' éí Bámah hoolyé .
PRED:	“ What do you say to the mountains ? What is it ? ” And the name of the Lord replied .
GOLD:	I said to them , ‘ What is this high place where you are going ? ' ( This kind of pagan shrine has been called Bamah — ‘ high place ' — ever since . )

ID:	3415
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iiláíjah diné áłah nilínígíí ííłní , Shí , t'áá shí t'éiyá , Bóhólníihii yá halne'ii nishłį́įgo yisdziih , nidi Béíyal yá dahalne'ii éí dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin yilt'é .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to the men , “ I am the Lord . I am the one who comes from the group of Baal . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to them , “ I am the only prophet of the Lord who is left , but Baal has 450 prophets .

ID:	3416
INPUT:	Éí ak'ah biłgo sit'éhígíí dííkááł ; éí niheesti'go bááh nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo łikání halchingo nááhíłniih doo .
PRED:	You must present a special gift to the Lord as a special gift to the Lord . This is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	It must be carefully mixed with olive oil and cooked on a griddle . Then slice this grain offering and present it as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	3417
INPUT:	Éí bąą ádíshní , Jó , Gílgal haz'ánígi Filístiya dine'é t'óó shik'i dah yijeehgi át'é ; Bóhólníihii doo náoshkąąhgóó , ákohgo t'áá shí t'áá bizááká didlidgo nááhániihii nááháłnii' .
PRED:	So I said , “ I am coming to Gilgal , ” I cried out to the Lord , “ for I am going to help the burnt offerings of burnt offerings . ” And the Lord said , “ I will help you for burnt offerings . ”
GOLD:	So I said , ‘ The Philistines are ready to march against us at Gilgal , and I have n't even asked for the Lord 's help ! ' So I felt compelled to offer the burnt offering myself before you came . ”

ID:	3418
INPUT:	Nidi Christ t'ááłáhídi náá'ádiisnii'ígíí éí ádił ni'iidzííh biniyé hool'áágóó náá'ádiisnii' , áádóó índa Diyin God binish'náájígo dah neezdá .
PRED:	But Christ has made a sin offering for Christ , and he has raised up the right hand of God and his right hand .
GOLD:	But our High Priest offered himself to God as a single sacrifice for sins , good for all time . Then he sat down in the place of honor at God 's right hand .

ID:	3419
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Néthinim daolyéii Ófel hoolyéedi kéédahat'ínígíí éí ha'a'aahjí tó bidáń'dítį́hí bíighahgóó haz'áníjį' áádóó ats'áhoní'ą́ądi ya'iitł'inígíí bíighahjį' tsé nídeiztł'in .
PRED:	The rest of the Temple servants who lived in the east side of the east side of the gateway passage .
GOLD:	with the Temple servants living on the hill of Ophel , who repaired the wall as far as a point across from the Water Gate to the east and the projecting tower .

ID:	3420
INPUT:	Éí hakéyahgi nanise' t'áá ałtso índa nidazhniłt'ą'ígíí ałtso yaa nahodeeskai .
PRED:	They have planted all the crops of plants and crops .
GOLD:	They ate up everything green in the land , destroying all the crops in their fields .

ID:	3421
INPUT:	Kin haal'áagi kéédahoht'į́įgo nihik'idahojidlíi doo áádóó dadzígaigi kéédahoht'į́įgo nihik'idahojidlíi doo .
PRED:	When you live in the land , you will live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Your towns and your fieldswill be blessed .

ID:	3422
INPUT:	Hadaałt'éii t'áá ałtso bá nidahwiizt'i'go yiiłtsą́ , nidi nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii éí doo bá nihonít'i' da .
PRED:	I have seen all these things , but I do n't obey your commands .
GOLD:	Even perfection has its limits , but your commands have no limit .

ID:	3423
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham hajííghalgo nidzizghal , nít'éé' hane'jígo deenásts'aa' bidee' yee tsin yiih dinoolne' lá , áádóó Éíbraham éí deenásts'aa' néidiiłtį́įgo haye' bitsásk'ehgi didlidgo náádziisnii' .
PRED:	When Abraham saw his eyes , he looked up and watched , he took the ram 's horn and laid it on the horns of the ram 's horn .
GOLD:	Then Abraham looked up and saw a ram caught by its horns in a thicket . So he took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt offering in place of his son .

ID:	3424
INPUT:	Wóne'di ahééhool'áhígíí ha'a'aahjígo t'áá bíni' haz'ánígíí áádóó kin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí binaashiijí tsé yítł'inígíí bii' dahooghan .
PRED:	The top of the Temple was built to the east side of the Temple , and the walls of the Temple was built by the Temple .
GOLD:	On the south side of the Temple there were two blocks of rooms just south of the inner courtyard between the Temple and the outer courtyard . These rooms were arranged just like the rooms on the north .

ID:	3425
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God ání , Éí bijį́ kin bii' sohodizin si'ánídóó sin éí cha nídoodleeł . Ats'íís daneeznáanii t'óó ahayóí t'áá ałtsogóó nihidadíl'áago t'áadoo íits'a'í éí ats'íís yóó'adayiiłtł'iid doo .
PRED:	And this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ On the day of the Temple of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies will be filled with blood . The bodies will be filled with blood .
GOLD:	In that day the singing in the temple will turn to wailing . Dead bodies will be scattered everywhere . They will be carried out of the city in silence . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	3426
INPUT:	Díí biniinaa nihaa deeshááł nisin yę́ę lą'ídi shidi'neestł'ah .
PRED:	I am telling you these things , but I will not stop you .
GOLD:	In fact , my visit to you has been delayed so long because I have been preaching in these places .

ID:	3427
INPUT:	Jó , éí bijį́ náá'iiłniihii á bee k'ééhoodǫǫłii nihá nááyiiłniihgo doo nihąąh chinígóó ánihizhdoolííł , áko ádił nida'iyoosí'ígíí t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii binááł ałtso nihąąh táázdoogis .
PRED:	For the priest will purify you from making you right with the Lord , and he will purify you in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	On that day offerings of purification will be made for you , and you will be purified in the Lord 's presence from all your sins .

ID:	3428
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádíyi'ídi nitsíkeesígi át'éego t'áá ákót'éego hiná . <unk> áádóó ídlą́ , niłní , nidi bijéí biyi'dóó doo hánígo naa nitsíkees da .
PRED:	For you do n't know what is right , and you do n't believe it . And you do n't believe in your hearts .
GOLD:	They are always thinking about how much it costs. “ Eat and drink , ” they say , but they do n't mean it .

ID:	3429
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii Bóhólníihii bich'į' dah nídidoohkah , baa nánihi'dookąąh
PRED:	O Israel , come to the Lord , and let us go back to us .
GOLD:	Healing for the Repentant

ID:	3430
INPUT:	áádóó gáagii ał'ąą ádaat'éii
PRED:	The Rich Man
GOLD:	ravens of all kinds ,

ID:	3431
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Shą́ą́' , Shí éí ásht'į́ , dishníigo nihił hweeshne' ; jó , shíkadanohtáá ládą́ą́' díí bił naashkaígíí bíni' nidaakai .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I am telling you what I am saying , for you are looking for me . ”
GOLD:	“ I told you that he , ” Jesus said . “ And since I am the one you want , let these others go . ”

ID:	3432
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The Giving of Tithes

ID:	3433
INPUT:	Saul doo ak'eh hóół'įįd dago doo bidi'niidzį́į' da
PRED:	Saul 's Anger at Sin
GOLD:	Saul Defeats the Amalekites

ID:	3434
INPUT:	Nídeiltihii t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá ałtsojį' ádaa áháyą́ yee nida'ádínítaah . Éidí woobįįhii ádoodįįłii bee dahodooleeł yiniyé ádaat'į́ , nidi nihí woobįįhii hool'áágóó hólóonii biniyé ádeiit'į́ .
PRED:	“ Do n't worry about what you are going to do . You are going to get the price of the poor . ”
GOLD:	All athletes are disciplined in their training . They do it to win a prize that will fade away , but we do it for an eternal prize .

ID:	3435
INPUT:	T'áá ákwe'é naháatą́ągo lą'í yiską́ , áko Judíyadę́ę́' Diyin God yá halne'ii léi' , Ágabas yolyéego ákwe'é níyá .
PRED:	And there was a few days of Judea , and a man named a man named a man named Barnabas .
GOLD:	Several days later a man named Agabus , who also had the gift of prophecy , arrived from Judea .

ID:	3436
INPUT:	Índa éí tsé naakiígíí Ízrel biye'ké bee bééhániih doo biniyé íífad wolyéii bikáa'gi awostisgi t'áá ałch'ijí sinilgo ádíílííł ; Éran éí Ízrel biye'ké dabízhi' hawostisgi bik'i sinilgo bee Bóhólníihii yee hwénálniih doo biniyé binááł yah aníjídáah doo .
PRED:	Place the two sons of Israel 's sons in front of the ephod at the front of the Lord 's shoulders . Aaron and his sons will lay their hands on the front of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	3437
INPUT:	Áko kwe'é nahazt'i'gi diné ła' bik'is <unk> dólééł lágo , háálá ákódaat'íinii Bóhólníihii atíbidoolíłígíí t'áá bítséedi hazhó'ó bee nihida'ayeelnii' ni' .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone mislead your relatives , for the Lord has given you this message from his own eyes .
GOLD:	Never harm or cheat a fellow believer in this matter by violating his wife , for the Lord avenges all such sins , as we have solemnly warned you before .

ID:	3438
INPUT:	shich'į' naho'diilnáago , ti'hwiisénii'ii ałdó' nił bééhózin . Ántiyakgi áádóó Aikóniyamgi índa Lístragi atíshi'dool'įįd , índa atíshi'dil'į́įgo bich'į' ha'iisisniidii baa ákoninizį́į́' ! Nidi éí t'áá ałtso bits'ąą Bóhólníihii yisdáshííłtį́ .
PRED:	When I was preaching to Antioch of Syria , Paul and Barnabas learned that Paul had done to Antioch of Syria and Iconium . But the Lord had rescued me from Antioch of Syria . But he saved me from the Lord .
GOLD:	You know how much persecution and suffering I have endured . You know all about how I was persecuted in Antioch , Iconium , and Lystra — but the Lord rescued me from all of it .

ID:	3439
INPUT:	áádóó ałtį́į́' nishtł'ajígo bee dah yítį́įłii nílák'ee habízhdeeshhałgo nish'náájí k'aa' dah yíjihii nílák'ee hadoołdas .
PRED:	I will crush the bow of his bow ; I will shoot them down with a sharp arrow at his right hand .
GOLD:	I will knock the bow from your left hand and the arrows from your right hand , and I will leave you helpless .

ID:	3440
INPUT:	Chahałheeł índa anoonééł bichaha'oh bii' diné doo ákwii ádajooníiłiit'áá hó nídazhdidoot'į́įłgi t'áá há ádin .
PRED:	They will live in darkness , and they will live in darkness .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	3441
INPUT:	Áádóó ádabidi'dooldįįłígíí doo t'áá ákogi át'éii ałtah ádaat'éii yee yina'alo'go doogááł . Háálá t'áá aaníinii ayóó'ádayó'níi dooleeł yę́ę doo deiniizį́į́'góó biniinaa doo yisdáhidookah da .
PRED:	But if they are not guilty , they will not be punished because of their sins , for they will not be saved .
GOLD:	He will use every kind of evil deception to fool those on their way to destruction , because they refuse to love and accept the truth that would save them .

ID:	3442
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Grieves over Jerusalem

ID:	3443
INPUT:	Áko éí yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Gálilii kéyah biyi'gi Názareth hoolyéédóó Jesus jiníyáago John éí Jórdan tooh biyi' tó yee hóósį́į́' .
PRED:	About that time Jesus returned from Galilee , where John had baptized the Jordan River .
GOLD:	One day Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee , and John baptized him in the Jordan River .

ID:	3444
INPUT:	Nidi nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Christ nihiBóhólníihii nilį́įgo nihił dadiyin doo . Biniyé nihił chodahoo'ínígíí éí diné ła'da yíndanihídíłkidgo bee bił nídahodoołnihígíí áłahjį' bee hasht'e'áda'díínółzin , ákondi a'ohgo ída'díínółzingo índa Diyin God dadíínóhsingo bił dahołne' .
PRED:	But if you do n't know that the Lord our God is from our own heart , do n't let anyone be able to teach you what he tells you . Instead , you do n't know how to do .
GOLD:	Instead , you must worship Christ as Lord of your life . And if someone asks about your hope as a believer , always be ready to explain it .

ID:	3445
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bá ádaaht'į́įgo diné bi'óhólnííh t'áá ałtso bídahwíínółnííh : alą́ąjį' naat'áanii nilíinii , éí ts'ídá aláahdi nant'áii bi'óhólníihii bídahwíínółnííh ,
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the Lord , all people who fear him in charge of the king .
GOLD:	For the Lord 's sake , submit to all human authority — whether the king as head of state ,

ID:	3446
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ;
PRED:	He brought a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , which equals twenty pounds of choice flour moistened with olive oil . This is the sanctuary shekel , which equals twenty gerahs .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	3447
INPUT:	Deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí áńdí'niihgo , Háháa , ní nahalin łeh . Doo nádíinágháníjį' anaa' dandzinii yiłchin ! Siláo binanit'a'í dadilwoshgoáádóó siláo ałt'ááh yijahgo yidiits'į́į́h .
PRED:	The blast of the ram 's horn , shouting , “ Listen to us ! Tell us , ‘ Listen to the battle ! '
GOLD:	It snorts at the sound of the horn.It senses the battle in the distance.It quivers at the captain 's commands and the noise of battle .

ID:	3448
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Sádam áádóó Gomárah kin haal'áii índa binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí atélyaa yę́ęgi át'éego diné ła' índa ba'áłchínída doo ła' ákwii kééhat'į́į da doo .
PRED:	And the Lord said , “ Sodom , Sodom , Sodom , Gomorrah , and Gomorrah will live in ruins .
GOLD:	It will be like the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrahand their neighboring towns , ” says the Lord. “ No one will live there ; no one will inhabit it .

ID:	3449
INPUT:	Iiná bá honít'i'ígíí shił bééhózingo áshiinilaa ; honílǫ́ǫgi t'áá íiyisí bee ił hózhóonii hólǫ́ ; ninish'náájí baa honeeninii hólǫ́ǫgo ahóyéel'á .
PRED:	He has made me a good life ; he has given me his honor . His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	3450
INPUT:	Bee nihoyíní'áanii baa honisą́ągo shidziilgo áshi'dólne' laanaa !
PRED:	And if you obey my decrees , he has made me strong and strengthened me .
GOLD:	Oh , that my actions would consistentlyreflect your decrees !

ID:	3451
INPUT:	Binaagóó k'os índa chahałheeł hólǫ́ . T'áá ákogi át'éii áádóó doo haada yit'éii bee bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bohoníłdzilgo si'ą́ .
PRED:	His throne is dark , and his throne will never be filled with justice .
GOLD:	Dark clouds surround him.Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne .

ID:	3452
INPUT:	Áko yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Diyin God nilíinii bich'į' łikání halchinii náádayiiłniih dooleeł áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii índa biye'ké bida'iina' yá sodadilzin doo .
PRED:	Then I will praise God from heaven and his sons , and they will pray for their sons and daughters .
GOLD:	Then they will be able to offer acceptable sacrifices to the God of heaven and pray for the welfare of the king and his sons .

ID:	3453
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii joosdląąd , áko t'áá ákogi ájít'éego há haadzíí' .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ The Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	And Abram believed the Lord , and the Lord counted him as righteous because of his faith .

ID:	3454
INPUT:	nihił dahadlee' , áko nihada'doodił ; le'dółt'e'go daneel'ą́ągo áádóó níłk'íbí'<unk> nii'go áádóó yaa yisdzidgo índa wó'ąha<unk> go bił áłká dasoołzaaz doo . Háálá t'áá ła' bá ída'nóoł'ąąd yę́ęgi ánéelt'e'go nihá ínídadí'nóol'ąął .
PRED:	Be sure that you will be free , and you will be able to eat it . For if you are defiled , you will be able to wear it up for a little while you are defiled .
GOLD:	Give , and you will receive . Your gift will return to you in full — pressed down , shaken together to make room for more , running over , and poured into your lap . The amount you give will determine the amount you get back . ”

ID:	3455
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ła' ch'il jidoonishgo biniyé halgaigóó ajííyáago ch'il t'áá bíni'dii da'ítł'óhígíí bik'ízhníyá ; éí bąąhdóó nidilkal yiyííbį́į'go bi'éénééz hadeezbingo néiníłtsoozgo abézhígíí yiih yiyííłgizh , nidi éí ádaat'éhígíí doo hoł béédahózin da .
PRED:	So someone went to the field and found it to be cut off into the field and cut it off . But if it had been cut off , it would be cut off from the threshing floor and cut it off .
GOLD:	One of the young men went out into the field to gather herbs and came back with a pocketful of wild gourds . He shredded them and put them into the pot without realizing they were poisonous .

ID:	3456
INPUT:	Jesus yéego ádił hadzoodzolgo ájíní , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé díí k'ad ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii hadeintá ? T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Díí k'ad ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii doo ła' bá ádoolníił da .
PRED:	Jesus said , “ What do you want ? ” And he asked him , “ I tell you the truth about this miraculous sign : I tell you the truth , no one will ever be able to tell you the truth . ”
GOLD:	When he heard this , he sighed deeply in his spirit and said , “ Why do these people keep demanding a miraculous sign ? I tell you the truth , I will not give this generation any such sign . ”

ID:	3457
INPUT:	Ákohgo Sámuel áhodííniid , Át'ahálo , tł'éédą́ą́' Bóhólníihii áshidííniidígíí bee nił hodeeshnih . Áádóó áhozhdííniid , Haa'íyee' , baa hólne' .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to him , “ Go and tell me what the Lord has said . ” So Samuel said , “ Let 's tell me what I am going to do . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ Stop ! Listen to what the Lord told me last night ! ” “ What did he tell you ? ” Saul asked .

ID:	3458
INPUT:	Áko ádíshní , Hasbídí nahalingo shit'a' hólǫ́ǫ doo yę́ę , áko éí bee yóó'adeesht'ahgo háadida hanáshyį́įh doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then I said , “ You are my own wings , and I will never rest . ”
GOLD:	Oh , that I had wings like a dove ; then I would fly away and rest !

ID:	3459
INPUT:	Díí lą́ą : Filístiya dine'é éí binanit'a'í ashdlalt'éego yił bikin hadaas'á áádóó Kéínan dine'é t'áá ałtso kéyahgi kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' áádóó Sáídan dine'é índa Háíva dine'é Dził Lébanangóó éí Dził Béí<unk> si'ánídóó Héímath kin haal'áii yah ahóót'i'jį' kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	These were the five kings of the Philistines who lived in the hill country of Canaan , along with the Canaanites , the Canaanites , and all the other nations of the hill country of Lebanon .
GOLD:	These are the nations : the Philistines ( those living under the five Philistine rulers ) , all the Canaanites , the Sidonians , and the Hivites living in the mountains of Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon to Lebo-hamath .

ID:	3460
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii kóní , Jerúsalem baa a'áhí nídínéesdzįįł . T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Shikin ninádoot'ááł áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áii bee ída'neel'ąąhí bee bídí'nóol'ąął .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The people of Jerusalem will be given to me , and Jerusalem will be given to the city of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I have returned to show mercy to Jerusalem . My Temple will be rebuilt , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and measurements will be taken for the reconstruction of Jerusalem . '

ID:	3461
INPUT:	Da'agizhígíí t'ah táá' nídeezid hadziihgo doo nahałtingóó ádeeshłííł , áko t'ááłáhígo kin haal'áhígíí bik'i nahałtingo náánáłahgo kin haal'áhígíí éí doo bik'ijį' nahałtingóó ádeeshłííł . Kéyah t'ááłáhígo bik'i nahodoołtį́į́ł ; náánáłahgoígíí éí doo bik'ijį' nahałtingóó biniinaa hodoogą́ą́ł .
PRED:	“ The third day I will teach the third year of the purification ceremony , and I will make a city of refuge for the city of refuge , a city that comes from the city .
GOLD:	“ I kept the rain from fallingwhen your crops needed it the most.I sent rain on one townbut withheld it from another.Rain fell on one field , while another field withered away .

ID:	3462
INPUT:	BiYe' ayóó'áyó'níinii biniit'aa bibee ajooba' ayóó át'éii yee nihik'ijisdli'go nánihidiinilígíí bee baa dahwii'niih doo .
PRED:	May God 's grace be merciful , and he has blessed us with his Son .
GOLD:	So we praise God for the glorious grace he has poured out on us who belong to his dear Son .

ID:	3463
INPUT:	Nihił yá'át'ééh daats'í dooleeł , éí doodaii' , doo daats'í nihił yá'át'éeh da dooleeł , nidi bich'į' dandeel'a'ígíí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ánínígíí bik'eh dahoniil'į́į doo , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God ánínígíí bik'eh dahoniil'į́įgo nihá yá'át'éeh dooleeł .
PRED:	But if you do n't want to do good or good or bad , it will be good to the Lord our God , and we will obey him .
GOLD:	Whether we like it or not , we will obey the Lord our God to whom we are sending you with our plea . For if we obey him , everything will turn out well for us . ”

ID:	3464
INPUT:	Nidi há nidaal'a'í hwíighahjį' niikaigo hach'į' hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , Nihizhé'é nílíinii , Diyin God yá halne'ii t'áadoo le'é ayóó át'éii ádíílííł niłníigoósh doo ádíílíił da ? Tá'ádidíígisgo nídíídzih , niłnínígíí yee' doo nantł'a da .
PRED:	But the servants came to him and said , “ Do n't you call us a prophet ? Do n't you say to your father ? Do n't you say , ‘ Do n't you talk to you ? '
GOLD:	But his officers tried to reason with him and said , “ Sir , if the prophet had told you to do something very difficult , would n't you have done it ? So you should certainly obey him when he says simply , ‘ Go and wash and be cured ! ' ”

ID:	3465
INPUT:	éí yoołkááł ałtso bíighah da'azlį́į'go níjookah , nít'éé' ashkii Jesus t'áá Jerúsalemdi naagháá lá . Jóseph índa Mary éí doo bił bééhózin da ,
PRED:	When they returned to Jerusalem , Mary stayed in Jerusalem , and Mary knew that he had no son .
GOLD:	After the celebration was over , they started home to Nazareth , but Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem . His parents did n't miss him at first ,

ID:	3466
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii nant'áago tsosts'id náhááh góne' , ashdla' yiziłígíí binih Ézra éí Jerúsalemgi níyá .
PRED:	On the seventh year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , during the fifth year of King Ezra 's reign .
GOLD:	Ezra arrived in Jerusalem in August of that year .

ID:	3467
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' bik'eh hoogáałii ádá ádeiilyaa ; éí t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh nihiDiyin God bikin si'ą́ągi oonishígíí bá shékel wolyéii ałníí' bich'į'dóó anídahii'nił doo ,
PRED:	We will teach us the regulations of our God , and we will be based on the Sabbath day of our God .
GOLD:	“ In addition , we promise to obey the command to pay the annual Temple tax of one-eighth of an ounce of silver for the care of the Temple of our God .

ID:	3468
INPUT:	T'áá éí bijį́ ch'é'étiin gónaa naní'áii yáátis hijeehígíí índa bindanit'a'í dabikin bii' t'áá na'níle'dii áhoonííł áádóó na'adlo' hadadeezbingo ádayiilaii atídeeshłííł .
PRED:	“ On that day I will break the walls of the sky , the kings of the sky , and I will destroy every nation . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I will punish those who participate in pagan worship ceremonies , and those who fill their masters ' houses with violence and deceit .

ID:	3469
INPUT:	Áádóó siláo neeznádiin yilt'éego yinanit'a'í ła' bá naal'a'í ayóogo bił nilínígíí , éí daatsaahgo dadootsaałjį' ahoolzhiizh lá .
PRED:	The captain of the guard was very old when he died , he was dead .
GOLD:	At that time the highly valued slave of a Roman officer was sick and near death .

ID:	3470
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí doo yá'ádaashóonii ayóó át'éego bee nihokáa'gi tsi'adeesdee'go áádóó bił ádaat'íinii t'áá ałtso bijéí yee t'ááłáhígi át'éego bąąhági át'éii yaa nitsídaakeesgo yoo'į́ .
PRED:	The Lord detests the wickedness of the wicked , and he sees every kind of sin .
GOLD:	The Lord observed the extent of human wickedness on the earth , and he saw that everything they thought or imagined was consistently and totally evil .

ID:	3471
INPUT:	Éí'ai kin haal'áii yisnáago ábi'disdįįd
PRED:	The town of Ai
GOLD:	The Israelites Defeat Ai

ID:	3472
INPUT:	Tó doo nahasdzáán bił náádidoolkǫǫł da biniyé bich'ą́ą́h adínízoh , áko doo bilááhgóó anáázdoołhał da .
PRED:	The earth will not destroy the earth ; it will not be divided into the sea .
GOLD:	Then you set a firm boundary for the seas , so they would never again cover the earth .

ID:	3473
INPUT:	Éí diné éédzíi'ii níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi nidanohłóosgo t'áá ałtso dahodiizts'ą́ą'ii éí hatsii'káa'gi dah dadidoolnihgo t'áá dah oonééł nít'éé' hoł nidazdoołniił .
PRED:	And everyone who has been taken away from the camp of the camp will be taken away from the camp , and they will kill him .
GOLD:	“ Take the blasphemer outside the camp , and tell all those who heard the curse to lay their hands on his head . Then let the entire community stone him to death .

ID:	3474
INPUT:	ákónít'į́įgo agha'ii'níiłii nahalingo té'é'į́ nik'i hwiidooleeł , áádóó té'é'į́ éí diné bee na'abaahii neijaahgo haatįįh yíyá nahalin doo .
PRED:	But if you are thieves , you will be like a thief , you will be like a thief .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	3475
INPUT:	Áádóó Jerúsalemgi dine'é t'áá át'é , naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó diné doo nídanilyéesii áádóó t'áadoo le'é dayiichįįhii índa da'atsidii éí t'áá neeznáadi míilgo deisnáago ayiizh'eezh ; doo ła' t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nidaakai da , t'áá hazhó'ó éí kéyahdóó a'ohgo ádaat'éii t'éiyá t'áá da'ákǫ́ǫ́ .
PRED:	And all the people of Jerusalem , the men of Jerusalem , the men of Jerusalem , who had been killed and killed . They were only one of them in the land .
GOLD:	King Nebuchadnezzar took all of Jerusalem captive , including all the commanders and the best of the soldiers , craftsmen , and artisans — 10,000 in all . Only the poorest people were left in the land .

ID:	3476
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago dį́į́' náhááh góne' Bóhólníihii kót'éego Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord during the fourth year of King Jehoiakim of Judah . He said ,
GOLD:	During the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king in Judah , the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :

ID:	3477
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Sálaman yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Solomon ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave this message to Solomon :

ID:	3478
INPUT:	Bada'áłchíní doo bits'ąą dadíníil'į́įł da , nidi Bóhólníihii bee baa ha'niihii áádóó bibee adziilii índa naanish ayóó ádaat'éii yaa naayáhígíí akéédę́ę́' hanínááhinoot'į́įłii bee bił nidahodiilnih .
PRED:	“ Get away from your children , but do n't let us tell the greatness of the Lord .
GOLD:	We will not hide these truths from our children ; we will tell the next generationabout the glorious deeds of the Lord , about his power and his mighty wonders .

ID:	3479
INPUT:	Nidibé yázhí biką'ii ła' binááhaí hadaałt'éii ; dibé éí doodaii' tł'ízí bitahdę́ę́' nídidoohdzį́į́s .
PRED:	“ Take a male lamb or a male goat , or a male goat for a flock .
GOLD:	The animal you select must be a one-year-old male , either a sheep or a goat , with no defects .

ID:	3480
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii bikin si'ánígíí bii' yódí t'óó ahayóí hólǫ́ , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii bich'į' i'iideełígíí éí ach'į' nahwii'ná bił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The godly are in the house of the godly , but the wicked are filled with trouble .
GOLD:	There is treasure in the house of the godly , but the earnings of the wicked bring trouble .

ID:	3481
INPUT:	Áádóó Páílat éí aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa diné áłah silį́'ígíí áyidííniid , Díí diné yee ádąąh dah hast'áanii doo ła' bá shił bééhoozin da .
PRED:	So Pilate asked the leading priests and the high priest , “ Do n't know these things ? ”
GOLD:	Pilate turned to the leading priests and to the crowd and said , “ I find nothing wrong with this man ! ”

ID:	3482
INPUT:	Bááh ályaaígíí diné bichaan bee niłt'eesgo binááł nánídį́įh doo .
PRED:	“ You must eat the meat of food , and it must eat it .
GOLD:	Prepare and eat this food as you would barley cakes . While all the people are watching , bake it over a fire using dried human dung as fuel and then eat the bread . ”

ID:	3483
INPUT:	Bijéí yídin nilíinii baa dííní'ą́ , áádóó yókeedii t'áadoo bits'ąą t'ą́ą́' íinilaa da . Síilah .
PRED:	Do n't abandon your heart ; do n't let them rescue you from your lips .
GOLD:	For you have given him his heart 's desire ; you have withheld nothing he requested.Interlude

ID:	3484
INPUT:	Áko Paul áádóó yił yikahígíí <unk> dóó bił dah náá'dii'éelgo Pérgagi Pamfíliya kéyahdi yíkai . Áádóó John hats'ą́ą́' dah diiyáago Jerúsalemgóó anáádzá ,
PRED:	So Paul went to Antioch of Syria and went to the region of Canaan and went to Jerusalem . Then they returned to Jerusalem and returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Paul and his companions then left Paphos by ship for Pamphylia , landing at the port town of Perga . There John Mark left them and returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	3485
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii náádoodááł
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The Hope of the Resurrection

ID:	3486
INPUT:	Háálá Jesus Christ atł'ááh nástł'inii nilį́įgo ábi'diilyaa . Áko diné ła'da atł'ááh nástł'inii náánáłahgo át'éii doo hanáájótł'in át'ée da .
PRED:	For Christ is the foundation of the foundation of the world , and no one can stand in its foundations .
GOLD:	For no one can lay any foundation other than the one we already have — Jesus Christ .

ID:	3487
INPUT:	Samériya kéyahdóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii doo hóshkał yaa nidaakaigo yiiłtsą́ . Béíyal diyin bidi'níinii yinahjį' dahoolne'go shidine'é da'asiihgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	The people of Samaria did n't say , “ They have made my calamity for Baal . They have defiled my people from Baal . ”
GOLD:	“ I saw that the prophets of Samaria were terribly evil , for they prophesied in the name of Baaland led my people of Israel into sin .

ID:	3488
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , t'áá Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí naaltsoos biyi'dóó yaa ííłta'ígíí t'áá át'é ánínígi át'éego díí kéyah nahós'a'gi índa ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí bik'ijį' doo yá'át'éehii bi'deeshnih ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The king of Judah have sent this message to the people of Judah and the land of Judah .
GOLD:	‘ This is what the Lord says : I am going to bring disaster on this city and its people . All the words written in the scroll that the king of Judah has read will come true .

ID:	3489
INPUT:	áko éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó Jew dine'é kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá ałtso , Mózes bina'nitin bits'áhóhkáahgo , niha'áłchíní t'áadoo bąąh nídahinilgishí , índa Ízrel dine'é bi'é'él'į' t'áadoo bik'eh dayínóhkáhí , bidiní , ha'níigo bee naa hóóne' .
PRED:	So you must teach the Jewish leaders of Israel to teach them to teach them all of their children . They must teach them to follow the tradition of Moses and to follow the tradition of their tradition .
GOLD:	But the Jewish believers here in Jerusalem have been told that you are teaching all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to turn their backs on the laws of Moses . They 've heard that you teach them not to circumcise their children or follow other Jewish customs .

ID:	3490
INPUT:	Dooládó' shił bééhózingo Diyin God bik'íjóya' laanaa da ; dah sidáadi <unk> sha' laanaa da .
PRED:	“ Oh , that God could n't get it , but I could n't see him .
GOLD:	If only I knew where to find God , I would go to his court .

ID:	3491
INPUT:	Jó , łį́į́' nihik'eh hół'į́į doo biniyé biza'iilt'ihgo bee bits'íís neidlo' .
PRED:	Look at us , we are trying to obey your body .
GOLD:	We can make a large horse go wherever we want by means of a small bit in its mouth .

ID:	3492
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é adooyį́į́ł biniyé t'áá ałtso yindaalnish , nidi doo yee hwiih daaleeh da .
PRED:	But all the earth are allowed to eat it , but they do n't have enough food to eat .
GOLD:	All people spend their lives scratching for food , but they never seem to have enough .

ID:	3493
INPUT:	Dibé naakaidóó dibé agháago yá'át'éehii bits'ádííłtéełgo ásaah díínił , áko biyaagi ts'in éí chizh bił dididííłjah , áádóó ts'in ła'ígíí ásaah dííniłgo nizhónígo dííł bish .
PRED:	“ Go and take the shepherd of the sheep and cut it into pieces of wood , and cut it into a clay pot . ”
GOLD:	Use only the best sheep from the flock , and heap fuel on the fire beneath the pot.Bring the pot to a boil , and cook the bones along with the meat .

ID:	3494
INPUT:	Diné bahojoobá'íii áádóó diné ade áhósinii díí yee ahéédiit'ash : éí t'áá ájíłah Bóhólníihii hoł ch'í'diiłdlaad .
PRED:	The poor and poor are open , and the eyes of the poor are called to the Lord .
GOLD:	The poor and the oppressor have this in common — the Lord gives sight to the eyes of both .

ID:	3495
INPUT:	Kót'éego David éí Rííhob biye' Hadadíízer bik'eh jideesdlį́į́' ; éí Zóbah kéyahgi aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; hasiláo bił joonéełgo Yufréítiiz tooh nílíníjį' chánahgo bee ádíhwííníshníih doo jinízin .
PRED:	So David captured the army of Gilead , and he reigned in the Euphrates River in the south side of the Euphrates River in the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	David also destroyed the forces of Hadadezer son of Rehob , king of Zobah , when Hadadezer marched out to strengthen his control along the Euphrates River .

ID:	3496
INPUT:	Ła'da diné náánáła' diné jiisxíinii t'áá aaníí hodi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	Anyone who kills another person must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Anyone who takes another person 's life must be put to death .

ID:	3497
INPUT:	Bi'ana'í danilíinii baa honónééł laanaa nízinii ákódaalyaajį' bik'ee doo bił yée' da doo áádóó bijéí bidziil ályaa .
PRED:	Do n't let them be afraid of your enemies ; let them be afraid of your enemies .
GOLD:	They are confident and fearlessand can face their foes triumphantly .

ID:	3498
INPUT:	Jéíkab dine'é bá aląąjį' nisoozíinii , t'áá éí Ízrel dine'é binanit'a'í danohłíinii , éí doo haada yit'éii dajiinohłáii áádóó aheełt'éego baa nitsáhákeesii t'áá ałtso áts'ą́ąjį' kódaoł'íinii , díí deísółts'ą́ą́' , nihidishní .
PRED:	“ Listen to the elders of Jacob , the leaders of Israel , the leaders of Israel , and those who do not listen to what is right .
GOLD:	Listen to me , you leaders of Israel ! You hate justice and twist all that is right .

ID:	3499
INPUT:	éí eda'alyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii áádóó dił áádóó bizák'ídadii'nii'ii t'áadoo daohsání , índa na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá bits'ą́ąjį' ádanoht'é . Éí bits'ą́ąjį' ádanoht'éego yá'át'éehgi ádaahníił dooleeł . Diyin God nihił hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	“ Do not defile yourselves by worshiping idols , and you are defiled by worshiping other gods . You will be defiled by worshiping other gods . Then you will be ashamed of God .
GOLD:	You must abstain from eating food offered to idols , from consuming blood or the meat of strangled animals , and from sexual immorality . If you do this , you will do well . Farewell . ”

ID:	3500
INPUT:	Nidi ch'ikę́ę́h éí doo haada dadoohłíił da ; hoł oodzí'ígíí biniinaa hodi'yoolyéełgi doo bą́ą́h ílį́į da ; jó , díí áhóót'įįdígíí éí diné bikwá'ásiní yik'iilwodgo yiyiisxínígíí bił ałk'eh ,
PRED:	But if the woman does n't let her go to death , it is not a virgin to be cut off . This man 's murder .
GOLD:	Do nothing to the young woman ; she has committed no crime worthy of death . She is as innocent as a murder victim .

ID:	3501
INPUT:	Díí éí kin hadaas'áii nideet'ánígíí Ízrel dine'é t'áá a łtso bá áádóó bitahgóó dé'éyóní t'óó átsééd kéédahat'ínígíí bá ádaat'é , áko doo t'áá ákónéehgo diné yiyiisxínígíí ákǫ́ǫ́ nídidoolwoł áádóó áłah ná'ádleehgi doogáałgo haa náhódóot'įįłjį' dił biniinaa k'ééhodidoodlíiłii doo hodiyoołhéeł da .
PRED:	“ This is a permanent law for all the people of Israel and foreigners living among the foreigners living among the people of Israel . They will go to death , and they will go to death . ”
GOLD:	These cities were set apart for all the Israelites as well as the foreigners living among them . Anyone who accidentally killed another person could take refuge in one of these cities . In this way , they could escape being killed in revenge prior to standing trial before the local assembly .

ID:	3502
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é éí kédaayahgóó tahwiidínéeshkałgo a ł'ąą dine'é bitahgóó tahwiidínéeshkał .
PRED:	I will scatter the people of Egypt , and I will scatter them among the Egyptians .
GOLD:	I will scatter the Egyptians to many lands throughout the world .

ID:	3503
INPUT:	David biye'ké Hííbran kin haal'áagi nidabi'diizhchį́
PRED:	David 's sons
GOLD:	David 's Sons Born in Hebron

ID:	3504
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' Hérad , naat'áaniishchíín jílíinii , Jesus baa hozdiizts'ą́ą'go
PRED:	When Herod heard that Jesus was teaching , he was the Messiah .
GOLD:	When Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , heard about Jesus ,

ID:	3505
INPUT:	Diné doo áhályáanii aizdoo'į́įgo niyáháłtéehgo doo beełt'ée da , áádóó t'ah nááyówehígo naat'áanii biyooch'íidgo doo beełt'ée da .
PRED:	A wise person is naked , and no one has ever done anything else .
GOLD:	Eloquent words are not fitting for a fool ; even less are lies fitting for a ruler .

ID:	3506
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yóó'anídadoh'áahgo diyin bidi'níinii doo béédahózinii dadíínóhsin ládą́ą́' , ákohgo nihik'ijį' dooleeł , áádóó atínihił'į́įgo nanihídoołdįįł ; yá'át'éhígi ánihiilaadóó bik'ijį' ánihidoołdįįł .
PRED:	When you love the Lord your God , you will know that he will destroy you and destroy them . Then you will destroy them , and you will destroy them .
GOLD:	If you abandon the Lord and serve other gods , he will turn against you and destroy you , even though he has been so good to you . ”

ID:	3507
INPUT:	Áko hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , John Tó Yee Asį́įhii yę́ę át'į́ , nidi ła' éí , Iiláíjah át'į́ , daaní ; náánáła' éiyá , Ałk'idą́ą́' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yę́ę ła' daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náádiidzáago át'į́ , daaní .
PRED:	Then they told John the Baptist , “ John the Baptist is the Baptist ! ” But some of the Baptist said , “ Elijah is the resurrection of the dead . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , ” they replied , “ some say John the Baptist , some say Elijah , and others say you are one of the other ancient prophets risen from the dead . ”

ID:	3508
INPUT:	Áko diné áłah silį́'ígíí ch'íneelkaadgo yah ajííyáago , at'ééd yę́ę bíla' jiiłtsoodgo nídii'na' .
PRED:	So the man jumped up and went out to the house of the man 's hand and grabbed it .
GOLD:	After the crowd was put outside , however , Jesus went in and took the girl by the hand , and she stood up !

ID:	3509
INPUT:	Áádóó Romegi niikaigo , [ siláo binanit'a'í éí awáalyaaí danilínígíí siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í yeinínil , ] nidi Paul éí t'áá sahdii siláo baa áhályánígíí yił bighan doogo baa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	So Paul went to Rome at Rome , and he sent Paul to the guard the prisoners of the guard .
GOLD:	When we arrived in Rome , Paul was permitted to have his own private lodging , though he was guarded by a soldier .

ID:	3510
INPUT:	Áko éí dinéhígíí hak'ijį' deeshłeełgo hadine'é bits'ą́ąjį' hodiyeeshxééł , háálá ha'áłchíní ła' Mólek diyin bidi'níinii bich'į' náájiisnii'go shihodiyingo haz'ánígíí jííłchxǫ' áádóó shízhi' diyinígíí doo dílzingóó ájiilaa .
PRED:	So I will send him away from the camp , for I will kill them because they have defiled my holy name . They have defiled my holy name and holy name .
GOLD:	I myself will turn against them and cut them off from the community , because they have defiled my sanctuary and brought shame on my holy name by offering their children to Molech .

ID:	3511
INPUT:	Azhą́ bik'isóó bitahgóó t'óó ahayóí bineest'ą' nidi , ha'a'aahdę́ę́' dooyoł ; éí honoojíídę́ę́' Bóhólníihii níyolgo íidoolííł áádóó tó háálíinii náhodooltsih índa tó ha'niłhoshii náhooltseii doo áádóó naalye'é da'ílíinii ałtso hats'ą́ą́' néididoolééł .
PRED:	But many of his brothers will grow up , and the river will dry up , for the Lord will pull them into the wilderness , and the water will dry up .
GOLD:	Ephraim was the most fruitful of all his brothers , but the east wind — a blast from the Lord — will arise in the desert.All their flowing springs will run dry , and all their wells will disappear.Every precious thing they ownwill be plundered and carried away .

ID:	3512
INPUT:	Átséédą́ą́' Jew dine'é binahagha' bik'ehgo hinishnáá nít'éé' yę́ę , áádóó t'áá ii' shíłjaa'ígi bee t'áá shizááká Diyin God dayoodlání áłah nádleehii atésh'į́įgo ádeeshdįįł nisin nít'é'ígíí baa dahosidoots'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	I have heard that I am determined to destroy the Jews , and I will destroy the churches in the church .
GOLD:	You know what I was like when I followed the Jewish religion — how I violently persecuted God 's church . I did my best to destroy it .

ID:	3513
INPUT:	Dziil nihigháanii áádóó nihiyéél dandaazii t'áá ánółtso hágo , shaa hohkááh , áko háádaałyį́įhgo ánihideeshłííł .
PRED:	If you are a stranger , I will make you a burden of food , and you will eat it .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	3514
INPUT:	Áko diné bitahgi t'áá hazhó'ó haa saad aghą́ . Ła' éí , Diné yá'át'éehii nilį́ , daaní , náádaała' éí , Dooda , éíyee' t'áá ádzaagóó diné iinii'áahii nilį́ , daaní .
PRED:	Some people say , “ We are a good person who plants good seed . We say , ‘ We are not a person who does n't have a good life . '
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	3515
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáłígíí biyi' bidine'é tídadiilyaii yik'i da'deezdizgo áádóó adadeeznehígíí náyííłdzíi'go tł'éhonaa'éí éí jį́honaa'éí nahalingo adiníłdíin doo , áádóó jį́honaa'éí bee adinídínígíí éí tsosts'id jį́ adinídíín bíighahdi ahą́ą́h nániiláago adiníłdíin doo .
PRED:	On the day of the sun , the sun will be covered with the sun , and the sun will shine on the sun .
GOLD:	The moon will be as bright as the sun , and the sun will be seven times brighter — like the light of seven days in one ! So it will be when the Lord begins to heal his people and cure the wounds he gave them .

ID:	3516
INPUT:	bik'eh hodeesdlį́į́' , áko yá'ąąshdi doo bá haz'ą́ą da hazlį́į́' .
PRED:	He breathed his instructions , and there was no place for heaven .
GOLD:	And the dragon lost the battle , and he and his angels were forced out of heaven .

ID:	3517
INPUT:	Áko hwíídíiską́ą́dóó náhást'éidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	He lived another years old , and he died .
GOLD:	Enosh lived 905 years , and then he died .

ID:	3518
INPUT:	T'áá háiida shitsį' jiyánígíí áádóó shidił jidlánígíí éí shiyi' hojílǫ́ , áádóó bidiníná hayi' honishłǫ́ .
PRED:	Anyone who believes in me is my blood and blood is my blood .
GOLD:	Anyone who eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me , and I in him .

ID:	3519
INPUT:	T'áá háiida éí tséhígíí bik'ijį' ajíígo'ígíí nihizhdooltǫǫł , nidi t'áá háiida hak'ijį' naalts'idígíí ch'íhodoołk'ááł .
PRED:	Anyone who attacks it will be broken , and it will be broken , and it will be broken .
GOLD:	Everyone who stumbles over that stone will be broken to pieces , and it will crush anyone it falls on . ”

ID:	3520
INPUT:	Hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii náánáła' dadoohts'į́į́h . Diné ła' kéyah bee bóhólníihii jílį́įgo , ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'izhdííláago tsé binaa ahénátł'ingo ájiilaa , áádóó ákwii ch'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizh dooleełgi hahodziiznil , índa bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí hajíítł'ingo nízaadgóó yaa'áago ájiilaa , áko ch'il na'atł'o'ii yaa ádahalyą́ą dooleełii baa dzisįįdgo náánáła' kéyahgóó ajííyá .
PRED:	“ Listen to this message : Listen to this message from the king : “ Listen to this message from the vineyard of a vineyard , a large crop that has been planted in the vineyards and grapes . Then he broke it into the vineyards and olive groves .
GOLD:	“ Now listen to another story . A certain landowner planted a vineyard , built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	3521
INPUT:	Díí táyi' nidaaldeehii t'áá ałtso kódaat'éhígíí daohsą́ : bit'a' dahólónígíí índa bikágí ałk'i dadoo<unk> hígíí éí daahsą́ .
PRED:	“ You must eat all these things that are ceremonially unclean because you are defiled by eating and unclean .
GOLD:	“ Of all the marine animals , you may eat whatever has both fins and scales .

ID:	3522
INPUT:	Nít'éé' t'áá bí yee nahas'áanii ła' yinahjį' hak'i dahodii'ą́ą́ lágo shił bééhoozin , nidi biniinaa hodiyoolyéełgi , éí doodago biniinaa yah ahodi'doolt'eełgi t'áadoo ła' bee há ha'oodzíi' da .
PRED:	So I realized that one of the law was trying to kill him , but no one could be killed . But no one would be counted like him .
GOLD:	I soon discovered the charge was something regarding their religious law — certainly nothing worthy of imprisonment or death .

ID:	3523
INPUT:	Bikáá' adání ałdó' tsin nitł'izii yee áyiilaa ; táadi ké silá áníłnééz , áádóó naaniigo t'ááłá'í ké siláádóó ná'áłníi'go áníłtéél , índa dego naakidi ké siláádóó táá' asdzoh ánízah ;
PRED:	He made the poles from acacia wood , 30 feet high and 27 inches wide , and 27 inches wide .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the table of acacia wood , 36 inches long , 18 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	3524
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ayóó át'éego deeyol , áádóó tó náádadiidáhígíí tsinaa'eeł biih yilk'oołgo tsinaa'eeł k'adę́ę tó bii' hadibin .
PRED:	As a mighty wind grew up , the wind covered the ship with a raging flood .
GOLD:	But soon a fierce storm came up . High waves were breaking into the boat , and it began to fill with water .

ID:	3525
INPUT:	Éí óola biláahgo , óola t'áá íiyisí yá'át'éehii nidzinígíí nidi , biláahgo da'ílį́ ; tsés'ná bitł'izh bits'a' bąąhdę́ę́' tsés'ná bitł'izh nidahidilch'ą́łígíí nidi biláahgo ayóó ádahalniih .
PRED:	The gold is greater than gold , but the finest gold is better than honey . It is the most sweet than honey .
GOLD:	They are more desirable than gold , even the finest gold.They are sweeter than honey , even honey dripping from the comb .

ID:	3526
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go Mózes hodiyeeshxééł niizį́į́' . Nidi Mózes éí Féro bits'ą́ą́' yóó'ajoolwodgo Mídiyan kéyahgi kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' , áko tó hahadleeh léi'gi dzineezdá .
PRED:	When Pharaoh heard him , he went to Pharaoh and told him , “ Listen to Pharaoh , ” he told him , “ and he was buried in the land of Midian .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	3527
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é bich'é'é t'óó haa yáhásinígi áho'di'doolnííł ; náhookǫsdę́ę'go dine'é bílák'ee hodi'dooltééł .
PRED:	The Egyptians will be taken away from Egypt , and the north will be taken away from the north .
GOLD:	Egypt will be humiliated ; she will be handed over to people from the north . ”

ID:	3528
INPUT:	Nidi t'áadoo ha'át'íhída dadííniid da . Áko diné jiiłtsoodgo náábizdiisá , áádóó béézh'níłnii' .
PRED:	But he said to them , “ No one has taken his hand and put it into his hand . ” So they grabbed it .
GOLD:	When they refused to answer , Jesus touched the sick man and healed him and sent him away .

ID:	3529
INPUT:	Naalte' nahaaznii'ii nilį́į nidi Bóhólníihii háká ániihgo éí Bóhólníihii <unk> dííchidii jileeh . T'áá ákót'éego diné doo naalte' nahaaznii'ii nilíinii bíká áhodoo'niidii éí t'áá aaníí Christ yíí' yileeh .
PRED:	For we are slaves to the Lord , but we do n't belong to the Lord . And we do n't belong to Christ , just as Christ lives .
GOLD:	And remember , if you were a slave when the Lord called you , you are now free in the Lord . And if you were free when the Lord called you , you are now a slave of Christ .

ID:	3530
INPUT:	Shízhi' biniinaa sháháchį'ígíí átsé nahjį' kóshłaa , áádóó shaa ha'niihígíí biniyé ná t'ą́ą́' kwíínísin , áko doo ándeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	I have led my name to my name , so I will not destroy it . I will not destroy you .
GOLD:	Yet for my own sake and for the honor of my name , I will hold back my anger and not wipe you out .

ID:	3531
INPUT:	Áko yádiłhił biyaagi t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii áádóó yee nant'áii índa yee ayóó át'éii éí Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii bidiyį́į́' bidine'é danilíinii baa didoot'ááł ; bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii éí hool'áágóó bee bóhólníih doo áádóó bídahólníihii bá nidaal'a' doo índa bik'eh dahół'į́į dooleeł .
PRED:	Then he will rule over the heavens with all the kingdoms of the heavens and honor of the Most High . He will serve the Most High , and he will serve him forever .
GOLD:	Then the sovereignty , power , and greatness of all the kingdoms under heaven will be given to the holy people of the Most High . His kingdom will last forever , and all rulers will serve and obey him . ”

ID:	3532
INPUT:	Háálá lą'í a'ídeeł biniyé Diyin God bizaad yił tádadijeeh , ákondi nihí doo ákódeiit'į́į da ; nihí t'áádóo nídí t'áá aaníí ádeiit'į́įgo índa Diyin God dabííł'aadii daniidlį́įgo Diyin God binááł Christ binahjį' dahwiilne' .
PRED:	For we do n't believe God 's word , but we do n't know what we have done . We know that we have seen God 's message in Christ .
GOLD:	You see , we are not like the many hucksters who preach for personal profit . We preach the word of God with sincerity and with Christ 's authority , knowing that God is watching us .

ID:	3533
INPUT:	Háálá shi'dizhchį́į́dóó tseebíí jį́į́ góne' shąąh náhineeshgizh , áádóó Ízrel dine'é ahoolchíiłii nishłį́ , Bénjamin bidine'íígíí nishłį́ , índa dashizhé'é yę́ę Hííbrew dine'é danilį́į́ nít'éé' , áko shí ałdó' Hííbrew dine'é nishłį́ . Jew dine'é bibee haz'áanii k'ehgo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é bił haz'ą́ą́jí éí Férisii nishłį́į́ nít'éé' ,
PRED:	On the eighth day I was born in the eighth day of the tribe of Israel . I am the tribe of Benjamin , the Hebrews , the Hebrews , and Benjamin . I am the Jewish leaders of Israel . I am the Hebrews .
GOLD:	I was circumcised when I was eight days old . I am a pure-blooded citizen of Israel and a member of the tribe of Benjamin — a real Hebrew if there ever was one ! I was a member of the Pharisees , who demand the strictest obedience to the Jewish law .

ID:	3534
INPUT:	Nihidił bee dahinohnáanii nihits'ádaazlį́įgo ánihiilaii ts'ídá t'áá k'ééhodideeshdlíłí ; naaldlooshii éí diné yiyiisxį́įgo éí diyoolyéełgo bee hwiideesh'aał , doodaii' diné dziisxį́įgo hodi'yoolyéełgo bee hwiideesh'aał ; t'áá háiida hak'is dziisxį́įgo hodi'yoolyéełgo bee hwiideesh'aał .
PRED:	“ But if you have been killed , I will send an animal to death and killed the animal that has been killed , and I will put to death . I will put an end to death . ”
GOLD:	“ And I will require the blood of anyone who takes another person 's life . If a wild animal kills a person , it must die . And anyone who murders a fellow human must die .

ID:	3535
INPUT:	Áádóó dah didookahgo ła' bee haz'áanii dayiizti'ii éí bits'íís daneeznánígíí deiníł'į́į doo ; jó , baa da'ashch'oshígíí doo dadínóonéeł da áádóó dadéek'ą́ąhii doo dadínóotsis da índa bits'íís danił<unk> go diné t'áá ałtso doo hat'áahjį' na'aldeeh da doo .
PRED:	They will go to the place of purification , and they will be able to enter the body of the dead . They will never be able to go out into the fire . They will never be able to go out into the fire . ”
GOLD:	And as they go out , they will seethe dead bodies of those who have rebelled against me.For the worms that devour them will never die , and the fire that burns them will never go out.All who pass bywill view them with utter horror . ”

ID:	3536
INPUT:	Áádóó Job ánááhodoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	3537
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Solomon 's Prayer of Dedication

ID:	3538
INPUT:	Íísa dízdiin binááhaigo Het dine'é Biyérai wolyéii bitsi' <unk> hwe'asdzą́ą́ ájiilaa ; Het dine'é Íílan wolyéii bitsi' Báshiimath ałdó' hwe'asdzą́ą́ ájiilaa .
PRED:	He also made twenty years old when he married his daughter , the daughter of Esau 's daughter , the daughter of the Hittite .
GOLD:	At the age of forty , Esau married two Hittite wives : Judith , the daughter of Beeri , and Basemath , the daughter of Elon .

ID:	3539
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , T'áadoo nił yé'í . Ha'át'íishą' yiniłtsą́ ? Áko asdzání éí Saul áyidííniid , Nahasdzáán biyi'dę́ę́' diyin ła' haagháahgo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid ? ” the king asked . “ What do you see ? ” And Saul replied , “ I saw a woman from the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid ! ” the king told her . “ What do you see ? ” “ I see a god coming up out of the earth , ” she said .

ID:	3540
INPUT:	Aghaa' áádóó na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo bee éé' ályaaígi át'éii doo biih díínáał da .
PRED:	You must not enter the clothing of linen cloth , and you must not enter it .
GOLD:	“ You must not wear clothing made of wool and linen woven together .

ID:	3541
INPUT:	Bináá' atíjiilaago hanáá' atínídoolnííł ; biwoo' atíjiilaago hawoo' atínídoolnííł ; bíla' atíjiilaago hála' atínídoolnííł ; bikee' atíjiilaago hakee' atínídoolnííł ;
PRED:	His eyes are punishment , and punishment punishment punishment punishment is punishment for their feet . His feet will be crushed , and their feet will be crushed .
GOLD:	an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth , a hand for a hand , a foot for a foot ,

ID:	3542
INPUT:	Áko tł'ée'go ní'jiilwosh áádóó jį́įgo náázhdii'nah , áádóó álástsii' hadaneesą́ áádóó dadínéesą́ , áko hada'neesánígíí índa dadí'néesánígíí t'áadoo hoł bééhoozin da .
PRED:	On the night they began to celebrate the night , and they ate the seed that grow in the morning and ate it .
GOLD:	Night and day , while he 's asleep or awake , the seed sprouts and grows , but he does not understand how it happens .

ID:	3543
INPUT:	Gííba kin shijaa'dóó Jerúsalem shádi'áahjigo Ríman kin haal'áajį' kéyah t'áá át'é honíteelgo áhodoolnííł . Nidi Jerúsalem éí Bénjamin bich'é'étiinídóó áłtsé ch'é'étiin nít'é'íjį' áádóó nástł'ahgi ch'é'étiiníjį' , índa Hanániyel bá ya'diitł'inii íí'áhídóó níléí naat'áanii bich'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizhgo bąąh haha'níhíjį' kin hanáánáál'áa doo .
PRED:	He will return to the Negev , and he will return to the hill country of Gibeon , the city of Benjamin , the city of Benjamin , the city of Benjamin , the city of Benjamin , and the city of Benjamin will be accompanied by its mother .
GOLD:	All the land from Geba , north of Judah , to Rimmon , south of Jerusalem , will become one vast plain . But Jerusalem will be raised up in its original place and will be inhabited all the way from the Benjamin Gate over to the site of the old gate , then to the Corner Gate , and from the Tower of Hananel to the king 's winepresses .

ID:	3544
INPUT:	Áádóó Athaláíyah deisiłgo aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bich'į'go łį́į́' bee yah aná'áldahí góne' ch'élwodgo ákwe'é bi'diisyį́ .
PRED:	When Athaliah grabbed her horses , she hurried out to the entrance of the palace of the palace .
GOLD:	So they seized her and led her out to the gate where horses enter the palace grounds , and she was killed there .

ID:	3545
INPUT:	Nidi łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hąąh hazlį́į'go áádóó t'áá át'é łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii t'áá hatsiit'áádóó hakétł'áahjį' haa diiłnii'go náá'iiłniihii éí t'áá át'é łigaigo yiyiiłtsą́ągo
PRED:	But as the leprosy disappeared , the priest saw a serious skin disease and a skin disease . When the priest saw that the priest had been healed ,
GOLD:	“ Now suppose the disease has spread all over the person 's skin , covering the body from head to foot .

ID:	3546
INPUT:	Bíni'dii t'áá ádzíłtso agééh hoł danilį́į le' , áádóó ahé'áské dílzin le' . Na'ageh bee tsi'nidajikaii , índa dazh'diléii éí Diyin God há nihodiyoo'ááł .
PRED:	Let them be unfaithful to them , and let them be unfaithful to God and sexual immorality . ”
GOLD:	Give honor to marriage , and remain faithful to one another in marriage . God will surely judge people who are immoral and those who commit adultery .

ID:	3547
INPUT:	Áádóó Jiiháshafat éí dabizhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego i'ííłhaazhgo hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi dahazhé' é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaa yę́ęgi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áko haye' Jiihóram hatsásk'eh góne' aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	When Jehoshaphat died , he was buried in the City of David , and his son David became the next king . So his son Ahaziah became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jehoshaphat died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Jehoram became the next king .

ID:	3548
INPUT:	Shidine'é shíká ádáát'įįdígíí bá Shéran honíteelgi dibé bighango haz'ą́ą doo , índa Éíkor honíts'aa' góyaa éí dibé nídanjah doo .
PRED:	My people will weep for my people , like sheep , goats , and lambs will return to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and lambs will return to the valley of Ben-Hinnom .
GOLD:	The plain of Sharon will again be filled with flocksfor my people who have searched for me , and the valley of Achor will be a place to pasture herds .

ID:	3549
INPUT:	Íífad wolyéii biyaadi éé' agod ta'jį' nineel'ánígíí ałdó' t'áá át'é yá nahalingo dootł'izhgo ádeidoolíiłgo íínísin .
PRED:	“ The ephod with the ephod of the ephod , and it is good to the ground .
GOLD:	“ Make the robe that is worn with the ephod from a single piece of blue cloth ,

ID:	3550
INPUT:	<unk> dilt'éego John yáłti'go jidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá áko Jesus bikéé' dashdii'ázhígíí éí ła' Andrew át'į́ , Sáíman Peter yił háá'áázh .
PRED:	When John heard John 's message , he went to Peter and told Simon Peter what he had said .
GOLD:	Andrew , Simon Peter 's brother , was one of these men who heard what John said and then followed Jesus .

ID:	3551
INPUT:	Áko díí bich'į' doo t'ą́ą́' háádadzódziih át'ée da .
PRED:	They will not answer these things , for they will never answer them .
GOLD:	Again they could not answer .

ID:	3552
INPUT:	Ííshją́ą́ tsosts'id nááhaigo t'ááłá'í nootínígo Hííbrew diné nihinaalte' nilį́į dooleeł biniyé nihich'į' nidahaaznii'ii éí nihá nidaalnishgo hastą́ą́h nááhaigo béédadidoohchił . Danihizhé'é yę́ę t'áadoo shá deidiizts'ą́ą' da , índa t'áadoo nidi yíká da'íists'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	If you are seven years old , listen to your servant , you will be slaves to your servants , but you will not listen to me . You will not listen to my ancestors .
GOLD:	I told them that every Hebrew slave must be freed after serving six years . But your ancestors paid no attention to me .

ID:	3553
INPUT:	T'áá ałtso yik'ee ti'dahooznii'ígíí bik'ee ti'hodzooznii' áádóó t'áá hó hojílónígi hadiyingo naal'a'í yisdábíínil ; hwe'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' áádóó baa a'ááh jinízingo bee bik'é niná'jídlá ; ałk'idą́ą́' hoolzhishii bik'ehgo bił ha'jólníigo náás jiníjaa' .
PRED:	For he suffered in suffering and suffered suffered for them , and he saved them with love and love for his faithful love and love .
GOLD:	In all their suffering he also suffered , and he personally rescued them.In his love and mercy he redeemed them.He lifted them up and carried themthrough all the years .

ID:	3554
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi nááhíłniih dooígíí éí díí : dibé yázhí ła' binááhaii naakigo t'áá ákwíí jį́ nááhíłniihgo hoolzhish doo .
PRED:	“ These are the instructions regarding the altar . On the first day you must offer two one-year-old male lamb for each day .
GOLD:	“ These are the sacrifices you are to offer regularly on the altar . Each day , offer two lambs that are a year old ,

ID:	3555
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , doo ak'eh dahóół'įįd da índa nich'į' nidaalteehgo nibee haz'áanii yaa dáádiikai áádóó nich'į' dah nídahizhdidookah biniyé doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii éí ná dahalne'ii yee bił nídahoolne' yę́ę nideistseed índa ayóó át'éego doo ílį́į́góó ádáát'įįdígíí yee ná dahóółchįįd .
PRED:	But when they rebelled against their enemies , they provoked the law of their ancestors and led them away to their ancestors . They provoked the anger of their ancestors , and they provoked their anger .
GOLD:	“ But despite all this , they were disobedient and rebelled against you . They turned their backs on your Law , they killed your prophets who warned them to return to you , and they committed terrible blasphemies .

ID:	3556
INPUT:	Áádóó sédáa dooleełgi ałdó' t'áá áłdįįłt'éego shá ádíílííł ; shá sodadołzingo t'ah nít'ée'da lá t'áá ánółtso nihaa nánísdzáa łeh nisingo bíká shił chohoo'į́ .
PRED:	And when I pray for you , do n't let me be afraid of all my troubles .
GOLD:	One more thing — please prepare a guest room for me , for I am hoping that God will answer your prayers and let me return to you soon .

ID:	3557
INPUT:	Nidi háishą' t'áá bí ni'iisíihgo ádaa ákondzin ? Sha'át'e' néés'į́į'ii shąąh áníłdįįh .
PRED:	But who has become very angry ? Who has become very angry with me ?
GOLD:	How can I know all the sins lurking in my heart ? Cleanse me from these hidden faults .

ID:	3558
INPUT:	Áko Abáíjah éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazhgo David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áádóó haye' Éísa hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' . Áko bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' kéyahgi hodéezyéelgo neeznáá nááhai .
PRED:	When Abijah died , he was buried in the City of David . He was buried in the City of David . He reigned in the City of Asa .
GOLD:	When Abijah died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Asa became the next king . There was peace in the land for ten years .

ID:	3559
INPUT:	Asdzání naaki ak'áa doo ; ła' nídidooltééł , ła'ígíí éí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	One of the women will be taken away , and no one will be left .
GOLD:	Two women will be grinding flour at the mill ; one will be taken , the other left .

ID:	3560
INPUT:	Jó , ak'idajishdliih doogo bee shich'į' ha'oodzíí' ; ak'idzisdli'ígíí doo łahgo áńdeeshdlíił da .
PRED:	“ Look , it is my inheritance ; it will not be taken away from my hand.It will not be taken away from my enemies .
GOLD:	Listen , I received a command to bless ; God has blessed , and I can not reverse it !

ID:	3561
INPUT:	Nidi nihí doo ákódanoht'ée da ; nihitahgóó aláahgo ayóó át'éhígíí bíni'dii éí akéédę́ę́' naagháhígíí nahalin dooleeł , áádóó naat'áanii nilíinii bíni'dii naal'a'í nahalin dooleeł .
PRED:	But you will not be like a mighty king ; let your enemies be like a mighty king .
GOLD:	But among you it will be different . Those who are the greatest among you should take the lowest rank , and the leader should be like a servant .

ID:	3562
INPUT:	Áko diné yíl'áhígíí hódahooł'aahii bił hágo bizhdííniidgo ájíní , Diné t'áá háiida shikéé' dashdiigháahgo ádeizhdiyoo'nah , hatsin ałnáoszid nízhdidootį́į́ł áádóó shikéé' joogáał doo .
PRED:	Then Jesus called his disciples to his disciples and said , “ Anyone who wants to follow me . If you follow me , you will follow my cross and follow me . ”
GOLD:	Then , calling the crowd to join his disciples , he said , “ If any of you wants to be my follower , you must give up your own way , take up your cross , and follow me .

ID:	3563
INPUT:	Esther éí aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Héíman yá áda'íísįįdjį' hágo yidííniid
PRED:	Esther and the banquet Esther had prepared for the banquet he had said .
GOLD:	Esther 's Request to the King

ID:	3564
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné bił nijikaígíí bił da'jííyą́ą́' , índa t'áá ákwii jineezhjéé' . Abínígo nízhdiijée'go ájíní , Shinanit'a'í bich'į' náshidoł'á .
PRED:	So the men returned to their camp and ate them . Then they turned to the king and told me , “ Come to my master . ”
GOLD:	Then they ate their meal , and the servant and the men with him stayed there overnight.But early the next morning , Abraham 's servant said , “ Send me back to my master . ”

ID:	3565
INPUT:	Áádóó Kapérniyamgi jíkaigo hooghangi yah ajííyáago hódahooł'aahii nayízhdééłkidgo ábijiní , Níláhdę́ę́' wohkahgoshą' ha'át'íí baa nídaaht'į́į́ nít'éé' ?
PRED:	When Jesus returned to Capernaum , he asked his disciples , “ What are you going to see ? ”
GOLD:	After they arrived at Capernaum and settled in a house , Jesus asked his disciples , “ What were you discussing out on the road ? ”

ID:	3566
INPUT:	Díí Náftalai biye'ké bada'áłchíní náás ahideeshchínígíí ádaat'į́ : Náftalai biye' <unk> ziyel ba'áłchíní <unk> ziyel dine'é danilį́ . Náftalai biye' <unk> ba'áłchíní <unk> dine'é danilį́ .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the tribe of Naphtali : The tribe of Naphtali , named after their ancestor Naphtali . The tribe of Naphtali are the tribe of Naphtali .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Naphtali : The Jahzeelite clan , named after their ancestor Jahzeel.The Gunite clan , named after their ancestor Guni .

ID:	3567
INPUT:	háálá t'áá aaníinii nihii' dahólǫ́ , áádóó hool'áágóó nihił hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	For you are the truth , and you will live forever .
GOLD:	because the truth lives in us and will be with us forever .

ID:	3568
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsodę́ę́' ách'į' na'ódlíigo náldzidgo yigááł ; t'áá éí binoołchéeł doo .
PRED:	All glory to him , and a mighty nation will come to him .
GOLD:	“ Terrors surround the wickedand trouble them at every step .

ID:	3569
INPUT:	éí asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nilíinii naat'á ch'ah bich'ahgo aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó bił nidazhdookah , áko bee yá'ájít'éehii éí diné danilíinii áádóó aláahgo bídahólníihii bich'į' ádééhozdoolzįįł , háálá asdzání baa dzólníinii jílį́ .
PRED:	The king will lay their heads in front of the king 's head , and the kings of the earth will know that the Lord is like a woman .
GOLD:	to bring Queen Vashti to him with the royal crown on her head . He wanted the nobles and all the other men to gaze on her beauty , for she was a very beautiful woman .

ID:	3570
INPUT:	Mk . 6 : <unk>
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts His Death

ID:	3571
INPUT:	Áko bee aha'deet'áanii éí dadine'é t'áá ałtso bá íishłaa nít'ée'ii k'ídeeshtih biniyé shitsihał Ił Hóshóonii bee yíníshí yę́ę k'íníti' .
PRED:	I made my covenant with all my people , so I can not make my covenant with my people .
GOLD:	Then I took my staff called Favor and cut it in two , showing that I had revoked the covenant I had made with all the nations .

ID:	3572
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii éí t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yizéé' yidoot'įįł yiniyé naayik'íghal .
PRED:	The wicked will look for the wicked , and the words of the wicked will stand before you .
GOLD:	The wicked wait in ambush for the godly , looking for an excuse to kill them .

ID:	3573
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii Béíyal yich'į' deidiłidgo doo yá'áshónígi ádáát'įįdgo shá dahashchįįdígíí biniinaa t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii k'indííláii doo yá'áshónígi áńdi'doolníłígíí yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The people of Judah have burned incense to Baal and burn incense in the fire of Baal and the people of Israel . They will see what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	“ I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who planted this olive tree , have ordered it destroyed . For the people of Israel and Judah have done evil , arousing my anger by burning incense to Baal . ”

ID:	3574
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii ánáshidoo'niidgo ání , Nił ádzaaígíí t'áá bééhózínígo bee ak'e'íłchí , áádóó naaltsoos bikáá' hazhó'ó ánílééh , áko t'áá háiida haneetehee yíídóołtah .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Write this message from the Lord : Write this letter to the record of these things and say , ‘ Take it into the sky . ' ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Write my answer plainly on tablets , so that a runner can carry the correct message to others .

ID:	3575
INPUT:	Tł'óo'jigo ahééhool'áhígíí bich'į'go ch'é'étiingi ałts'ą́ą́hjí tsin yadaa'áhígíí bąąhjį' páam sikaadii bééda'alyaago naask'ęę' , áádóó dah náhást'ánígíí bich'į' tseebíigo ałk'i hoo'niłí haaz'á .
PRED:	A person with a measuring stick to the entry room of a palm tree . There was a palm tree with a palm tree that decorated with a palm tree .
GOLD:	Its entry room faced into the outer courtyard , and it had palm tree decorations on the columns . There were eight steps leading to its entrance .

ID:	3576
INPUT:	Áádóó t'óó baa dahodisiits'ą́ą́' yę́ędą́ą́' t'óó nihił ádahasdįįd ; t'áadoo yee diné hada'óolní'ígóó nihiniinaa ákódeiidzaa , háálá Bóhólníihii éí nihí aají nihiDiyin God éí Diyin God nilį́įgo wódahdi yá'ąąshdi índa wóyahdi nihokáa'gi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	And we have heard that you had never been destroyed , for you have destroyed us in the presence of the Lord your God , the God of heaven and earth .
GOLD:	No wonder our hearts have melted in fear ! No one has the courage to fight after hearing such things . For the Lord your God is the supreme God of the heavens above and the earth below .

ID:	3577
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii áháłní , Nikee' hadiidlé , háálá sínízínígi hodiyingo haz'ą́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ Your feet are healed of your feet . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord said to him , ‘ Take off your sandals , for you are standing on holy ground .

ID:	3578
INPUT:	Áko éí asdzání doo saad biiłhéégóó ádzósingo bízhneel'áanii doo níyolgóó ádzósingo ałdó' bízhneel'ą́ą doo , áádóó nish'náájí hála' bee ak'ah tó nahalinígíí dziiłtsoodgo hálágiizhdę́ę́' doo hadadeesxį́į́góó ádzósingo bízhneel'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	A man who had sexual relations with a man named a man named a man named a man named a man named a wife . She was taken away from his right hand and broken off his right hand .
GOLD:	Stopping her complaints is like trying to stop the windor trying to hold something with greased hands .

ID:	3579
INPUT:	áko náá'iiłniihii éí asdzání ádee hayididoołdzihgo íididooniił , Bóhólníihii éí ni'dódziihgo áádóó nidine'é bitahgi ni'dit'į́įgo ándoolííł , Bóhólníihii éí nitsoosk'id yididoołdził índa nibid yidínóołchał .
PRED:	Then the priest will say to the priest , ‘ May the Lord give you an oath that he will cause you to be a curse among the nations of the earth . '
GOLD:	“ At this point the priest must put the woman under oath by saying , ‘ May the people know that the Lord 's curse is upon you when he makes you infertile , causing your womb to shrivel and your abdomen to swell .

ID:	3580
INPUT:	Dził danohłíinii , haash daohdzaago deenásts'aa' naalgeed nahalingo dah nidasinoodee' ? Dah daask'id danohłíinii , haash daohdzaago dibé yázhí naalgeed nahalingo dah nidasinoodee' ?
PRED:	“ O mountains , how long will you hide the rams ? How long will you hide like a young bull ?
GOLD:	Why , mountains , did you skip like rams ? Why , hills , like lambs ?

ID:	3581
INPUT:	Dinééh nílíinii , ániid nanináhígíí baa nił hózhǫ́ áádóó ániid nanináago níyoołkáłígíí nijéí bił hóshǫ́ǫ le' ; nijéí yídin nilíinii áádóó nináá' bee yíní'íinii bik'ehgo yínááł , nidi díí biniinaa naa náhódóot'įįłjį' Diyin God andoolósígíí nił bééhózin le' .
PRED:	“ Son of man , be glad , ” he said . “ Be angry with you , and do n't know what you are doing . Do n't be afraid of what you have done to you , O God . ”
GOLD:	Young people , it 's wonderful to be young ! Enjoy every minute of it . Do everything you want to do ; take it all in . But remember that you must give an account to God for everything you do .

ID:	3582
INPUT:	Díí naalyéhé baa nidahaniihii hats'ą́ą́dóó da'ast'įįdii , bee atího'diilyaaígíí yéédaaldzidgo , ayóó ánízáádę́ę́' naazį́įgo ayóó íits'a'go daachxa áádóó atíńdadinidleeh doo ,
PRED:	“ This is what happened to her merchants : She will be heard in her streets , weeping , and mourning will be heard .
GOLD:	The merchants who became wealthy by selling her these things will stand at a distance , terrified by her great torment . They will weep and cry out ,

ID:	3583
INPUT:	Ayidgi dah siłtsooz dooígíí bá tł'óół ałk'ésgizígi át'éego óola t'áá bízhání da'ahólzha'ígíí ałk'ésgizgo ádeidoolíiłgo íínísin ;
PRED:	Make the chestpiece for the ephod and attach them to the ephod of pure gold .
GOLD:	“ To attach the chestpiece to the ephod , make braided cords of pure gold thread .

ID:	3584
INPUT:	Diyin God shił ííshją́ą́ áyiilaii bik'ehgo ákǫ́ǫ́ níyá . Áko doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó hane' yá'át'éehii baa hashne'ii da'oodlání yá naazíinii bee bił dahweeshne' . Nidi doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bił nahosisne'ii doo t'áadoo biniyéhígóó baa niséyáa da áádóó baa nináánáshdáa dooleełii bił t'áá da'áko doo biniyé t'áá bí t'éiyá bił dahweeshne' .
PRED:	I told you the Good News , and I did n't tell you the Good News about the Good News . But I did n't believe the Good News I told you about the Good News . But I did n't believe the Good News .
GOLD:	I went there because God revealed to me that I should go . While I was there I met privately with those considered to be leaders of the church and shared with them the message I had been preaching to the Gentiles . I wanted to make sure that we were in agreement , for fear that all my efforts had been wasted and I was running the race for nothing .

ID:	3585
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah hótsaago nihá yínéidoozohgo , jó , ákót'éego danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' áádóó éí kéyah t'áá át'é nihaididoo'áałgo , danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí'
PRED:	“ The Lord your God has promised you to divide your land into a field . He swore to give you a vow to your ancestors , and he swore to give you a vow to your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ And if the Lord your God enlarges your territory , as he swore to your ancestors , and gives you all the land he promised them ,

ID:	3586
INPUT:	Díí naaltsoos nihich'į' yéélta'go índa , Leiyodisíyadi da'oodlání áłah nádleehii ałdó' bich'į' dayízhdóołtah . Leiyodisíyagóó naaltsoos íishłaaígíí ałdó' ts'ídá dayídóołtah .
PRED:	I am writing this letter to Paul , Paul , and sisters , who sent me to preach the Good News . I said , “ Please give my greetings to Please , too . ”
GOLD:	After you have read this letter , pass it on to the church at Laodicea so they can read it , too . And you should read the letter I wrote to them .

ID:	3587
INPUT:	Ch'iyáán ts'ídá łą́ągo nooh nídaachíihgo tsosts'id nááhaijį' hodichingo chodao'į́į doo biniyé yah anídahayéeh doo ; éí Ííjip kéyahgi ákót'éego hwiidoo'aał , áko kéyahgi diné doo dichin yiih dínóodah da .
PRED:	The famine will be filled with food , and there will be no rain in Egypt . It will be a severe famine in Egypt , and the famine will be gone .
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	3588
INPUT:	Áádóó nináá' éí bąąhági ánít'į́ ánóhsingo , éí hani'aahgo yóó'ahíłhan ; nináá' t'ááłá'í nidi iiná biih yíníyáájígo doo ná yá'át'éeh da , nidi nináá' t'áá ałch'ijígo hool'áágóó kǫ' bii' ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'ą́ąjį' andi'yoolghą́ą́łjí agháago doo ná yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	And if you sin causes your eyes to sin , it is not right with God 's eyes . It 's better to be thrown into hell with God 's eye . It 's better to be thrown into hell with the fire .
GOLD:	And if your eye causes you to sin , gouge it out and throw it away . It 's better to enter eternal life with only one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell .

ID:	3589
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó Ámor dine'é ch'íininíłkaadígíí éí yaa naaskaii t'áá át'é bik'ehgo bida'alyaii bich'į' nahojiłáago bee t'áá íiyisí doo yildinii baa nijiyá .
PRED:	When the Israelites saw that the Lord had led Israel out of the Amorites , they worshiped the idols of the Amorites .
GOLD:	His worst outrage was worshiping idols just as the Amorites had done — the people whom the Lord had driven out from the land ahead of the Israelites . )

ID:	3590
INPUT:	Amínadab bá Náshan yizhchį́ , Náshan bá Sálman yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	Salmon was the father of Shelah was the father of Salmon .
GOLD:	Amminadab was the father of Nahshon.Nahshon was the father of Salmon .

ID:	3591
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jííhu Jézriyelgi níyáago Jézebel yaa hodiizts'ą́ą́' , áko binii' yizhchíi'go índa bitsii' neizhch'ąą'go tsésǫ'dę́ę́' déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	When Jehu heard what had happened in Jezreel , he remembered the oldest son of Jesse 's mother 's mother 's name .
GOLD:	When Jezebel , the queen mother , heard that Jehu had come to Jezreel , she painted her eyelids and fixed her hair and sat at a window .

ID:	3592
INPUT:	Áko ákwii Zórah kin haal'áádóó diné léi' Dan dine'é jílį́įgo Manówah joolyéé lá . Áko hwe'asdzą́ą́ doo ałchíígóó ha'áłchíní doo haleeh da .
PRED:	Later , there was a man named Zimri , who lived in the town of Dan . He had no children .
GOLD:	In those days a man named Manoah from the tribe of Dan lived in the town of Zorah . His wife was unable to become pregnant , and they had no children .

ID:	3593
INPUT:	áádóó ch'ah dijoolí bee ál'ínígíí hatsiinídííłt'ih , índa átáa'gi dah sitą́ą dooígíí hátáa'gi dah díítį́į́ł .
PRED:	“ Take the crown of the cloak , and put it on the third side of the Temple .
GOLD:	Place the turban on his head , and fasten the sacred medallion to the turban .

ID:	3594
INPUT:	Áko hazhé'é David yę́ę yee haadzíi'ii bik'ehgo nááda'iiłniihii ałkéé' níjaa'go nidaalnish doo índa Líívai dine'é éí nááda'iiłniihii binááł t'áá ákwíí jį́ naanish hólǫ́ǫgi aa dahojiniih doo áádóó nidajil'a' doo biniyé nihonínil , áádóó dáń'da'ditį́į́h yaa ádahalyánígíí ałdó' ałkéé' níjaa'go t'áá dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó yaa ádahalyą́ą doogo niinínil ; kót'éego Diyin God yá naal'a'í David yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	So David commanded his ancestors to serve the priests and Levites in charge of the work of the priests and Levites . He appointed them to serve as priests and Levites in charge of the storerooms of the Temple of God .
GOLD:	In assigning the priests to their duties , Solomon followed the regulations of his father , David . He also assigned the Levites to lead the people in praise and to assist the priests in their daily duties . And he assigned the gatekeepers to their gates by their divisions , following the commands of David , the man of God .

ID:	3595
INPUT:	Atł'ohí atł'óogo bee a<unk> tsxį́įłgo choyooł'ínígíí nahalingo shíyoołkááł , áko t'áá ákwíí jį́ t'áadoo bee ił chohoo'ínígóó i'ii'aah .
PRED:	Do n't let him be like a grapevine ; let my hope be like a long day .
GOLD:	“ My days fly faster than a weaver 's shuttle.They end without hope .

ID:	3596
INPUT:	tó áhásdįįd nahalingo ásiidįįd doo nít'éé' , tooh nílínígíí nihik'i diilkǫ' doo nít'éé' ,
PRED:	We will die like water , and the river was covered with fire .
GOLD:	The waters would have engulfed us ; a torrent would have overwhelmed us .

ID:	3597
INPUT:	Haleebee bigaan yee naalnishii éí bóhólníih doo , nidi bił hóyée'ii éí naanish bídidi'nilchéeh doo .
PRED:	A powerful arm is a slave to someone who has a slave to someone else .
GOLD:	Work hard and become a leader ; be lazy and become a slave .

ID:	3598
INPUT:	T'áá náábíláahgo naalyéhé yá naazdáii áádóó naalyéhé baa nidahaniihígíí índa Aréíbiya kéyahdę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá ałtso áádóó kéyahdóó naat'áanii danilíinii ałdó' óola áádóó béésh łigaii éí Sálaman yaa nídeigééh .
PRED:	The king of Arabia , and all the articles from Arabia . He also brought tribute money to King Solomon and gold .
GOLD:	This did not include the additional revenue he received from merchants and traders . All the kings of Arabia and the governors of the provinces also brought gold and silver to Solomon .

ID:	3599
INPUT:	Ruth áádóó Neiyómii
PRED:	Naomi and Ruth
GOLD:	Elimelech Moves His Family to Moab

ID:	3600
INPUT:	Áko áádóó Bó'az ííyą́ą́' áádóó oodlą́ą'go bijéí bił hózhǫ́ǫgo tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í t'óó ałk'i yanáa'á bíighahgi neeztį́ . Áádóó hazhóó'ógo yah aji'yíí<unk> go bikee'jį' bik'izdííłtsoozgo ákwii dzineeztį́ .
PRED:	So Boaz drank some wine and drank the wine of grain with wine and grain , and it covered the ground with the grain . Then she covered the ground with a huge river .
GOLD:	After Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in good spirits , he lay down at the far end of the pile of grain and went to sleep . Then Ruth came quietly , uncovered his feet , and lay down .

ID:	3601
INPUT:	Índa éí yoołkáłígíí doo áłts'ísí ánályaagóogo , nihokáá' dine'é doo ła' doodzih da , nidi bitah haasdláa'ii biniinaa éí yoołkáłígíí áłts'ísí áńdoolnííł .
PRED:	And if there is no resurrection of the world , no one will be able to say , ‘ A little while the old person is left . ' ”
GOLD:	In fact , unless that time of calamity is shortened , not a single person will survive . But it will be shortened for the sake of God 's chosen ones .

ID:	3602
INPUT:	Áko t'áá éí bijį́ Féro éí naanish binanit'a'í danilíinii índa bik'ehgo nida'anishí yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	So Pharaoh gave this message to Pharaoh and his officials :
GOLD:	That same day Pharaoh sent this order to the Egyptian slave drivers and the Israelite foremen :

ID:	3603
INPUT:	Ałjiłnii diné bił yah anídaakah nít'é'ígi át'éego diné bił yah anídaakah nít'éé' ; kót'éego bidáhonooníinii yaa nidaakai dooleeł biniyé Ahólah índa Ahólibah , asdzání t'óó baa'ihii nilíinii , yił yah anídaakah nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ The men of Israel were like a prostitute in the wilderness , ” says the Lord. “ A woman is coming to fight against us , ‘ Your brother , ' says the Lord .
GOLD:	And that is what they did . They had sex with Oholah and Oholibah , these shameless prostitutes .

ID:	3604
INPUT:	Áko kót'é daaníinii yich'į' nida'iiléego hak'ijį' danilį́įgo biniyé ádajit'íinii deineestł'ago Pérzha dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Sáíras bíiníłką́ , áádóó Pérzha dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Daráíyas nídíníit'ą́ąjį' dahoníłtł'a nít'éé' .
PRED:	He gave this message to King Cyrus of Persia , and he gave them a message to King Cyrus of Persia . He said to King Cyrus of Persia , “ Long ago the king of Persia . ”
GOLD:	They bribed agents to work against them and to frustrate their plans . This went on during the entire reign of King Cyrus of Persia and lasted until King Darius of Persia took the throne .

ID:	3605
INPUT:	Ne'asdzą́ą́ yił háá'áázh niniinaa doo yił ahoolch'į́įd da doo biniyé doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da ; ła'ígíí t'ah hináago doo bił ahíidííłtsoł da .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your wife , or you must not have sexual relations with her .
GOLD:	“ While your wife is living , do not marry her sister and have sexual relations with her , for they would be rivals .

ID:	3606
INPUT:	Jó , bitsé éí doo nihí nihiTsé Niłdziliigi át'ée da ; éí nihi'ana'í t'áá bí ándahwii'aahgo ádaa ákodandzin .
PRED:	You are the Rock of the Rock , who saves us .
GOLD:	But the rock of our enemies is not like our Rock , as even they recognize .

ID:	3607
INPUT:	Kéyah Shádi'ááh hoolyéedi asdzání naat'áanii jílį́į́ nít'é'ígíí díí k'ad ahoolchíłígíí ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi bił náázhdidoojahgo bá nihozhdoo'ááł , háálá éí Sálaman bibee hódzáanii yízdóołts'įįł biniyé , ni' nineel'ą́ą́dę́ę́' jiníyá , nidi jó'akon , Sálaman yiláahgo ayóó át'éii éí kǫ́ǫ́ naaghá .
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from the distant lands of the earth , and it is a distant day of judgment on judgment day . The king will listen to King Solomon , and he will listen to King Solomon .
GOLD:	The queen of Sheba will also stand up against this generation on judgment day and condemn it , for she came from a distant land to hear the wisdom of Solomon . Now someone greater than Solomon is here — but you refuse to listen .

ID:	3608
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii doo haada yit'ée da
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Yodh

ID:	3609
INPUT:	Áko Peter yah ajííyáago , Korníílyas hadááh yílwodgo hach'į' nitsidinígo'go tsé'yaa neeshjool .
PRED:	Then Peter went and bowed down to the ground and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	As Peter entered his home , Cornelius fell at his feet and worshiped him .

ID:	3610
INPUT:	Áko Máíkal éí Saul bitsi' nilį́įgo David ayóó'áyó'ní , áko Saul yił dahoolne'go yaa bił hóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	When Saul learned that Saul 's daughter , Saul loved David , and he was filled with joy .
GOLD:	In the meantime , Saul 's daughter Michal had fallen in love with David , and Saul was delighted when he heard about it .

ID:	3611
INPUT:	shí ałdó' nihik'ijį' nishłį́į doo , áádóó nida'ayoohsí'ígíí biniinaa t'ah yówehgo tsosts'idi ahą́ą́h nániiláago atínáánihideeshdlííł .
PRED:	“ But now , I am sending you seven times , but then I will repay you seven times .
GOLD:	then I myself will be hostile toward you . I will personally strike you with calamity seven times over for your sins .

ID:	3612
INPUT:	<unk> dilt'éego t'éiyá hata' sizínígíí hólǫ́ǫ doo . Jó nidi Diyin God éí t'ááłá'í .
PRED:	So you can be the one who can be with God , but God is with you .
GOLD:	Now a mediator is helpful if more than one party must reach an agreement . But God , who is one , did not use a mediator when he gave his promise to Abraham .

ID:	3613
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii áháłní , Bídahonołníihii bá nidaal'a'í bił dohkáahgo shiye' Sálaman t'áá shí shidzaanézígíí bikáá' dah dabinoołdáago Gáíhan góyaa bił doohkah ,
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ Let me go to my servants , and prepare my son Solomon on my behalf . ”
GOLD:	the king said to them , “ Take Solomon and my officials down to Gihon Spring . Solomon is to ride on my own mule .

ID:	3614
INPUT:	Nidi Peter áhodííniid , Ananáíyas , ha'át'éegoshą' Níłch'i Diyinii díníí'ah biniyé níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í Séítan yolyéii níni' ná áhoolaago , kéyah bą́ą́h azlį́'ígíí ła'jį' ádá áásínísįįd ?
PRED:	But Peter replied , “ Why are you trying to kill us ? ”
GOLD:	Then Peter said , “ Ananias , why have you let Satan fill your heart ? You lied to the Holy Spirit , and you kept some of the money for yourself .

ID:	3615
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii ayóó ábóodziilii bik'e'íyé'ígi át'éego shił hólǫ́ . Éí bąą atídashijił'íinii ádił dazdoosih , áádóó doo shik'eh dazhdidoodleeł da . T'áadoo a<unk> ádadziidzaaígíí biniinaa t'óó baa yádaznízin doo . Hool'áágóó ádił tsétah da'dziztł'ónígíí éí ts'ídá doo baa hodiyoo'nah da .
PRED:	But the Lord is a strong fortress , for I will be filled with bitter anguish and ashamed of their sins , for they will not be ashamed of their sins . They will not be ashamed of their wickedness .
GOLD:	But the Lord stands beside me like a great warrior.Before him my persecutors will stumble.They can not defeat me.They will fail and be thoroughly humiliated.Their dishonor will never be forgotten .

ID:	3616
INPUT:	Áádóó nihik'ijį' nishłį́įgo nihi'ana'í binááł nidanihi'ditseedgo danihijoołáii nihindant'áa doo , índa t'áadoo nidanihiniłchéhígóó nidanochée doo .
PRED:	I will drive you out your enemies before you , and you will rule over your enemies . You will be handed over to you , and you will hate you .
GOLD:	I will turn against you , and you will be defeated by your enemies . Those who hate you will rule over you , and you will run even when no one is chasing you !

ID:	3617
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Aadę́ę́' diltłish shá nídoohtįįh . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii binááł diltłish nídeidiitą́ .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ Take your sword and kill me . ”
GOLD:	All right , bring me a sword. ” So a sword was brought to the king .

ID:	3618
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí Jóseph ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , éí Íífreiyim dine'é áádóó Manáseh dine'é danilį́įgo áyidííniid , Nihí t'óó ahonohyóí áádóó ayóó át'éego bee adziilii nihee dahólǫ́ ; doo t'ááłá'í yáá'iilt'e' t'éiyá bíighahgo kéyah nihíí' dadooleeł da ,
PRED:	So Joshua said to Joseph , “ The descendants of Manasseh has become the tribe of Manasseh , Ephraim , Manasseh , and Manasseh replied , ‘ We will give us a great land . '
GOLD:	Then Joshua said to the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh , the descendants of Joseph , “ Since you are so large and strong , you will be given more than one portion .

ID:	3619
INPUT:	Hats'ą́ą́jí danilíinii éí hananit'a'í daazlį́į́' ; hwe'ana'í k'ee'ąą dadeeshzhiizh , háálá lą'ídi ni'dziisí'ígíí biniinaa Bóhólníihii hach'į' ho<unk> náá' ; ákót'éego hwe'ana'í bilą́ąjį' ha'áłchíní deisnáago deinééłkaad .
PRED:	“ The enemy has become our enemy , for many nations have rebelled against the Lord , for they have driven their eyes to the Lord .
GOLD:	Her oppressors have become her masters , and her enemies prosper , for the Lord has punished Jerusalemfor her many sins.Her children have been capturedand taken away to distant lands .

ID:	3620
INPUT:	Áko yóó'ájiilaadóó bik'ijį' haye'ké bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Dasétsą́ągo díí Diyin God yá halne'ii tséní'ootséél góne' yóó'ályaaígi bits'in bíighahgóó shits'in yóó'ádadoohłííł ,
PRED:	When he saw this , he said to his sons , “ You will buried me in the tomb of God 's bones . ”
GOLD:	Afterward the prophet said to his sons , “ When I die , bury me in the grave where the man of God is buried . Lay my bones beside his bones .

ID:	3621
INPUT:	Áko kót'ée dooleeł : deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí nízaadgóó yee ádadidooniił , áko yee ádadidooniiłígíí éí dasidoots'ą́ą'go diné ts'ídá t'áá ałtso hahodidoołdlałgo ayóó át'éego hahóó'áa doo , áádóó kin haal'áhígíí ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inígíí naa'ahiłdaasgo éí bitis gó'ąą Ízrel dine'é t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá k'éhézdon yah adoojah .
PRED:	When the blast of the ram 's horn , it will say , ‘ The horns of the trumpet will be heard , and the land will be divided into the middle of the city will be divided into the city . '
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	3622
INPUT:	Bił kéédahwiit'íinii bich'į'go bá nahat'i'ii ánihiinilaa . Nihinaagóó kéédahat'íinii nihá nida<unk> i'go índa t'óó nihaa daadlohgo íinilaa .
PRED:	You have made us a trap for your neighbor , and you are filled with violence .
GOLD:	You let our neighbors mock us.We are an object of scorn and derision to those around us .

ID:	3623
INPUT:	Asdzání hahastiin bighangi ádee hazdoodzíi'go , doodaii' hwii' sizíinii ádá nihodiní'ą́ągo
PRED:	“ If a woman has sworn an oath or a vow or a woman ,
GOLD:	“ But suppose a woman is married and living in her husband 's home when she makes a vow or binds herself with a pledge .

ID:	3624
INPUT:	éí bąą ał'ąą dine'é nihinaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí bá nidahat'i'go yik'ee ti'dahwiidoonih ; kót'éego ádee haasdzíí' , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ As surely as I live , I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have taken a solemn oath that those nations will soon have their own shame to endure .

ID:	3625
INPUT:	Áádóó ak'áán dibahí bee bááh naakits'áadahgo ádíílííł ; éí ómer bee í'neel'ąąhí bee ak'áán dibahí naakidi haaką́ągo bááh bik'eh níką́ą doo .
PRED:	“ Make two quarts of choice flour with olive oil — two quarts of choice flour with olive oil .
GOLD:	“ You must bake twelve flat loaves of bread from choice flour , using four quarts of flour for each loaf .

ID:	3626
INPUT:	Jó , kwe'é kót'é , diné bá aa áhojilyáanii éí hananit'a'í ha'ólíi dooleełgo bee haz'ą́ .
PRED:	“ Look , it is a friend of a fool , but he has hidden his master 's house .
GOLD:	Now , a person who is put in charge as a manager must be faithful .

ID:	3627
INPUT:	diné éí ch'ikę́ę́h bił jineezhtézhígíí bizhé'é béésh łigaii shékel wolyéii ashdladiingo baazhdoonił áádóó ch'ikę́ę́h hwe'asdzą́ą́ dooleeł , háálá baa yáhásinígi ájiilaa ; nizhníłdįįd bijį́įjį' doo yóó'azhdidoo'áał da .
PRED:	“ If a man who has sexual relations with silver , he must pay five pieces of silver , and he will not leave his wife . He will not leave his wife , for he will not leave his wife . ”
GOLD:	he must pay her father fifty pieces of silver . Then he must marry the young woman because he violated her , and he may never divorce her as long as he lives .

ID:	3628
INPUT:	Díí dah oonéłígíí bits'ánóh'aash , áko t'óó hodíínáá'ígo áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	“ Get out of the camp , and I will destroy them . ”
GOLD:	“ Get away from all these people so that I may instantly destroy them ! ”

ID:	3629
INPUT:	ádahałní , Ha'át'íí bee óhólnííh shį́įshą' bik'ehgo díidí baa naniná , áádóó háishą' díí bee óhólnííh neidiní'ą́ągo bik'ehgo baa naniná ?
PRED:	“ What do you think about these things ? ” they asked . “ Who is your authority ? ”
GOLD:	They demanded , “ By what authority are you doing all these things ? Who gave you the right to do them ? ”

ID:	3630
INPUT:	Éidíígíí ákót'éego hasht'edaalyaago níbaal bii' hodílzinii átsé haz'ą́ą́ góne' nááda'iiłniihii Diyin God yá nidaalnish yiniyé t'áá ahą́ą́h yah anídaakah nít'éé' ;
PRED:	They kept the courtyard of the Tabernacle , and the priests continued to work in the sanctuary of God .
GOLD:	When these things were all in place , the priests regularly entered the first room as they performed their religious duties .

ID:	3631
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad , díí tł'éé' nílááh yínááł ; diné nił naakaígíí bił halgaidi baa hínóhjéé' .
PRED:	“ Go and see today , ” you said . “ Go on the plains of the field . ”
GOLD:	Come by night with an army and hide out in the fields .

ID:	3632
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ayóó íits'a'go ádííniid nahalingo áníigo ii'ni' tsosts'idígíí dadiists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The lion said to me , “ Listen to me like a lion ! ”
GOLD:	And he gave a great shout like the roar of a lion . And when he shouted , the seven thunders answered .

ID:	3633
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' ch'íníyáago Bóhólníihii bizaad yee hach'į' hahaasdzí'ígíí bee bił nahodzisne' , áádóó tsosts'idiingo hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii ahíjiinilgo níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaagóó ahéénízį́įgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	So Moses went out to the Lord and told the elders of Israel what had happened to the Lord . Then the elders of Israel stood in front of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	So Moses went out and reported the Lord 's words to the people . He gathered the seventy elders and stationed them around the Tabernacle .

ID:	3634
INPUT:	Mózes haadzí'ígi át'éego Éran éí ajéíts'iin áádóó ajáád nish'náájíígíí náásee bił nídi'dilnihgo nááhániihii át'éego Bóhólníihii binááł náásee bił jidideesnii' .
PRED:	So Moses did as Aaron had commanded Moses and Aaron as a special offering to the Lord as a special offering .
GOLD:	Aaron then lifted up the breasts and right thighs as a special offering to the Lord , just as Moses had commanded .

ID:	3635
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'éiyá Diyin God nilį́
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The Foolishness of Idols

ID:	3636
INPUT:	éí diné ayóoda ádaat'éii áádóó t'óó adahayóí nít'éé' índa Ánakim dine'égi ádaníłnééz nít'éé' , nidi Ámon dine'é nilíinii dabinááł Bóhólníihii ábísdįįdgo yighadahodeest'ą́ągo kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgóó bighan ádahoolaa .
PRED:	The people of the Lord had completely destroyed all the people , and they were completely destroyed . The people of the land of the Lord had destroyed them .
GOLD:	They were also as strong and numerous and tall as the Anakites . But the Lord destroyed them so the Ammonites could occupy their land .

ID:	3637
INPUT:	Áádóó bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní , T'ááká shaa ch'ídahooh'ááł lágo .
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Do n't be afraid of me . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus sternly commanded the spirits not to reveal who he was .

ID:	3638
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é nohłíinii , t'áá ánółtso nihiinéé' nídididla'go Diyin God bich'į' nihił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	O earth , you people of the earth , sing praises to God .
GOLD:	Shout joyful praises to God , all the earth !

ID:	3639
INPUT:	T'áá ákwíí tł'éé' áádóó t'áá ákwíí jį́ nihinídaas'áá nít'éé' ; dibé baa ádahwiilyą́ągo bił ákódaniit'éé nít'éé' .
PRED:	That night the night and night , and the flocks of sheep were given to each day .
GOLD:	In fact , day and night they were like a wall of protection to us and the sheep .

ID:	3640
INPUT:	Índa ákwii didlidgo náádahołniihii , áádóó nááhidoonihgo náádahołniihii , áádóó t'áadoo le'é neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' , Bóhólníihii baa nídahidoh'aahii , áádóó bił yádi'diilnihgo náádahołniihii , áádóó bee ádee hadasoohdzíi'go náádahołniihii , áádóó t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo náádahołniihii , índa nihilį́į́' áádóó nihidibé alą́ąjį' nidahaazhchíinii náádahołniihii ninádahohjih doo .
PRED:	“ Take your burnt offerings and burnt offerings and burnt offerings , and bring them to the Lord . You must sacrifice one of your offerings and offerings , sheep , sheep , goats , and goats , and sacrifices .
GOLD:	There you will bring your burnt offerings , your sacrifices , your tithes , your sacred offerings , your offerings to fulfill a vow , your voluntary offerings , and your offerings of the firstborn animals of your herds and flocks .

ID:	3641
INPUT:	T'áadoo nánídlíiniísh hadínííltsééł ? Háálá yót'áahdi atsá naat'a'ígíí nahalingo dajit'íinii bit'a' ádayiił'įįhgo yóó'adahat'ah .
PRED:	“ Do n't you see , for your wings are like a eagle on the wings of the wings of your wings .
GOLD:	In the blink of an eye wealth disappears , for it will sprout wingsand fly away like an eagle .

ID:	3642
INPUT:	Áko doo bagha'dót'ááł át'éégóó niiltee'go nihí t'óó dadiilyeelgo ádadii'niid , Bóhólníihii yee íinízinii bohodoolnííł .
PRED:	So they became angry and said , “ We have seen the Lord , ” they said .
GOLD:	When it was clear that we could n't persuade him , we gave up and said , “ The Lord 's will be done . ”

ID:	3643
INPUT:	Áko Abínowam biye' Bérak éí Kéí<unk> lai kin haal'áagi kééhat'íinii bíká ajííł'a'go ábizhdííniid , Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God díí yee ná haadzíí' : Nílááh , Náftalai dine'é índa Zébyulan dine'é bisiláo neeznáadi míilgo nił yinéeł doo .
PRED:	Then Joshua sent this message to the Lord : “ Go and fight the God of Israel , ” he said . “ Go to the tribe of Zebulun and Naphtali . ” So the Lord told him , “ Go to Naphtali . ”
GOLD:	One day she sent for Barak son of Abinoam , who lived in Kedesh in the land of Naphtali . She said to him , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , commands you : Call out 10,000 warriors from the tribes of Naphtali and Zebulun at Mount Tabor .

ID:	3644
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá át'é éí dayiiłtsą́ągo ni'jį' tsé'yaa daneeshjoolgo ádaaní , Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God nilį́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God nilį́į́ lá .
PRED:	When the people saw them , they bowed down and bowed down to the ground and said , “ The Sovereign Lord is God ! ”
GOLD:	And when all the people saw it , they fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ The Lord — he is God ! Yes , the Lord is God ! ”

ID:	3645
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	3646
INPUT:	Mózes daaztsą́
PRED:	The Resurrection of Moses
GOLD:	The Death of Moses

ID:	3647
INPUT:	Jó'akon , aa hideeshłéełii tsį́įłgo bił nishááh ! T'ááłá'í jinítínígo baa nidadziskaii bik'ehgo haa da'diyeeshłééł .
PRED:	“ Look , I will give you a gift to you , and I will give you whatever you deserve .
GOLD:	“ Look , I am coming soon , bringing my reward with me to repay all people according to their deeds .

ID:	3648
INPUT:	Díík'ǫsh bił bááh ályaii éí náádahołniihii t'áadoo bił daohsání ; tsosts'id jį́ díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii éí bááh ach'į' nahwii'náago ályaii nídaohdį́įh doo , háálá t'óó hatsxį́įłgo Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínooná . Kót'éego Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'ínoonánígíí náás nihídeídíiską́ą́góó béédaołniih doo .
PRED:	“ Do not eat the bread made without yeast . Do n't eat the bread made without yeast or bread made without yeast . This is how you eat the bread you eat from the wilderness of Egypt .
GOLD:	Eat it with bread made without yeast . For seven days the bread you eat must be made without yeast , as when you escaped from Egypt in such a hurry . Eat this bread — the bread of suffering — so that as long as you live you will remember the day you departed from Egypt .

ID:	3649
INPUT:	Diné ła' ne'iina' íidoołdįįł biniyé há nidéez'į́į'go nich'į' nídiilwodgo , nidi shinanit'a'í nílíinii , nii' sizíinii éí as'ahgóó iináanii bee hólǫ́ǫgo Bóhólníihii niDiyin God t'áá bí yaa áhályą́ą dooleeł . Áko ni'ana'í danilíinii éí bee aditł'į́į́h yee iijíítł'inígi át'éego yee azdootł'į́į́ł .
PRED:	“ If a man comes to death , he will destroy you and destroy my master 's life , but he will return to the Lord your God 's enemies . He will put up security for a long life to death , and he will put it into battle .
GOLD:	“ Even when you are chased by those who seek to kill you , your life is safe in the care of the Lord your God , secure in his treasure pouch ! But the lives of your enemies will disappear like stones shot from a sling !

ID:	3650
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é danilíinii bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Danihizhé'é yę́ę shich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdígíí bee doo anishłį́į́góó ádashiilaa .
PRED:	“ Son of man , give this message to the people of Israel : ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the God of your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , son of man , give the people of Israel this message from the Sovereign Lord : Your ancestors continued to blaspheme and betray me ,

ID:	3651
INPUT:	Áádóó nihikéyahgi da'ohizhgo dá'ák'eh nídaastł'ahgóó t'áadoo ałtso daohizhí ; da'ohizhgo nidahineezdee'ígíí t'áadoo nídahohłáhí .
PRED:	“ You have not seen the land you have left your fields , but you have not seen the land you have seen .
GOLD:	“ When you harvest the crops of your land , do not harvest the grain along the edges of your fields , and do not pick up what the harvesters drop .

ID:	3652
INPUT:	Nidi ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bee azéédéetání ázéédazhdéetą́ągo bá nidajil'a'ii éí t'áá dahakéyah bii' kéédahojit'į́į dooleełgo haa dideesh'ááł , áko t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ kéédahojit'į́įgo ninádahojiiłdla'go k'éédazhdidléeh dooleeł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But I will give you the yoke of the nations of Babylon , and I will bring them to the yoke of Babylon . I will bring them back to Babylon , ” says the Lord . “ I will bring them back to Babylon . ”
GOLD:	But the people of any nation that submits to the king of Babylon will be allowed to stay in their own country to farm the land as usual . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	3653
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é éí diné ayóó át'éii nidahalin dooleeł , áko wáin bee ił hózhónígi át'éego bijéí bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo ; bada'áłchíní ałdó' éí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo ; bijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Bóhólníihii yee bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	The people of Ephraim will rejoice , and the glory of Israel will be filled with joy . They will rejoice in their hearts , and they will rejoice in their hearts .
GOLD:	The people of Israel will become like mighty warriors , and their hearts will be made happy as if by wine.Their children , too , will see it and be glad ; their hearts will rejoice in the Lord .

ID:	3654
INPUT:	Háishą' náháchį'ígíí ábóodziilgi índa nits'ąą hasti'ígíí bik'ehgo t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'éł'íinii bił bééhózin ?
PRED:	Who knows the anger of your anger ? Who knows your anger ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	3655
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'éego nibik'eh hoogáałii biniinaa tł'é'ííłnihgo náádiish'nahgo ahé<unk> nándish'niih doo .
PRED:	I will thank you for your regulations , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	I rise at midnight to thank youfor your just regulations .

ID:	3656
INPUT:	Dabitooh diłgo áyiilaa , áko doo dayódlą́ą́' át'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	He made the rivers of the Euphrates River , and he drank the rivers of the Nile .
GOLD:	For he turned their rivers into blood , so no one could drink from the streams .

ID:	3657
INPUT:	T'áá ahą́ą́h diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bits'ą́ą́' bee hool'iní dahiniltséés índa atídabi'dil'į́ ! Diyin God éísh báháchį'ii bik'ehgo adiniih neiłniih ?
PRED:	Let the wicked get out of the wicked , and they pour out the anger of God 's anger ?
GOLD:	“ Yet the light of the wicked never seems to be extinguished.Do they ever have trouble ? Does God distribute sorrows to them in anger ?

ID:	3658
INPUT:	Shizéé' nideii'áhígíí háni'dii t'áadoo danilínígóó áádóó t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádabi'dilnééh ! Doo yá'át'ééhgóó shindahagizgo atídashiléhígíí bíni' t'ą́ą́' anábidi'nilkaadgo yaa yádaniizįįh !
PRED:	Let me be ashamed of my lips , and let my tongue be ashamed of what is evil . Let me turn away from evil .
GOLD:	Bring shame and disgrace on those trying to kill me ; turn them back and humiliate those who want to harm me .

ID:	3659
INPUT:	Éí Mózes bidááhdóó Ízrel dine'é yił nídahidiikaigo naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiingo naat'áanii ánéelą́ą́' ; dah deínéehii béédaho'dílzinii yił ałtah ahiisdláá' .
PRED:	So Moses and the entire community of Israel joined them in front of the camp .
GOLD:	They incited a rebellion against Moses , along with 250 other leaders of the community , all prominent members of the assembly .

ID:	3660
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' éí adeídi haz'ánígi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bidáádílkał ániidíii bíighahgi Shéífan naaltsoos ííł'íní nilíinii biye' Gemaráíyah bighan góne' Bérak éí Jeremáíyah bizaad naaltsoos yisdisii biká'ígíí t'áá át'é diné t'áá ałtso bich'į' jííłta' .
PRED:	So Shaphan put the scroll in the Temple of the Lord in front of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple . He put it in charge of the Lord 's Temple in front of Jeremiah 's Temple .
GOLD:	Baruch read Jeremiah 's words on the scroll to all the people . He stood in front of the Temple room of Gemariah , son of Shaphan the secretary . This room was just off the upper courtyard of the Temple , near the New Gate entrance .

ID:	3661
INPUT:	Áko bik'ee t'óó bił adahóóyóí áádóó t'áadoo hanáádaasdzíi' da , índa t'áadoo yánáádááłti' da .
PRED:	He was amazed at them , and he refused to answer them .
GOLD:	You sit there baffled , with nothing more to say .

ID:	3662
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Mídiyan dine'é biniinaa Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii nídayookąąhgo
PRED:	At that time the Midianites cried out to the Lord for help .
GOLD:	When they cried out to the Lord because of Midian ,

ID:	3663
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá aaníí saad t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo bee hadahaadzíi'ii bida'diilnííł ; t'áá nihí índa danihizhé'é yę́ę áádóó aláahgo nihindant'áii índa nihinanit'a'í danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó Jerúsalemgi kintah da'nítiingóó didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihii éí wót'ááhdę́ę́' asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh bidi'níinii bich'į' náádahiilnii'ii t'áá ákót'éego náádahiilniih doo ; íídą́ą́' t'éiyá nihich'iyą' bee áda'azįįd nít'éé' índa doo nihąąh daatéeh da nít'éé' índa doo nihich'į' nidahwii'náa da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But if you have a good message to us , we will live in the streets of our ancestors , and we will live in Jerusalem . We will live in peace and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings .
GOLD:	We will do whatever we want . We will burn incense and pour out liquid offerings to the Queen of Heaven just as much as we like — just as we , and our ancestors , and our kings and officials have always done in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem . For in those days we had plenty to eat , and we were well off and had no troubles !

ID:	3664
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii wooch'ííd yijoołxá , nidi diné doo yá'áshóonii éí nádį́'ídi t'óó haa'ih , áádóó t'óó haa yánáhásįįh .
PRED:	The godly hate the wicked , but the wicked despise the wicked .
GOLD:	The godly hate lies ; the wicked cause shame and disgrace .

ID:	3665
INPUT:	Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi e'elyaii naaldlooshii noolningo , doodaii' yót'áahdi tsídii nidaat'a'ii noolningo ,
PRED:	As a result , a bird on the earth , a wild animal , or a wild animal ,
GOLD:	an animal on the ground , a bird in the sky ,

ID:	3666
INPUT:	Éí bąą Christ Jesus nihiBóhólníihii nihee dahazlį́'ígi át'éego baa dadzíínóhłíigo bee dayínóhkááh ,
PRED:	So you are confident in the Lord Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And now , just as you accepted Christ Jesus as your Lord , you must continue to follow him .

ID:	3667
INPUT:	Háálá Ízrel dine'é éí Ííjip kéyahdi aláahgo naat'áanii Féro biyaadę́ę́' Bóhólníihii haDiyin God ch'ééhoní'eezhígíí bich'į' ádił nida'jiisíi'go diyin dabidi'níinii dazhdósin nít'éé' .
PRED:	For the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Egypt , who brought the people of Egypt from the land of Egypt . The people of Egypt have sinned against the Lord their God .
GOLD:	This disaster came upon the people of Israel because they worshiped other gods . They sinned against the Lord their God , who had brought them safely out of Egypt and had rescued them from the power of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt .

ID:	3668
INPUT:	Ákót'éego haadzíi'go , łeezh yik'ídeezhée'go bizhéé' yee hashtł'ish áyiilaago diné doo oo'ínígíí binák'eegi yííztłéé' ,
PRED:	Then he measured the dust and burned it on it . He put it on it , and he planted it with a clay pot .
GOLD:	Then he spit on the ground , made mud with the saliva , and spread the mud over the blind man 's eyes .

ID:	3669
INPUT:	Héírim ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idts'áadah .
PRED:	The citizens of Harim320
GOLD:	The family of Harim1,017

ID:	3670
INPUT:	Shich'į' haadzíi'go níłch'i shiih hóóle' áádóó shiisį'go yee shich'į' haadzí'ígíí diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	He has spoken to me , and he has spoken to me .
GOLD:	The Spirit came into me as he spoke , and he set me on my feet . I listened carefully to his words .

ID:	3671
INPUT:	Áko jííchxǫ'go shił bééhoozin ; éí asdzání t'áá áłah t'ááłáhí góne' ałkéé' íí'áázh .
PRED:	So I know what I am saying , and each woman was married to them .
GOLD:	I saw the way she was going , defiling herself just like her older sister .

ID:	3672
INPUT:	Diné ájooníłígíí binahoji'á , nidi Bóhólníihii hoyoołááł .
PRED:	The human hands are sick , but the Lord heal him .
GOLD:	We can make our plans , but the Lord determines our steps .

ID:	3673
INPUT:	Háadishą' nidiné dahóyáanii ? Áko háni'dii k'ad nił dahalne' áádóó háni'dii t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Ííjip dine'é <unk> ijį' yinahaz'áanii bił béédahoozįįh .
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” the Lord of Heaven 's Armies replied . “ Let the Egyptians know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has come to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Where are your wise counselors , Pharaoh ? Let them tell you what God plans , what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is going to do to Egypt .

ID:	3674
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Sálaman éí Jerúsalemdi Dził Moráíyahgi éí hazhé'é David yę́ę Bóhólníihii bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaaígi David yę́ę éí Jííbas dine'é <unk> habí'íná'ál'isígi hasht'ehoolaaígi ákwii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin áyi'niilaa .
PRED:	Then Solomon made a solemn oath that the Lord had done to his father , David , who had made the Amorites in Jerusalem to rebuild the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	So Solomon began to build the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah , where the Lord had appeared to David , his father . The Temple was built on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite , the site that David had selected .

ID:	3675
INPUT:	Nihijéí bił dahózhóonii doo át'ée da silį́į́' índa da'azhish yę́ę t'óó cha násdlį́į́' .
PRED:	Our hearts are filled with weeping and violence .
GOLD:	Joy has left our hearts ; our dancing has turned to mourning .

ID:	3676
INPUT:	Hasbídí nidayiiłniihii ábizhdííniid , Díidí ch'ídahohjááh ; shiTaa' bikin biyi' góne' t'áadoo na'iiniih bá haz'ą́ągo ádaał'íní .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of these things , ” he told them . “ Do n't remember these things in my Father 's house . ”
GOLD:	Then , going over to the people who sold doves , he told them , “ Get these things out of here . Stop turning my Father 's house into a marketplace ! ”

ID:	3677
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman éí naadiin naakidi mííl béégashii índa neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi míilgo dibé éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááyiisnii' . Kót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó diné t'áá ałtso Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizin diyingo nideideez'ą́ .
PRED:	So King Solomon sacrificed 200 sheep and goats , and he presented them to the Lord . So the people of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	King Solomon offered a sacrifice of 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep and goats . And so the king and all the people dedicated the Temple of God .

ID:	3678
INPUT:	Nít'éé' náánáła' atsá ayóida ánáánát'éé léi' , bit'a' ayóida át'éédóó bits'os ahineestihgo hólǫ́ǫ́ léi' náánát'a'go ; éí á'íí'áhídóó behétł'óól índa bits'áoz'a' tó yił niyiikaah doo biniyé bich'į'go dínéesą́ .
PRED:	One of the tree was a great tree , and a man who planted it with a huge eagle that covered it with a piece of water , and it covered it with water .
GOLD:	But then another great eagle camewith broad wings and full plumage.So the vine now sent its roots and branchestoward him for water ,

ID:	3679
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó diné ádaa dahojoolbá'íii t'áá ałtso yisdéidoonił biniyé Diyin God deesdzilgo na'ak'íyáshti' yę́ędą́ą́' ákódzaa . Síilah .
PRED:	I will rescue the poor from the earth , and I will make the foundations of the earth.Interlude
GOLD:	You stand up to judge those who do evil , O God , and to rescue the oppressed of the earth.Interlude

ID:	3680
INPUT:	áádóó asdzání hahastiin yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo náánáła' diné hahastiin ánáájiidlaago , éí ałdó' azhdíílá .
PRED:	He has taken his husband 's husband , and he has buried her husband .
GOLD:	And if a woman divorces her husband and marries someone else , she commits adultery . ”

ID:	3681
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hach'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áháłní , Ts'ídá aláahgoígíí éí díí , Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , da'íísółts'ą́ą́' : Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí Bóhólníihii t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	Then Jesus said to him , “ Listen to this message from the Lord : The God of Israel ,
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ The most important commandment is this : ‘ Listen , O Israel ! The our God is the one and only .

ID:	3682
INPUT:	Díí naaltsoos bii' bee haz'áanii bee ak'e'ashchínígíí nídooh'aahgo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii bíighahgi ninoh'aah ; nihidiilkaalgo yáłti' doo biniyé ákwii si'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Scriptures say : ‘ The Ark of the Lord your God is about to enter the Ark of the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	“ Take this Book of Instruction and place it beside the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord your God , so it may remain there as a witness against the people of Israel .

ID:	3683
INPUT:	Áádóó Gethsémanii hoolyéhígi jíkaigo hódahooł'aahii ábizhdííniid , T'áá kwe'é nahísóotą́ , shí nahí sodideeszįįł .
PRED:	Then he said to the disciples , “ I will pray for you . ”
GOLD:	They went to the olive grove called Gethsemane , and Jesus said , “ Sit here while I go and pray . ”

ID:	3684
INPUT:	Shoo , Job , díí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' , ge' , t'óó bida'ayóigo Diyin God binaanish danilíinii baa nitsíníkees .
PRED:	Listen to this , Job , O God.Pay attention to the mighty works of God .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention to this , Job.Stop and consider the wonderful miracles of God !

ID:	3685
INPUT:	Yéé' bik'ee índa nahasdzáán bikáa'gi báhádzidii nawólníinii bik'ee háni' áńdaadįįh doo , háálá yá'ąąshdi bee dahółdzilii dadoogał .
PRED:	The earth will be crushed , and the words of the earth will disappear . For the words of the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	People will be terrified at what they see coming upon the earth , for the powers in the heavens will be shaken .

ID:	3686
INPUT:	Ázgad ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin naaki .
PRED:	The family of Elam1,254
GOLD:	The family of Azgad1,222

ID:	3687
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí béésh nídaazbąsii bik'ehgo dah adiyiidleehígíí binda'adlo'ii índa bee ída'neel'ąąhí bee ha'iikaahii bina'adlo'ii éí t'áá áłah doo yíłdin da .
PRED:	The Lord detests dishonest scales and dishonest scales ; he detests dishonest scales .
GOLD:	False weights and unequal measures — the Lord detests double standards of every kind .

ID:	3688
INPUT:	Sámuel éí Bénjamin dine'é t'ááłá'í hooghandóó danilíinii át'áahjį' áłah ánáájiidlaa , áádóó <unk> ba'áłchíní nídii'nil , áadi índa Sámuel éí <unk> ba'áłchíní át'áahjį' áłah ánáájiidlaago Kish biye' Saul nídiiltį́ . Nidi Saul há dahozdéez'į́į́' nít'éé' t'áadoo shójoozt'e' da .
PRED:	When Samuel returned to the tribe of Benjamin , the people of Benjamin gathered up to the place where Saul had said to Saul , “ As surely as the sons of Benjamin , Saul , the sons of Saul , and Saul 's sons were born to Saul . ”
GOLD:	Then he brought each family of the tribe of Benjamin before the Lord , and the family of the Matrites was chosen . And finally Saul son of Kish was chosen from among them . But when they looked for him , he had disappeared !

ID:	3689
INPUT:	Háálá ánihidishní , Bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii áádóó Férisii danilíinii biláahgo ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádanoht'éego t'éiyá yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biih hidoohkah .
PRED:	For I tell you the teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law will enter the Kingdom of Heaven . ”
GOLD:	“ But I warn you — unless your righteousness is better than the righteousness of the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees , you will never enter the Kingdom of Heaven !

ID:	3690
INPUT:	Áko David ni'dóó nídii'na'go táádeesgis áádóó ak'ah yee ádeestłahgo éé' ła' yiih náádzá . Áádóó índa Bóhólníihii bikin góne' yah ííyáago yich'į' nahasá . Áádóó bighangi nádzáago ch'iyáán yiyííkeedgo biyaa ni'íką́ągo ííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	So David got up and went to the ground and threw it into his clothing . Then he went to the Lord and ate it . Then he went to the house of the Lord and ate it .
GOLD:	Then David got up from the ground , washed himself , put on lotions , and changed his clothes . He went to the Tabernacle and worshiped the Lord . After that , he returned to the palace and was served food and ate .

ID:	3691
INPUT:	Áko kót'ée dooleeł : ła'da nighandóó ch'íníyáii kintaa atiinjį' ííyáago éí t'áá bí dił bik'ee chxii'go ánábi'diilyaago dadootsaał ; nihí éí doo bee ádidahodidiilt'ih da , áádóó t'áá háiida nighan góne' bił nahíínítánígíí bidił bik'ee chxii'go ályaii daaztsą́ągo nihí éí bá naniideeh doo ; ła'da atíbiilaago ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ If someone goes out out into the house , it will be thrown into the streets and throw it into the streets , and you will die in the streets . If you die , you will die , you will die , and you will die . ”
GOLD:	If they go out into the street and are killed , it will not be our fault . But if anyone lays a hand on people inside this house , we will accept the responsibility for their death .

ID:	3692
INPUT:	Áko díí biniyé t'áá áłahjį' nihá sodadiilzin , éí nihiDiyin God yee nihá íinízinii yee nihíká ádííniidii bą́ą́h da'nohłį́įgo ánihidoolííł . Áádóó t'áá ałtsojį' yá'át'ééh ádaahníił dooleełígíí biniyé , índa oodlą' bee baa dadzíínóhłíigo baa nidaahkaígíí bibee adziilii yee nihá ła'yidoolííł .
PRED:	And if you pray for us , we will pray to God for you . And if you do what is right , you will do for you , and you will receive your faith in everything you have done .
GOLD:	So we keep on praying for you , asking our God to enable you to live a life worthy of his call . May he give you the power to accomplish all the good things your faith prompts you to do .

ID:	3693
INPUT:	Áko Híífer biye' Ziilófehad t'áadoo biye'ké hazlį́į' da , nidi hatsi'ké t'éí hólǫ́ . Díí Ziilófehad bitsi'ké kódaolyé : Mála , Nóah , Hágla , Mílka índa Térza .
PRED:	The sons of Zelophehad were Zelophehad , Zelophehad , and his daughters were unable to bury the sons of Zelophehad . This was the son of Noah . This was the son of Noah .
GOLD:	( One of Hepher 's descendants , Zelophehad , had no sons , but his daughters ' names were Mahlah , Noah , Hoglah , Milcah , and Tirzah . )

ID:	3694
INPUT:	Éí bąą shoo , nik'ijį' k'ídíshnii'go ch'iyáán naa hidish'aahii áłch'į́į́dígo áshłaa áádóó Filístiya dine'é bitsi'ké t'óó baa'ihgo hinínánígíí yaa yá danízinii , éí nik'ee dadiniihígíí baa nidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	Now I am telling you , ‘ I am sending you a little while I am telling you the truth . ' ”
GOLD:	That is why I struck you with my fist and reduced your boundaries . I handed you over to your enemies , the Philistines , and even they were shocked by your lewd conduct .

ID:	3695
INPUT:	Áádóó náhookǫsjigo hak'ijį' k'ídidoolchiłgo Asíriya dine'é atíidoolííł índa Níneveh kin haal'áii t'áá ádzaaí íidoolíiłgo honoojíígóó hóółtsei nahalingo haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	He will strike the north of Assyria and destroy the land of Assyria . He will destroy the land of Nineveh and across the land of Assyria .
GOLD:	And the Lord will strike the lands of the north with his fist , destroying the land of Assyria.He will make its great capital , Nineveh , a desolate wasteland , parched like a desert .

ID:	3696
INPUT:	áko Beth-hágla haz'ání bíighahgóó náhookǫsjí ch'ínááhoodzo áádóó Tónteel Dók'ǫ́ǫzhii náhookǫsjí táłts'á hiníyínígi nihoodzo ; éí shádi'ááhjígo Jórdan tooh nílínígíí nineel'ą́ ; díí éí shádi'ááhjígo hodeesdzo .
PRED:	On the north side of the Jordan River on the north side of the Jordan River . The boundary extended from the Jordan River on the south side of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	ran past the north slope of Beth-hoglah , and ended at the north bay of the Dead Sea , which is the southern end of the Jordan River . This was the southern boundary .

ID:	3697
INPUT:	Hódzą́ bee yáshti' doo . Áádóó shijéí biyi'di bik'i'diitáanii éí nabik'ítséskees doo .
PRED:	I speak to myself , but I can not understand what I say .
GOLD:	For my words are wise , and my thoughts are filled with insight .

ID:	3698
INPUT:	áko ájíní , T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Doo łahgo át'éego dahinohnáágóó índa doo áłchínígi át'éego ída'doołyaagóó , yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ts'ídá doo biih dadoohkah da .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , and you will never enter the Kingdom of Heaven .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ I tell you the truth , unless you turn from your sins and become like little children , you will never get into the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	3699
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí jooba' áádóó aa a'ááh hasin bii' hadeezbin ; doo hah báháchįįh da índa bił hadlee'go aa a'ááh nízin .
PRED:	The Lord is filled with unfailing love , slow to slow to slow to slow to slow to slow .
GOLD:	The Lord is merciful and compassionate , slow to get angry and filled with unfailing love .

ID:	3700
INPUT:	Áádóó nik'isóó Líívai dine'é danilíinii éí nizhé'é yę́ę bidine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó danilį́įgo bił nídííkah , áko éí nihíká anájahgo ni áádóó niye'ké biłgo níbaal bii' hodílzinii bii' neeznáago bik'eh ó'oo'níi łii bee bééhániihii si'ání góne' nihá nidaal'a' doo .
PRED:	And when your brothers and sisters , we will return to the Tabernacle of the tribe of Levi , and we will follow the commands of the Tabernacle . Then you will know that you are in the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Bring your relatives of the tribe of Levi — your ancestral tribe — to assist you and your sons as you perform the sacred duties in front of the Tabernacle of the Covenant .

ID:	3701
INPUT:	Daastee'ii danohłíinii áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii nízaadi bits'ąą dahonohłóonii , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' ;
PRED:	Listen to me , O God.Pay attention to me ,
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you stubborn peoplewho are so far from doing right .

ID:	3702
INPUT:	Nidi áshidííniid , I'dí'nííltsąął , jó'akon , áádóó ashkii dííłchííł , áko wáin , doodaii' tó tsi'na'iiłáii t'áadoo nidlání , índa doo daadą́ą́góó bee nihá haz'áanii doo ła' dííyį́įł da , háálá ashkii t'áá yizhchį́į́dóó daaztsą́ąjį' Diyin God bich'į' Názarait nilį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	But I said , “ You 've never been gone , and I will give birth to a son of wine , wine , wine , wine , and other alcoholic drink . You will eat the blood of God . ”
GOLD:	But he told me , ‘ You will become pregnant and give birth to a son . You must not drink wine or any other alcoholic drink nor eat any forbidden food . For your son will be dedicated to God as a Nazirite from the moment of his birth until the day of his death . ' ”

ID:	3703
INPUT:	Áko yił nidaal'a'í áhóót'įįdígíí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí yik'ee bíni' dei'a' , áko binanit'a'í yaa yíkaigo t'áá át'é yee yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	When the servants saw that they were afraid of their enemies , they told him what they had happened .
GOLD:	“ When some of the other servants saw this , they were very upset . They went to the king and told him everything that had happened .

ID:	3704
INPUT:	Háálá ándííniid , Ałtánídiisghasgo shee ádaa daha'niihii t'áadoo shaa bił dahózhóní .
PRED:	For they said , “ They have made me a covenant with me . ”
GOLD:	I prayed , “ Do n't let my enemies gloat over meor rejoice at my downfall . ”

ID:	3705
INPUT:	Nidi bich'į' nihił dahadlee'go yídin nilínígíí bíighahgo béeso baa nída'ohniłgo bił yá'át'éeh doo .
PRED:	But if you do n't worry about it , it is not good for you .
GOLD:	Instead , be generous and lend them whatever they need .

ID:	3706
INPUT:	Nikwá'ásiní bibéégashii , doodaii' bitéliida atiin bąąhgóó diniite'go doo t'óó dínííł'į́įł da , nidi bíká adíílwołgo bił nídidíídzį́į́s .
PRED:	“ You must not test the ox or a donkey , or you must not murder .
GOLD:	“ If you see that your neighbor 's donkey or ox has collapsed on the road , do not look the other way . Go and help your neighbor get it back on its feet !

ID:	3707
INPUT:	Dahóyáanii dabizaad éí béésh bee adilzhishí nidahalin , áádóó saad nawólta' áłah ályaaígíí éí ił adaalkaałí niłdzilgo eelkaalígíí nahalin ; t'ááłá'í dibé yaa áhályáanii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ályaa .
PRED:	The words of the wise are like silver , and the words of the apostles are like a shepherd . It is like a shepherd of sheep .
GOLD:	The words of the wise are like cattle prods — painful but helpful . Their collected sayings are like a nail-studded stick with which a shepherd drives the sheep .

ID:	3708
INPUT:	Diyin God adinídíín jílį́
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Living in the Light

ID:	3709
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' chánahgo bił ahadadi'nisht'ą́ągo Kéínan kéyah nihaa dideesh'ááł , bidííniid ni' ; t'áá éí kéyah t'óó átsééd yikáá' naasdee'go dé'éyóní danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę baa dideesh'áałgo bee haasdzíí' .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ I will give you the land of Canaan . I will give you a foreigner living among the foreigners living in the land of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	And I reaffirmed my covenant with them . Under its terms , I promised to give them the land of Canaan , where they were living as foreigners .

ID:	3710
INPUT:	Diné t'óó ahayóí ałjeeh nídanilniihgo ahił dahalne' . T'áá ałtsodę́ę'go shił dahółyée'go yádaałti' . Shik'isóó bił ahéédahasinii t'áá ałtso ádił adeesihígíí yiniyé shaa nidahaakaigo t'áá doodahígo shá hadahadziihgo ádaaní , Haa'íyee' t'áá doodahígo bá hadadiidzih ; binda'diidlohgo da'át'é . Ákódzaago hak'eh dadidiidleełgo k'éédahodidiilnííł .
PRED:	“ Son of man , tell me what you say , ‘ Let me curse all my brothers and sisters . Let them curse me , and they will say , ‘ Let us tell me what is right . ' ”
GOLD:	I have heard the many rumors about me.They call me “ The Man Who Lives in Terror. ” They threaten , “ If you say anything , we will report it. ” Even my old friends are watching me , waiting for a fatal slip. “ He will trap himself , ” they say , “ and then we will get our revenge on him . ”

ID:	3711
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii bá naal'a'í jílíinii doo saad hojíłǫ́ǫ da doo , nidi diné t'áá ałtso bich'į' há áhwiinít'į́'í doo , na'nitin jiichįįh doo , ha'jólníi doo ,
PRED:	For the servant of the Lord will be with you , but it will be a gentle person with a gentle heart .
GOLD:	A servant of the Lord must not quarrel but must be kind to everyone , be able to teach , and be patient with difficult people .

ID:	3712
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ák'ina'ooldláadgo ání , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ła' ch'ínáádahót'aah doo ?
PRED:	Then the high priest asked , “ What have you done ? What have you done ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest tore his clothing to show his horror and said , “ Why do we need other witnesses ?

ID:	3713
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , Jesus hadááh níyáago , Nihił hózhǫ́ǫ le' ! hałní . Áko baazhní'áazhgo bikee' dziiłtsoodgo bich'į' nitsizhdinígo' .
PRED:	Then Jesus went to meet him and said , “ Be glad ! ” So he bowed low before him and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	And as they went , Jesus met them and greeted them . And they ran to him , grasped his feet , and worshiped him .

ID:	3714
INPUT:	<unk> baa'níłdįįdgo t'ááká nahjį' kóshólééh yíila' . Doo shidziil da sélį́į'go yóó'ashidóó'ááł lágo .
PRED:	Do n't let me be destroyed , and do n't let me turn away from me .
GOLD:	And now , in my old age , do n't set me aside.Do n't abandon me when my strength is failing .

ID:	3715
INPUT:	Ádaa hojoolbá'ígo yínííł naagháii nááyiiłniihii éí Diyin God bił nilį́ ; Diyin God nílíinii , ádaa hojoolbá'ígo t'áá bijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' ádił ni'iisíi'go yąąh bíni'go yínííł naagháii éí doo nahjį' kódíílíił da .
PRED:	He is the proud of the wicked , and he is the God of the wicked , the God of the wicked . It is the sin of the wickedness of sin .
GOLD:	The sacrifice you desire is a broken spirit.You will not reject a broken and repentant heart , O God .

ID:	3716
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' ajooba' saad éí áshįįh halnihígi át'éego bee yádaałti' , ákódaaht'į́įgo diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo bich'į' t'ą́ą́' háá'doodzihgi nihił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	Do n't be angry with salt , and you will teach you what you have done . Then you will show you your kindness to each other .
GOLD:	Let your conversation be gracious and attractive so that you will have the right response for everyone .

ID:	3717
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ámalek dine'é Réfidim hoolyéegi yíkaigo Ízrel dine'é yił da'ahoogą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then he left the Amalekites and attacked Israel .
GOLD:	While the people of Israel were still at Rephidim , the warriors of Amalek attacked them .

ID:	3718
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Paul ádííniid , K'adę́ę dinínígíí éí dooda , nidi t'áá aaníí oodlání nílį́į laanaa nisin , áádóó doo t'áá ni t'éiyá da nidi díí jį́ dashidiizts'ą́'ígíí t'áá ałtso shígi ádaone' laanaa nisin , t'áá hazhó'ó díí shílátsíín aznilígíí éí doo át'ée dooleeł yę́ę nisin .
PRED:	But Paul said , “ I am afraid of you , but you are not my followers . You have heard what I have done for you , but you have heard what you have done for me .
GOLD:	Paul replied , “ Whether quickly or not , I pray to God that both you and everyone here in this audience might become the same as I am , except for these chains . ”

ID:	3719
INPUT:	E'e'aahjí kin bii' sohodizin bich'į'go kin ła' náánást'ą́ ; éí kin si'ánígíí naaniigo t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'éíts'áadah ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákóníłtéél , nááseego éí t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindóó ba'aan táá' ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákóhonízah ; kin bá nástł'inígíí t'áá dį́į́'dę́ę'go tseebíí ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódeidéetą́ą́' .
PRED:	On the east side of the Temple was 871/2 feet long and 21 feet wide , which was 871/2 feet long . The Temple was 871/2 feet long and 871/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	A large building stood on the west , facing the Temple courtyard . It was 1221/2 feet wide and 1571/2 feet long , and its walls were 83/4 feet thick .

ID:	3720
INPUT:	Ahééh danohsingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' dahohtaał ; tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii bee bá nidaahnéego nihiDiyin God baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Sing to the Lord your God , and praise the harp of the harp .
GOLD:	Sing out your thanks to the Lord ; sing praises to our God with a harp .

ID:	3721
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii ashdladiin dooleełjį' ashdla' bee bi'ohgoshą' , da' ashdla' bee bi'oh nidiísh kin haal'áii t'áá át'é ałdó' ádííłdįįł ? Áko ádííniid , Dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' bik'íníyáago lá kin haal'áii doo ádeeshdįįł da ni .
PRED:	“ Are you going to destroy fifty righteous people ? ” he asked . “ Why did n't you destroy the city ? ” So he replied , “ I will not destroy it . ”
GOLD:	Suppose there are only forty-five righteous people rather than fifty ? Will you destroy the whole city for lack of five ? ” And the Lord said , “ I will not destroy it if I find forty-five righteous people there . ”

ID:	3722
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii yéego ajiiłhaazhígi é'ét'éego índa danółch'ilgo ánihiilaa ; danihináá' áádóó danihitsiits'iin éí áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii áádóó nihá bił éédahózinii danilíinii yik'é'ésti' .
PRED:	For the Lord has made us strong , and you are as strong as the Egyptians , and your eyes are filled with pain .
GOLD:	For the Lord has poured out on you a spirit of deep sleep.He has closed the eyes of your prophets and visionaries .

ID:	3723
INPUT:	Díí óola bee ch'ozh bééda'alyaii éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii át'éego Filístiya dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádayiisnii'ii át'é : ła' éí Áshdad kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Géíza kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Áshkelan kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Gath kin haal'áii bá , ła' éí Ékran kin haal'áii bá náádayiisnii' .
PRED:	This is what the Ark of the Lord had said to the Philistines : “ The Philistines will also be killed with the Philistines , along with Ekron , along with Ekron , and Ekron , will be killed with the Philistines . ”
GOLD:	The five gold tumors sent by the Philistines as a guilt offering to the Lord were gifts from the rulers of Ashdod , Gaza , Ashkelon , Gath , and Ekron .

ID:	3724
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Barziléíyai áyidííniid , Wónaanígóó shił díí'ash , áko Jerúsalem kin haal'áadi shits'ą́ą́' ííyą́ą doo .
PRED:	The king replied , “ You 've never returned to Jerusalem . I have never been taken away from Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	“ Come across with me and live in Jerusalem , ” the king said to Barzillai . “ I will take care of you there . ”

ID:	3725
INPUT:	Ayóó áníínílninígíí bąą t'áá íiyisí ádaa hó'niih nít'éé' ; naa ha'niihígíí biniinaa bee honíyáanii ałtso yíníłchxǫ' . Aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii daniníł'į́į doo biniyé ni' bikáa'jį' hadaniyííłhan .
PRED:	You have broken the proud king because of your covenant . You have broken the king 's covenant with all the kings of the earth .
GOLD:	Your heart was filled with pridebecause of all your beauty.Your wisdom was corruptedby your love of splendor.So I threw you to the groundand exposed you to the curious gaze of kings .

ID:	3726
INPUT:	Síriya dine'é áádóó Íífreiyim dine'é índa Remeláíyah biye' nilíinii ahił ch'odaasne'go t'óó baa'ihgo nindahaz'ą́ągo ádaaní ,
PRED:	“ The people of Israel are like straw and Rebekah , the daughter of Rebekah , have spoken to us .
GOLD:	Yes , the kings of Syria and Israel are plotting against him , saying ,

ID:	3727
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné ádashidííniid , Díí baa nanináhígíishą' ha'át'íí nihiłní ? Da' éísh doo bee nihił hodíílnih da ?
PRED:	“ What do you mean ? ” they asked . “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people asked , “ What does all this mean ? What are you trying to tell us ? ”

ID:	3728
INPUT:	Áko tágí jį́ aleeh góne' Ízrel dine'é dah náádiikaigo Bénjamin dine'é yik'i náánéijéé' áádóó t'áá átsé ádaadzaa yę́ęgi át'éego Gíbiyah kin haal'áii yaa ninááhaakai .
PRED:	On the third day the third day of the tribe of Benjamin went to Gibeah , and the people of Benjamin went to Gibeah .
GOLD:	They went out on the third day and took their positions at the same place as before .

ID:	3729
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sámuel yił hoolne'go t'ááłá'í yiską́ hadziihgo Saul doogáałgo ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord told Samuel ,
GOLD:	Now the Lord had told Samuel the previous day ,

ID:	3730
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' Bóhólníihii baa hashniih doo ; t'ááłáhígi át'éego baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord , for I will praise the Lord .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord at all times.I will constantly speak his praises .

ID:	3731
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniyéhígóó danilíinii bits'ą́ąjį' dínísh'į́įgo áshíínísin , áádóó náshiiłnaahgo nik'ehgo áhoot'ééjí shiyíí<unk> dooleeł .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of me ; do n't let me follow my decrees and regulations .
GOLD:	Turn my eyes from worthless things , and give me life through your word .

ID:	3732
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , kin bii' sohodizin t'áá bee hódahólníih doo , índa ákwe'é naanish nidaat'i'ígíí t'áá ałtso baa nidajikai doo , índa wóne'é naanish danilíinii éí t'áá ałtso baa nidajikai doo .
PRED:	But the people of the Temple will be able to work in the Temple , and they will do everything they do .
GOLD:	They are to serve as the Temple caretakers , taking charge of the maintenance work and performing general duties .

ID:	3733
INPUT:	Áádóó dé'éyóní nílį́įgo kéyah biyi' kééhót'ínígíí naa dideesh'ááł ; Kéínan kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áádóó na'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii hool'áágóó daabíí' dooleeł , áádóó biDiyin God nishłį́į doo .
PRED:	I will give you land among the foreigners living in the land of Canaan . I will give you the land of Canaan , and I will be their God forever .
GOLD:	And I will give the entire land of Canaan , where you now live as a foreigner , to you and your descendants . It will be their possession forever , and I will be their God . ”

ID:	3734
INPUT:	K'idoolyáago íí'áhígi tooh binázlį́ , áádóó éí tó bits'ádaazlį́įgo binaagóó tsin yíl'áhígíí t'áá ałtso da'adlą́ , áko éí gad íí'áhígíí t'óó ahayóí tó baa nílį́ , áádóó éí tóhígíí yee wót'ááh níísą́ .
PRED:	Those who have planted the river and water from the river , and the springs of water flowed from the waters . It is a great waters of water , and the waters covered it with water .
GOLD:	Deep springs watered itand helped it to grow tall and luxuriant.The water flowed around it like a river , streaming to all the trees nearby .

ID:	3735
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , Peter , ándishní , díí tł'éé' naa'ahóóhai biką'í t'áadoo ániihí táadi doo hwééhasin da shididííniił .
PRED:	Then Peter said , “ I tell you the rooster rooster rooster rooster rooster rooster rooster rooster crows three days later , you will deny three times . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ Peter , let me tell you something . Before the rooster crows tomorrow morning , you will deny three times that you even know me . ”

ID:	3736
INPUT:	Áko dadzitsaahígíí yiyíínii'go , t'áá ákwii naagháago naaki náánéíską́ .
PRED:	So he breathed his hand and waited for three days .
GOLD:	he stayed where he was for the next two days .

ID:	3737
INPUT:	Áko Jerúsalem góne' ajííyáago t'áá át'éé nít'éé' hahodíídláád , Díishą' háí át'į́ , ha'níigo .
PRED:	When he returned to Jerusalem , he asked him , “ Who is the greatest ? ”
GOLD:	The entire city of Jerusalem was in an uproar as he entered . “ Who is this ? ” they asked .

ID:	3738
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Solomon 's Agreement with Hiram

ID:	3739
INPUT:	Tł'iish bik'aasda' nahalingo hwe'ánít'į́į́h dahólǫ́ . Tł'iish jé'áhodilkałii nidahojílin .
PRED:	Like snakes , they are like poisonous snakes , they are like snakes .
GOLD:	They spit venom like deadly snakes ; they are like cobras that refuse to listen ,

ID:	3740
INPUT:	Éí bíighah góne' Símiyan dine'é niná'néeh doo ; Zúrishádai biye' Shiilúmiyel éí Símiyan dine'é yinanit'a'í nilį́ .
PRED:	They left the tribe of Simeon , named after their ancestor Simeon , named after their ancestor Simeon .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	3741
INPUT:	Tsé yóó'adahaltł'iid baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó tsé áłah ál'į́ baa hwiilzhíísh ; ałzéé' ásnii' baa hwiilzhíísh áádóó doo ałzéé' ásnii' da baa hwiilzhíísh .
PRED:	A time to grow up , and a time to grow into the mouth of a harvest . It 's not a time to eat .
GOLD:	A time to scatter stones and a time to gather stones.A time to embrace and a time to turn away .

ID:	3742
INPUT:	Mó'ab kéyahgi kéédahoht'íinii kin hadaas'áádóó hah wohkáahgo tséníí'góó kéédahoht'į́ áádóó hasbídí a'áándáa'gi bit'oh áyiił'įįhígi át'éego ída'dołnééh .
PRED:	“ When you live in the land of Moab , go out to the valley of Moab , near the valley of Moab .
GOLD:	“ You people of Moab , flee from your towns and live in the caves.Hide like doves that nestin the clefts of the rocks .

ID:	3743
INPUT:	Áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́į́'dóó biiskání damį́įgo aleeh góne' naaniiníłką́ągo , Mary Mágdaliin áádóó Mary ła'ígíí tséní'ootséelgo Jesus yóó'ályaadi jidínóoł'įįł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ jiní'áázh .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day the next day , during the Sabbath day of Mary Magdalene , Mary Magdalene , Mary Magdalene , and Mary Magdalene .
GOLD:	Early on Sunday morning , as the new day was dawning , Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went out to visit the tomb .

ID:	3744
INPUT:	Éí t'áadoo baa nídaaht'íní ; doo da'oo'į́į́góó nida'a'eeshígíí ádaat'į́ . Áko diné doo oo'íinii náánáła' diné doo oo'íinii yoolóosgo , t'áá áłah a'ą́dínóodah .
PRED:	“ Do n't be fooled by a blind man who has blind blind blind blind — a blind person who is a blind person who is a blind to a blind person .
GOLD:	so ignore them . They are blind guides leading the blind , and if one blind person guides another , they will both fall into a ditch . ”

ID:	3745
INPUT:	Áko bidee' neeznáá yadaa'áhígíí bee óhólnííh bił haz'áanii bii'dóó éí aláahgo naat'áanii neeznált'éego nídahidiikáhígíí át'é . Díí bikéédę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii nínáádidoodáałgo neeznált'éhígíí doo yił aheełt'ée da dooleełgo éí aláahgo naat'áanii tált'éhígíí yik'eh didoodleeł .
PRED:	The ten horns of the ten horns of the king , and the king will return to the king 's throne . This will never return to the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Its ten horns are ten kings who will rule that empire . Then another king will arise , different from the other ten , who will subdue three of them .

ID:	3746
INPUT:	Ádaa ádahołyą́ągo t'ááká didlidgo nááhániihii t'áá áhoodzaagi náádahołniih lágo .
PRED:	Never forget the burnt offering .
GOLD:	Be careful not to sacrifice your burnt offerings just anywhere you like .

ID:	3747
INPUT:	Mt . 3 : 1-12
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	The First Disciples

ID:	3748
INPUT:	Diné hóyáanii íists'ą́ą' doo , áádóó náásgóó óhooł'aah doo ; diné bił ééhózinii hódzą́ągo yáti' t'éí hát'į́į doo ,
PRED:	A wise answer , and a wise answer , but a wise person hates a wise person .
GOLD:	Let the wise listen to these proverbs and become even wiser.Let those with understanding receive guidance

ID:	3749
INPUT:	Áko Sámuel éí Jésii áyidííniid , Na'áłchíníísh t'áá ałtso kwe'é ? Áko ázhdííniid , Akéédę́'ígíí t'éiyá t'ah doo yígháah da ; éí dibé yaa áhályą́ . Áádóó Sámuel éí Jésii ánéidoo'niid , Ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ díł'áago áádę́ę́' doogááł , háálá doo díníibįįł da , jiníyáago índa .
PRED:	“ What do you want to die ? ” David asked . “ No , ” he replied . “ I ca n't go back to bed with the sheep or goats . ” So Samuel replied , “ I 'll go out and go out . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel asked , “ Are these all the sons you have ? ” “ There is still the youngest , ” Jesse replied . “ But he 's out in the fields watching the sheep and goats. ” “ Send for him at once , ” Samuel said . “ We will not sit down to eat until he arrives . ”

ID:	3750
INPUT:	Éí bąą ashja'ósingo haa'íshą' diné t'áá ałtso baa dajiiniiba'go nizhónígo bindeiilnish doo , Christ dayoodlání danilíinii íiyisí agháago bindeiilnish doo .
PRED:	So why do n't worry about Christ 's kindness ? We want to trust in Christ 's work in Christ 's work .
GOLD:	Therefore , whenever we have the opportunity , we should do good to everyone — especially to those in the family of faith .

ID:	3751
INPUT:	Áko hadáahgi t'áá nidaho'diizhchínígi át'éego dah deidineesbin , áko diné ałch'į' yik'ee t'óó bił adahayóí .
PRED:	Then many of the people were amazed at the distance , and many were amazed .
GOLD:	Joseph told each of his brothers where to sit , and to their amazement , he seated them according to age , from oldest to youngest .

ID:	3752
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , dízdiin nááhaijį' honoojíidi didlidgo náádahaniihígíí áádóó náádahaniihiísh shich'į' náádahołniih nít'éé' ?
PRED:	O Israel , how long are you forty years old enough to offer sacrifices to me in the wilderness ?
GOLD:	“ Was it to me you were bringing sacrifices and offerings during the forty years in the wilderness , Israel ?

ID:	3753
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí dahaníbaal ninádaji'nił doo ; diné t'ááłá'í nízínígo t'áá hó haníbaal ninát'áahgi , t'áá hó hadah na'at'a'í bíighahgi ninádaji'néeh doo .
PRED:	So the Israelites left their camp , and they moved to their camp beside the camp of the camp .
GOLD:	Each tribe of Israel will camp in a designated area with its own family banner .

ID:	3754
INPUT:	Áádóó níbaal bii' dahozdísinii índa bikáá' náá'iiniihí bita'gi bii' tá'ádígisí niiní'ą́ągo tó bee tá'ádazdigis dooleełígíí niiníką́ .
PRED:	The altar of the Tabernacle and the washbasin with water , and the washbasin with water .
GOLD:	Next Moses placed the washbasin between the Tabernacle and the altar . He filled it with water so the priests could wash themselves .

ID:	3755
INPUT:	Shidine'é Ízrel bitahgi éí shízhi' diyinii bééhózingo ádeeshłííł , áádóó shízhi' diyinii doo ílį́į́góó ts'ídá doo bee hanáá'doodzih da , áko índa Ízrel dine'é bitahgi Bóhólníihii Diyinii nishłį́įgo ał'ąą dine'é bił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will make my name among Israel , my name will be honored among my people , and my name will know that I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	“ In this way , I will make known my holy name among my people of Israel . I will not let anyone bring shame on it . And the nations , too , will know that I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	3756
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa éí Jériko kin haal'áádóó Éí'ai kin haal'áajį' diné ła' dah dahizhdiił'a' ; Éí'ai éí Beth<unk> kin shijaa' bíighahgi Béthel ha'a'aahjígo kin haal'áhígóó dazdees'a'go ábizhdííniid , Nihílááh , kéyah hadaahsííd . Áko éí diné naalchi'í danilį́įgo Éí'aigóó eekaigo hada'íísid .
PRED:	So Joshua sent some men from Jericho to the town of Ai and explored the town of Bethel . Then Joshua sent them out to Bethel and ran out to the town of Bethel . Then he told them , “ Go back to Bethel . ”
GOLD:	Joshua sent some of his men from Jericho to spy out the town of Ai , east of Bethel , near Beth-aven .

ID:	3757
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáłígíí adayiiską́ą́dóó bik'ijį'díí bee aha'deet'ą́ nilíinii Ízrel dine'é bee bił ahadadi'deesht'ááł , ní Bóhólníihii : Bee hoséł'áanii bintsíkees biih dadeeshłééłáádóó dabijéí biyi'di bee bik'eda'deeshchííł . BiDiyin God nishłį́į doo , áádóó bí shidine'é danilį́į doo .
PRED:	On that day the day of the new covenant with the people of Israel , says the Lord , “ I am the God of Israel , and I will give them their hearts to their hearts . I will be their God , and I will be their hearts . ”
GOLD:	But this is the new covenant I will makewith the people of Israel on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their minds , and I will write them on their hearts.I will be their God , and they will be my people .

ID:	3758
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ą́ą́dóó diyin dabidi'níinii áádóó e'elyaii ch'íyiizhjaa' . Índa dziłgi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígi áádóó Jerúsalemgi bikáá' nááda'iiniihí ádayiilaii t'áá át'é kin haal'áádóó ch'íyiizyį́ .
PRED:	Then he took the sacred pillars from the Temple of the Lord and placed it in the worship of the Temple of the Lord . He also built an altar to worship the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Manasseh also removed the foreign gods and the idol from the Lord 's Temple . He tore down all the altars he had built on the hill where the Temple stood and all the altars that were in Jerusalem , and he dumped them outside the city .

ID:	3759
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso bił k'é da'ahidoh'níi dooleełígíí , áádóó diyingo dahinohnáa dooleełígíí bidadoołkaal . T'áá háiida doo ákójít'į́į́góó éí Bóhólníihii doo yizdoołtséeł da .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who say , ‘ Those who say , ‘ We will never see the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	Work at living in peace with everyone , and work at living a holy life , for those who are not holy will not see the Lord .

ID:	3760
INPUT:	Áko tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł o'oolkaalígi t'áá éí nahós'a'gi tsin bił dah náháltso , áko ákwe'é ániidígo tséní'ootséelgo ts'ídá t'ah doo áajį' diné ła' yóó'álnéeh da .
PRED:	So the cross of the cross of the cross , and there was no one in the province of Asia . There was no one in the tomb .
GOLD:	The place of crucifixion was near a garden , where there was a new tomb , never used before .

ID:	3761
INPUT:	Diyin God bibee ajooba' t'áá íiyisí nihilááh neel'ą́ągo nihee dahólónígíí bąą , nihídin danilį́ índa nihá sodadilzin .
PRED:	And we have no mercy on God 's mercy , and we have no mercy .
GOLD:	And they will pray for you with deep affection because of the overflowing grace God has given to you .

ID:	3762
INPUT:	Díí k'ad hoolzhishígíí biyi' t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo ííshją́ą́ í'dólzin dishní , háálá ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo bééhózin áádóó t'áá háiida Jesus joodlą́ągo beijólíhígíí ádił ni'dziisíi'ii há yóó'iidiiz'ą́ągo , k'ad t'áá ákogi ádajít'é hałníigo há haadzíi'go bééhózin .
PRED:	And now I know that you are righteous and righteous , for you know that everyone is righteous and righteous and righteous , and those who believe in Jesus Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	for he was looking ahead and including them in what he would do in this present time . God did this to demonstrate his righteousness , for he himself is fair and just , and he makes sinners right in his sight when they believe in Jesus .

ID:	3763
INPUT:	Héínan ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Gídel ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Géíhar ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	Jaalah , Giddel ,
GOLD:	Hanan , Giddel , Gahar ,

ID:	3764
INPUT:	T'áá honoojíidi Mózes éí tł'iish dah hizhdiiłt'e' yę́ęgi át'éego , Diné Silį́į'ii dah hididoolt'eeł ,
PRED:	But when Moses was raised into the wilderness , he will die in the wilderness of Man ,
GOLD:	And as Moses lifted up the bronze snake on a pole in the wilderness , so the Son of Man must be lifted up ,

ID:	3765
INPUT:	Díí Ízrel ba'áłchíní Ííjip kéyahdi nínánígíí dabízhi' ; Jéíkab áádóó biye'ké : Jéíkab há alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí Rúben wolyé ,
PRED:	These are the names of the tribes of Israel , the oldest son of Jacob , the oldest son of Jacob , the oldest son of Jacob .
GOLD:	These are the names of the descendants of Israel — the sons of Jacob — who went to Egypt : Reuben was Jacob 's oldest son .

ID:	3766
INPUT:	Haadzihgo wót'áahdi t'óó ahayóí tó yileeh ; nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' siil dego dah nída'diijołgo ánáyiil'įįh . Nahałtingo atsiniltł'ish t'áá bił anídahata'go ánáyiil'įįh . Binaalye'é bitahdę́ę́' níyolgo ánáyiil'įįh .
PRED:	Let the earth say , “ Let the earth burst out from the earth , and the lightning flashes of lightning flashes and lightning flashes out from lightning . ”
GOLD:	When he speaks in the thunder , the heavens roar with rain.He causes the clouds to rise over the earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	3767
INPUT:	Áko hodi'yoolyéełgo bee honahast'ánígíí bee shił hóóne'go , t'áá áko akǫ́ǫ́ nich'į' ahóół'a' , áko hak'i dahodii'aahii yee hak'i dahodii'áanii t'áá ninááł yee hadahidoodzih dishníigo bee haasdzíí' . [ K'adí , t'áá ákót'éhí dooleeł . ]
PRED:	So Jesus told me , “ I tell you the truth , and I will tell you what I am going to say . ”
GOLD:	But when I was informed of a plot to kill him , I immediately sent him on to you . I have told his accusers to bring their charges before you . ”

ID:	3768
INPUT:	Łinishzhíínígo biniinaa t'áadoo dashinół'íní , háálá jį́honaa'éí shiishį́į́' . Shimá biyáázhké shich'į' bá nídahachįįhgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áii baa áháshyą́ągo ádashiilaa . Nidi t'áá shí shich'il na'atł'o'ii doo baa áháshyą́ą da nít'éé' .
PRED:	My mother is dark because I am afraid of you , for I am afraid of my mother 's mother . But I did n't let my mother drink wine from the vineyards .
GOLD:	Do n't stare at me because I am dark — the sun has darkened my skin.My brothers were angry with me ; they forced me to care for their vineyards , so I could n't care for myself — my own vineyard .

ID:	3769
INPUT:	Díí bił síníkéego t'ááłáhídi damóo adooleeł , áádóó índa ła'ígíí naa náádadiiltééł ; éí bik'é shá nanilnishgo tsosts'id nínáádoohah .
PRED:	“ Each of you will have seven days , and each of the other will be taken back for seven years .
GOLD:	“ But wait until the bridal week is over ; then we 'll give you Rachel , too — provided you promise to work another seven years for me . ”

ID:	3770
INPUT:	<unk> ni'įįhii ts'ídá doo náázhdí'nóo'į́įł da , nidi hanaanish ílį́įgo joołt'ihgo éí bee badahojoobá'íígíí baa jijooba' doo .
PRED:	“ You must not defile the poor , but you will eat it with good works .
GOLD:	If you are a thief , quit stealing . Instead , use your hands for good hard work , and then give generously to others in need .

ID:	3771
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'idi háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́į́'dóó biiłkáhíjį' ashdladiin jį́ azlį́į'go deínółta' doo , áko náádadi'yoołnihgo náánáła' ak'áán nááhániihii éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	“ On the third day of the third day you must sacrifice one month old or three quarts of grain offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	Keep counting until the day after the seventh Sabbath , fifty days later . Then present an offering of new grain to the Lord .

ID:	3772
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Heziikáíyah yidiizts'ą́ą'go diné nídayííłdzíí' .
PRED:	When Hezekiah heard what the Lord had said ,
GOLD:	And the Lord listened to Hezekiah 's prayer and healed the people .

ID:	3773
INPUT:	Yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo kéyah ahádaasdzo
PRED:	The Land Given to the Land
GOLD:	The Tribe of Reuben

ID:	3774
INPUT:	Áádóó doo adą́ą da daaníigo yee dahooł'a'go Néíbath éí diné bitahdóó alą́ąjį' dah deineesdá .
PRED:	“ You must not eat any of it . ”
GOLD:	They called for a fast and put Naboth at a prominent place before the people .

ID:	3775
INPUT:	Éí ha'át'íí shį́į́ t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ yiizį' , nidi ga' ch'ééh bééhonisįįh ; t'áadoo bahat'aadí kǫ́ǫ́ shidááhgóó sizį́ , nidi ga' doo íits'a'í da , áko ła' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní ,
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” I told him . “ I 'm not here here ! ” And one of them replied , “ No one will tell me what I say . ”
GOLD:	The spirit stopped , but I could n't see its shape.There was a form before my eyes.In the silence I heard a voice say ,

ID:	3776
INPUT:	Abáíjah bits'ą́ą́dóó Zíkrai , Mowadáíyah áádóó Mínyamin bits'ą́ą́dóó Píltai ,
PRED:	Meshullam was full of clothes , and Meshullam was taken from the town of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Zicri was leader of the family of Abijah.There was also a leader of the family of Miniamin.Piltai was leader of the family of Moadiah .

ID:	3777
INPUT:	Áko biye'ké danilíinii anaa' dahodoohłeeł biniyé siláo t'óó ahayóí áłah ádeidoolííł ; ła' éí t'áá yilááh neel'ą́ągo náás oo'ishgo yinéełgo bidziilgo bił haz'áanii yik'ijį' anaa' ánááhodoodlííł .
PRED:	“ Then take many of your sons , and bring them back to war against them .
GOLD:	However , the sons of the king of the north will assemble a mighty army that will advance like a flood and carry the battle as far as the enemy 's fortress .

ID:	3778
INPUT:	Hach'é'é éí tábąąhdi nidaakaii diltłish bee nidabi'didootsił , áko Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	They will know that I am the sword of the Lord , and they will be killed .
GOLD:	and its mainland villages will be destroyed by the sword . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	3779
INPUT:	Máíyamin , Meiyadáíyah , Bílgah ,
PRED:	Meshullam , Hanan ,
GOLD:	Miniamin , Moadiah , Bilgah ,

ID:	3780
INPUT:	Tł'oh łitsooí háánít'į́hígíí nahalingo diné doo yá'ádaashóonii k'ee'ąą dínít'į́įhgo , áádóó diné doo ákwii ádaaníiłii k'ee'ąą dilzhishgo , éí hool'áágóó ábidi'dooldįįłgo át'é .
PRED:	The grass will die like grass , and the wicked will die like grass , and the Lord will destroy the land of the earth .
GOLD:	Though the wicked sprout like weedsand evildoers flourish , they will be destroyed forever .

ID:	3781
INPUT:	Nits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' adinídíinii índa nit'áá aaníinii bee i'díłdlaadgo bíni'dii shiyoołááł ; nidiyingo dah yisk'idgi kééhót'į́įjį' bíni'dii shił iikááh .
PRED:	All these things come from me , and let me throw my hands into the holy mountain.Let me escape .
GOLD:	Send out your light and your truth ; let them guide me.Let them lead me to your holy mountain , to the place where you live .

ID:	3782
INPUT:	béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh , índa łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo éí shékel wolyéii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh ; béésh łigaii łeets'aa' t'áá át'é ahídawóltą'go éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii naakidi mííldóó ba'aan dį́įdi neeznádiin dah hidiidloh .
PRED:	Here is the list of the silver , a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , and the weight of the sanctuary shekel , which equals twenty pounds of silver .
GOLD:	Each silver platter weighed 31/4 pounds , and each silver basin weighed 13/4 pounds . The total weight of the silver was 60 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) .

ID:	3783
INPUT:	doo da'oo'íinii t'áá aaníí yish'ish índa chahałheeł yii' dayíkáhígíí bá adinídíín nishłį́ nínízin .
PRED:	I am the light of those who are pure , and I am the light of light .
GOLD:	You are convinced that you are a guide for the blind and a light for people who are lost in darkness .

ID:	3784
INPUT:	Ákohgo Heziikáíyah áhodííniidgo ání , K'ad Bóhólníihii bich'į' diyingo ats'ánída'asidoht'ą́ ; áyídíjį' ninohkáahgo nááhidoonihii áádóó ahééh hasinjí nááhániihii áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah adaahjááh . Áko áłah nilínígíí éí didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ahééh hasinjí nááhániihii nidayiizhjaa' índa t'áá bí ádeinízinígíí didlidgo nááhániihii nidayiizhjaa' .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to Hezekiah , “ Go to the presence of the Lord , and bring thanks to the Lord . Go to the burnt offerings and burnt offerings , burnt offerings , burnt offerings , burnt offerings , burnt offerings , burnt offerings , sacrifices , and sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah declared , “ Now that you have consecrated yourselves to the Lord , bring your sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings to the Temple of the Lord. ” So the people brought their sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings , and all whose hearts were willing brought burnt offerings , too .

ID:	3785
INPUT:	Jesus Christ bi'dizhchį́
PRED:	The Birth of Jesus Christ
GOLD:	The Birth of Jesus

ID:	3786
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihaa bił hózhǫ́ǫgo díí kéyah nihaididoo'áałgo yiih nihidoo'ish ; éí kéyah yá'áhoot'éehgi abe' índa tsés'ná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįdgo haz'ą́ .
PRED:	The Lord will give you this land that he will give you a land flowing with milk and honey .
GOLD:	And if the Lord is pleased with us , he will bring us safely into that land and give it to us . It is a rich land flowing with milk and honey .

ID:	3787
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Líívai t'áá bí bighangi ayóó át'éego Jesus yá áda'íísįįd , áádóó ákwii tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii índa binaadę́ę́' danilíinii t'óó ahayóí yił da'ayą́ągo nidaháaztą́ .
PRED:	Then Jesus took his house and went to his home , and he sat with his tax collectors and other tax collectors and other other apostles .
GOLD:	Later , Levi held a banquet in his home with Jesus as the guest of honor . Many of Levi 's fellow tax collectors and other guests also ate with them .

ID:	3788
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Diyin God yá halne'ii t'áá aaníí Diyin God yá halne'ii nilínígíí bąą bich'į' k'éznídzingo , éí Diyin God yá halne'ii baa doolyéełii haa doolyééł , áádóó t'áá háiida diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii t'áá aaníí t'áá éí nilínígíí bąą bich'į' k'éznídzingo , éí diné ts'ídá t'áá ákwii át'éii baa doolyéełii haa doolyééł .
PRED:	“ Anyone who believes in God will be like a prophet who has been raised from the prophet . Anyone who believes in him will be ashamed of the righteous will be ashamed of the righteous .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	3789
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' hadziilgo ázhdiilyaago , tsé bee ahéé'ítł'in nideiniiskaadii t'áá át'é hasht'ééjiidlaa , áádóó éí bikáá'dóó yada'iitł'ingo bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí ájiilaa , áádóó tł'óó'dę́ę́' tsé ła' ahéénínáánástł'in , índa David bikin haal'áagi Míllo hoolyéii hasht'ééjiidlaa áádóó bee na'abaahii índa naagé t'óó ahayóigo ádajiilaa .
PRED:	He rebuilt the wall and rebuilt the wall of the wall . He rebuilt the walls of the wall and built the walls of the Temple , and he built the walls of the Temple . He also built a large shields and bronze stand at the entrance of David 's Temple .
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah worked hard at repairing all the broken sections of the wall , erecting towers , and constructing a second wall outside the first . He also reinforced the supporting terraces in the City of David and manufactured large numbers of weapons and shields .

ID:	3790
INPUT:	Índa ashdla' yiłkaah bijį́ dóola yázhí náhást'éigo , deenásts'aa' naakigo índa dibé yázhí dį́į́'ts'áadahgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the festival , sacrifice two young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs with no defects .
GOLD:	“ On the fifth day of the festival , sacrifice nine young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	3791
INPUT:	Nizháá'áád doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da ; éí niye' be'asdzą́ą́ nilį́ ; éí t'ááká t'áá łichí'ígo áwóólééh lágo .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your daughters . Do not have sexual relations with your wife .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law ; she is your son 's wife , so you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	3792
INPUT:	Áko kin biyi'dę́ę́' dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' tsé bik'ijį' nideiskaadgo ahééhool'á ; ni'dóó dego tsé bik'ijį' ádayiilaa , índa sáípres wolyéii tsin dantł'izii tsin neheeshjíí' ályaago ni'góó nideiskaad .
PRED:	Then he took the cedar cedar timber and cypress timber and cypress timber and cypress timber and cypress timber and cypress timber and cypress timber .
GOLD:	The entire inside , from floor to ceiling , was paneled with wood . He paneled the walls and ceilings with cedar , and he used planks of cypress for the floors .

ID:	3793
INPUT:	Ákohgo diyingo naal'a'í shich'į' yáłti'ii ábidishní , Shibóhólníihii , díishą' ha'át'íí ádaat'é ?
PRED:	Then the angel said to me , “ What do you say ? ”
GOLD:	Then I asked the angel , “ What are these , my lord ? What do they mean ? ”

ID:	3794
INPUT:	Háálá shí Bóhólníihii doo haada yit'éii ayóó'óósh'ní ; ani'į́į́' doo yá'áshóonii bił jooshłxá ; t'áá aaníí , bich'į' nida'diyeeshłeeł índa hool'áágóó bił ahada'dideesht'ááł .
PRED:	For I am the Lord , ” says the Lord , “ I will not destroy the wicked , and I will not destroy them .
GOLD:	“ For I , the Lord , love justice.I hate robbery and wrongdoing.I will faithfully reward my people for their sufferingand make an everlasting covenant with them .

ID:	3795
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá shí shíla' bee nitsaago nihich'į' ak'e'ashchíhígíí baa ákodanoohsįįh !
PRED:	I am writing to you , and you are my own hands .
GOLD:	Notice what large letters I use as I write these closing words in my own handwriting .

ID:	3796
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Doo haada yit'éii baa áhólyą́ áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii baa naniná , háálá shibee yisdá'iildéehii k'adę́ę baa hoolzhíísh , índa shit'áá ákogi át'éii yit'íní ádoolnííł .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Be right , for he rescues me from my salvation , for he rescues me from the end of my salvation .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Be just and fair to all.Do what is right and good , for I am coming soon to rescue youand to display my righteousness among you .

ID:	3797
INPUT:	Siláo ła' dah yinééł t'áadoo hooyání béíní'eezhgo dabighandóó bíni'dii chaháá'áago diits'a' , háálá dashidiyoołhééł biniyé a'áán ádahoolaa , áádóó łoh biih dideeshtał biniyé shá nideiznil .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone go out to the grave , for they are trying to kill me because they are trying to kill me .
GOLD:	Let screaming be heard from their homesas warriors come suddenly upon them.For they have dug a pit for meand have hidden traps along my path .

ID:	3798
INPUT:	Áádóó Ádam éí bízhi' ádajiilaii alį́į́' t'áá ałtso áádóó nidaat'a'ii índa nihokáá'góó naaldeehii t'áá ałtso bízhi' hólǫ́ǫgo ájiilaa , nidi Ádam t'áá ákónéehee háká análwo' dooleełii t'ah doo há álnéeh da .
PRED:	And the name of Adam , Adam , and all the people who belong to the name of Adam , the one who made us right with us .
GOLD:	He gave names to all the livestock , all the birds of the sky , and all the wild animals . But still there was no helper just right for him .

ID:	3799
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí díí dine'é kéyah biih nihideesh'ish yiłníigo , yich'į' ádee hadoodzíi'ii doo yínéés'ąądgóó , éí bąą honoojíigi neistseed .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will bring you into the wilderness , and I will plant it in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	‘ The Lord was not able to bring them into the land he swore to give them , so he killed them in the wilderness . '

ID:	3800
INPUT:	K'é ha'níinii
PRED:	Greetings from Paul
GOLD:	Greetings from Paul

ID:	3801
INPUT:	Bitsi' átséhígíí Jiimáíma yee yiyíízhi' , naaki góne'ígíí éí Kezáíya yee yiyíízhi' áádóó táá' góne'ígíí éí <unk> yee yiyíízhi' .
PRED:	The daughter of Joash named Zechariah , and he named the daughter of Ahaziah ( which means “ The three years ” ) .
GOLD:	He named his first daughter Jemimah , the second Keziah , and the third Keren-happuch .

ID:	3802
INPUT:	Mózes éí Éran bił dashdii'áazhgo Féro baazhní'áázh , áko Bóhólníihii t'áá hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bi'jiilaa , áko Éran bigish éí Féro áádóó bá nidaal'a'í biyaajį' ayííłt'e'go tł'iish silį́į́' .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh , and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded Pharaoh . So Aaron took the staff to Pharaoh and his officials .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did what the Lord had commanded them . Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his officials , and it became a serpent !

ID:	3803
INPUT:	Shoo , díí éí Diyin God át'éii t'įįhdígo yee' daah'į́ ; t'įįhdígo yee' baa dahodoohts'a' . Nidi bibee adziilii bee ii'ni' diits'a'ígíísh háí yik'idi'dootį́į́ł ?
PRED:	“ Look , God does n't understand this ! Do you hear the voice of the Almighty ?
GOLD:	These are just the beginning of all that he does , merely a whisper of his power.Who , then , can comprehend the thunder of his power ? ”

ID:	3804
INPUT:	Áko Dził Hor si'ánídóó dah náádii'náago Zalmónah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	So they left Mount Shepher and camped at the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Israelites left Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah .

ID:	3805
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áá shí gad yaa'áhígíí bílátahdóó ła' k'ídeeshtihgo k'idideeshłééł ; bílátahdi ániid náádeitsooígíí éí ła' k'ídeeshtihgo dził agháá'áhígíí bighą́ą'gi k'idideeshłééł ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will plant a tree among the trees of the hills , and I will pour it on the hills .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will take a branch from the top of a tall cedar , and I will plant it on the top of Israel 's highest mountain .

ID:	3806
INPUT:	Kédiimath kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił índa Méfeiyath kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił ; éí dį́į'go kin hadaas'áii Miirárai dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	The following towns were given to their pasturelands : The towns with their pasturelands were named after their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Kedemoth , and Mephaath — four towns .

ID:	3807
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii beidoołkáłígíí t'áá íídą́ą́' nádzá , daaníigo t'áá ádzaagóó nihił dahalne'ígíí t'áadoo bik'ee ch'į́į́góó nitsídanohkeesí , t'áadoo bik'ee ádił nídahodoołchiłí . Jó , diné ła' , Shich'į' yit'íní ályaa , doodaii' , Kót'éego shił hóóne' , doodaii' , Paul áádóó yił naakaígíí naaltsoos ádayiilaii kóní , nínígíí éí t'áadoo t'áá aaníí ání danohsiní .
PRED:	That day the day of the Lord came to you and said , “ If you do n't have a little while you do n't want me to die , or if you do n't know what you have done to me , you are saying , ‘ You are saying , ' or ‘ I am sending Paul , ' and you out . '
GOLD:	Do n't be so easily shaken or alarmed by those who say that the day of the Lord has already begun . Do n't believe them , even if they claim to have had a spiritual vision , a revelation , or a letter supposedly from us .

ID:	3808
INPUT:	Ts'íigo , ts'íigo , daaníinii bíni'dii t'óó baa yáhásinii bee k'éédabi'dólne' !
PRED:	Let them tell them what they say , “ Let 's kill them ! ”
GOLD:	Let them be horrified by their shame , for they said , “ Aha ! We 've got him now ! ”

ID:	3809
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę biBóhólníihii Diyin God baa ha'niih le' ; éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin t'áadoo bee nóoshónígóó ádoolnííł biniyé aláahgo naat'áanii kót'éego bijéí yee tsíideeskééz .
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord our God , the God of our ancestors , the God of our ancestors , just as the Lord our God had promised .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of our ancestors , who made the king want to beautify the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem !

ID:	3810
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí nihiníbaal haal'áhígi nihitahgi hólǫ́ , áko yisdánihiinííł áádóó nihi'ana'í nihílák'ee yidii'aah ; éí bąą nihiníbaal haal'áagi hodiyin dooleeł , áko doo yá'áshóonii doo ła' nihitahgi yiidoołtséeł da , áádóó doo nihits'ą́ą́' dah hodidooleeł da .
PRED:	For the Lord our God is among us , our God will rescue us from our enemies , and we will never see the land of our enemies , and no one will ever see us .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	3811
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí hał yee nínáhodiiłhał bik'eh ásaa' yilghaałígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii nídiits'į́įh doo índa bigaan yiłmazgo anaa' ííł'į́į doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord will roar for the sound of the harp , and the sound of the harp will shout for joy .
GOLD:	And as the Lord strikes them with his rod of punishment , his people will celebrate with tambourines and harps.Lifting his mighty arm , he will fight the Assyrians .

ID:	3812
INPUT:	Tseebíí yiską́ąjį' diné dabighangóó yéé'iisnii' , áko aláahgo naat'áanii yá'át'éehii yee yá hadaasdzíí' índa Bóhólníihii éí yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é bá naal'a'í David yę́ę áádóó bidine'é Ízrel yá yaa naayáhígíí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo índa bijéí bił nidahoozhǫǫhgo dabiníbaalgóó anídahaaskai .
PRED:	On the eighth day , during the eighth day the Lord gave this message to David and his servant David and his servant David and his servant David .
GOLD:	After the festival was over , Solomon sent the people home . They blessed the king and went to their homes joyful and glad because the Lord had been good to his servant David and to his people Israel .

ID:	3813
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3814
INPUT:	Áádóó nihíká adoojahii éí dine'é danilíinii dabizhé'é yę́ę bits'ą́ą́dóó náás ahoolchíiłii aląąjį' naazínígíí łá'í nítínígo
PRED:	The leaders of the tribe of Benjamin are the clans of the clans of the tribe of Judah .
GOLD:	and you will be assisted by one family leader from each tribe .

ID:	3815
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá biniyé ał'ąą dine'é ádá nídahojilchįįh , índa dadine'é éí t'áadoo biniyéhígóó nidahoji'á ?
PRED:	“ Why are the nations of the nations ? Why are they angry with the nations ?
GOLD:	Why are the nations so angry ? Why do they waste their time with futile plans ?

ID:	3816
INPUT:	Níshgaígíí biniinaa doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Dinishniihígíí bik'ee atínídinishdleeh , áádóó ádííniid , T'áá aaníí , díí bik'ee yínííł nishłį́ , nidi ts'ídá bich'į' ha'ííníshníi doo .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , ” when I cried out , “ I am innocent , and I am innocent . I am innocent , but I am innocent .
GOLD:	My wound is severe , and my grief is great.My sickness is incurable , but I must bear it .

ID:	3817
INPUT:	Ayóó'ánósh'níinii nílíinii , bee shił honíshónígíí éí bee dooládó' nízhónígo ayóó áníínílnin da .
PRED:	You love me , O my darling , for your beauty is lovely .
GOLD:	Oh , how beautiful you are ! How pleasing , my love , how full of delights !

ID:	3818
INPUT:	Dził Lébanan hoolyéii bitsin yíl'áhígíí ałtso adidoolk'ą́łígíí , doodaii' binaaldlooshii didlidgo náádahidoonihígíí bi'oh daneel'ą́ .
PRED:	The mountains of Lebanon will burn down the mountains of Lebanon .
GOLD:	All the wood in Lebanon 's forestsand all Lebanon 's animals would not be enoughto make a burnt offering worthy of our God .

ID:	3819
INPUT:	Áko jineezdáago naakits'áadahígíí hágo bizhdííniidgo ábijiní , Diné t'áá háiida ła' alą́ąjį' na'ázhdiiltéego éí akéédę́ę́' jílį́į doo , áádóó t'áá ałtso binaal'a'í jílį́į doo .
PRED:	Jesus called twelve disciples to the twelve disciples and said , “ Anyone who is the one who is the greatest and who is the greatest . ”
GOLD:	He sat down , called the twelve disciples over to him , and said , “ Whoever wants to be first must take last place and be the servant of everyone else . ”

ID:	3820
INPUT:	<unk> . 2 : <unk>
PRED:	The Birth of Jesus
GOLD:	Leaders Buried in the Promised Land

ID:	3821
INPUT:	Nidi dah daask'idgóó kin hadaas'áii éí Ízrel dine'é t'áadoo adeideesk'ą́ą' da ; t'áá hazhó'ó Héízor kin haal'áii t'éiyá éí Jáshowa iidííłk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the people of Israel left the hill country , and Joshua left the hill country of Israel . He completely completely completely destroyed the town .
GOLD:	But the Israelites did not burn any of the towns built on mounds except Hazor , which Joshua burned .

ID:	3822
INPUT:	Tsosts'id jį́ aleeh góne' aláahgo naat'áanii wáin bił honiiłdoigo bijéí bił nihoozhǫǫhgo díí yee haadzíí' : Miihóman , <unk> ha , <unk> na , Bígtha , A<unk> ha , <unk> har índa <unk> éí aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras áhánígo tsosts'id yilt'éego bá nidaal'a'ígíí
PRED:	On the seventh day of King Xerxes told him , “ I will be filled with wine , Queen Esther . This is the son of Xerxes and the royal historian . ”
GOLD:	On the seventh day of the feast , when King Xerxes was in high spirits because of the wine , he told the seven eunuchs who attended him — Mehuman , Biztha , Harbona , Bigtha , Abagtha , Zethar , and Carcas —

ID:	3823
INPUT:	Ak'is hojooba' át'éii bohónéedzą́ ábi'diilyaago yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ le' ,
PRED:	What sorrow awaits your friend 's friends , and let wisdom be joyful .
GOLD:	Believers who are poor have something to boast about , for God has honored them .

ID:	3824
INPUT:	Díí jį́ , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilį́ , dadooniid . Éí bik'ehgo deíníikáah doo áádóó yee nihwiiz'áanii áádóó bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó yee nihodii'aahii bik'eh dahoniil'į́į doo índa áníinii deísíilts'ą́ą' doo , dadooniid .
PRED:	“ On that day the Lord your God is our God , ” they said . “ We will obey his commands and obey his commands and regulations . We will obey his commands and obey his commands .
GOLD:	You have declared today that the Lord is your God . And you have promised to walk in his ways , and to obey his decrees , commands , and regulations , and to do everything he tells you .

ID:	3825
INPUT:	Kót'éego Sálaman éí kin áyiilaaígíí biyi'dę́ę́' óola t'áá bízhání bik'ésti'go áyiilaa , áádóó agháago hodiyingo haz'ánígíí bidáahgi óola da'ahólzha'í ha'naa naneelzhee'go ałts'ą́ą́hjí bidíníilzhee'ígi dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' ałts'ą́ą́hjí ha'naa naní'áhígíí óola bik'ésti'go áyiilaa .
PRED:	So Solomon made the Ark of the Temple and overlaid it with pure gold . He overlaid it with gold and placed it in front of the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant with gold .
GOLD:	Then Solomon overlaid the rest of the Temple 's interior with solid gold , and he made gold chains to protect the entrance to the Most Holy Place .

ID:	3826
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áadoo tseebíí , doodaii' neeznáá daats'í hwiiłkaahí , Sesaríya góyaa jiníyáago , biiskání bikáá'dóó ánihwiit'aah bikáá' dasneezdáago , Paul nídoohłóós , jidííniid .
PRED:	About eight days later Paul went to Caesarea and sat at Caesarea at Caesarea at the next day he sat on the next day . He said to Paul , “ Go and stand in front of the evening . ”
GOLD:	About eight or ten days later Festus returned to Caesarea , and on the following day he took his seat in court and ordered that Paul be brought in .

ID:	3827
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hojíyáanii díí bik'izhdi'yiitįįh doo . T'áá háiida hóyą́ągo nitsíkeesii díí bił bééhózin doo . Háálá Bóhólníihii yee át'éii ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'é áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii yii' deíkáah dooleeł . Bee haz'áanii dayiitíihii chą́ą́h dahidínídééh .
PRED:	Those who are wise will be wise , and those who do what is right . For the Lord is righteous and righteous .
GOLD:	Let those who are wise understand these things.Let those with discernment listen carefully.The paths of the Lord are true and right , and righteous people live by walking in them.But in those paths sinners stumble and fall .

ID:	3828
INPUT:	Mózes biyiin
PRED:	The Song of Moses
GOLD:	A Song of Deliverance

ID:	3829
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'jiiłhaazhgo łahgo nináádziizyeel : nít'éé' shoo , tł'oh naadą́ą́' t'ááłá'í sikaadígíí bineest'ą' yá'át'éehgo daneest'áanii tsosts'idgo bąąh dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	When he saw a dream , he saw seven heads of grain , and seven heads were seven heads of grain .
GOLD:	But he fell asleep again and had a second dream . This time he saw seven heads of grain , plump and beautiful , growing on a single stalk .

ID:	3830
INPUT:	Áko diné danilíinii éí Jáshowa ádeidííniid , Dooda , nidi Bóhólníihii bá nideiil'a' dooleeł .
PRED:	The men said to Joshua , “ We will not serve the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But the people answered Joshua , “ No , we will serve the Lord ! ”

ID:	3831
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	3832
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel éí Jóseph áyidííniid , Doo hanii náániideestséeł da nisin nít'éé' , nidi Diyin God na'áłchíní ałdó' yideestséełgo yee shá hooł'a' .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ I will see you again , but I will see God 's children . ”
GOLD:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ I never thought I would see your face again , but now God has let me see your children , too ! ”

ID:	3833
INPUT:	Tó t'óó ahayóí dzoołhał nahalingo ał'ąą dine'é hahóół'á , nidi dziłghą́ą́'dóó azhool bił náhidiiyóół nahalingo áádóó nááts'ó'oołdísii łeezh dibahí naanáyooghas nahalingo Diyin God bididootehgo doo deeghánígóó yóó'ahidoojah .
PRED:	The waters of many nations are like grass , and the wind will run like grass ; the wind will run like the grass , and the floods of God will come upon us .
GOLD:	But though they thunder like breakers on a beach , God will silence them , and they will run away.They will flee like chaff scattered by the wind , like a tumbleweed whirling before a storm .

ID:	3834
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hach'į' ni'ílyáago diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahíii dziisxíinii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Anyone who kills another person must be put to death , and everyone will say , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who accepts payment to kill an innocent person . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	3835
INPUT:	Áko kin hadaas'áhígíí t'áá át'é Líívai dine'é baa deet'aahgo dízdiindóó ba'aan tseebíí kin haal'á índa binaagóó dahootsooígíí ałdó' baa didoot'ááł .
PRED:	The Levites will be given to the Levites , and they will be given to the Levites .
GOLD:	In all , forty-eight towns with the surrounding pastureland will be given to the Levites .

ID:	3836
INPUT:	áko jį́honaa'éí hanádáhídóó e'e'aahjį' doo ła' diyin nááhódlǫ́ǫ́góó bee hoł béédahodoozįįł . Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ áádóó doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	The sun will be at the sun , and there will be no other sun . There will be no other god . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	so all the world from east to westwill know there is no other God.I am the Lord , and there is no other .

ID:	3837
INPUT:	Dibé yázhí hwee ádingo éí hasbídí naakigo , doodaii' hasbídí łigaii yázhí naakigo , ła' didlidgo nááhániihii át'éego áádóó ła'ígíí éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego yidoojih , áko náá'iiłniihii éí há k'ééhodoodǫǫłgo há néidiyoołnih , áko ho'didéeh doo .
PRED:	“ If a young lamb or two young lamb or two young pigeons , bring two young pigeons to the priest , the priest will purify them from the sin offering , and the priest will purify them .
GOLD:	“ If a woman can not afford to bring a lamb , she must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons . One will be for the burnt offering and the other for the purification offering . The priest will sacrifice them to purify her , and she will be ceremonially clean . ”

ID:	3838
INPUT:	Hazhé'é éí , Ha'át'íísh biniyé kwíínít'įįd ? ts'ídá t'áadoo hodííniidgóó t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo yee hainíst'įįd da . Áko ałdó' t'áá íiyisí diné bíiyisii jílį́ ; Ábsalam bikéédę́ę́' ho'dizhchį́ .
PRED:	Why did n't you realize that your father had done wrong ? He was very angry with his father , but he was very old .
GOLD:	Now his father , King David , had never disciplined him at any time , even by asking , “ Why are you doing that ? ” Adonijah had been born next after Absalom , and he was very handsome .

ID:	3839
INPUT:	Biinéíyah , Biidíyah , <unk> ,
PRED:	Benaiah , Benaiah , Benaiah ,
GOLD:	Benaiah , Bedeiah , Keluhi ,

ID:	3840
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel naakits'áadah dine'é bitahgóó kéyah daabíí' dooleeł biniyé bá nidahodíízohígíí díí éí át'é : Jóseph dine'é éí naakigo bá náhodíízoh .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : These are the twelve tribes of Israel . These are the names of the tribes of Joseph .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Divide the land in this way for the twelve tribes of Israel : The descendants of Joseph will be given two shares of land .

ID:	3841
INPUT:	Áko yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Manáseh dine'é éí kéyah ła' bá haadzo , háálá éí Jóseph alą́ąjį' bá yizhchį́ , Méíkir éí Manáseh alą́ąjį' bá yizhchį́ ; éí Gíliyad dine'é bizhé'é jílį́ ; jó , diné naabaahii jílį́įgo bąą Gíliyad áádóó Béíshan kéyahígíí há haadzo .
PRED:	When the following allotment of land was allotted to Manasseh , he became the father of Manasseh . He was the father of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh . He was the father of Manasseh , the tribe of Gilead , and the tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The next allotment of land was given to the half-tribe of Manasseh , the descendants of Joseph 's older son . Makir , the firstborn son of Manasseh , was the father of Gilead . Because his descendants were experienced soldiers , the regions of Gilead and Bashan on the east side of the Jordan had already been given to them .

ID:	3842
INPUT:	Éí bąą Ízrel biDiyin God Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , Jerúsalemgi dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é bik'ijį' doo yá'ádaashóonii ádaat'éhígíí kóshłééh , áko t'áá háiida yaa dahodiizts'ą́'ígíí bik'ee t'áá ałch'ijí bijeeh dahosiilts'įįh doo .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring my people back to Judah , and I will not listen to my people of Judah .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I will bring such disaster on Jerusalem and Judah that the ears of those who hear about it will tingle with horror .

ID:	3843
INPUT:	áádóó bik'isóó éí da'azhé'é aláahgo bídahólníhígíí éí naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki ánéelą́ą́' , índa Ímer biye' Miishíliimath , éí biye' Ahéísai , éí biye' Azéíriyel , éí biye' Amásheiyai wolyéii ,
PRED:	and his brothers and sisters , listed according to their father 's family . Their registered troops : Meshullam son of Meshullam , son of Meshullam , son of Meshullam ,
GOLD:	along with 242 of his associates , who were heads of their families . Also Amashsai son of Azarel , son of Ahzai , son of Meshillemoth , son of Immer ,

ID:	3844
INPUT:	Danihich'é'éké ajił t'óó bił nidahodíł<unk> go áádóó danihizháá'áád da'diléego éí doo atídeeshłíił da , háálá diné danilínígíí t'áá bí ałjiłnii yich'į' ch'í'ídiyoo'nił áádóó ałjiłnii yił nidahałáago náá'iiniih yaa naakai ; éí bąą diné ts'ídá doo ak'ida'dootą́ą́' át'éégóó t'óó nida'ádiilchǫǫh .
PRED:	“ Do n't let your daughters marry her , for they will not defile her by worshiping other gods . They will do what they have done to them , and they will be able to commit adultery with them .
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	3845
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego ałdó' Christ aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ábidi'doolnííł biniyé doo t'áá bí ayóó át'éego í'diilyaa da , nidi Diyin God kóbidííniidgo nibiníłtį́ , ShiYe' nílį́ , díí jį́ nishchíinii sélį́į́' .
PRED:	This is why the Son of Christ , the high priest , and he also called the Son of God . He said , “ I am the Son of God , and I am the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	That is why Christ did not honor himself by assuming he could become High Priest . No , he was chosen by God , who said to him , “ You are my Son.Today I have become your Father . ”

ID:	3846
INPUT:	T'áá áko saad bihoolyaago Nébukadnézzar nilíinii bik'i hoole' . Diné danilíinii bits'á hodi'needzood áádóó béégashii nahalingo tł'oh jiłchozh nít'éé' índa yá'ąąshdę́ę́' dahtoo' bee nínájíltłohgo hatsii' t'éí atsá bits'os nahalingo dínéesą́ áádóó háláshgaan tsídii bíláshgaan nahalin silį́į́' .
PRED:	Then Nebuchadnezzar said to Nebuchadnezzar , “ Son of Nebuchadnezzar , the Sovereign Lord , whose eyes are like grass , and the grass were like grass , and the grass were like grass .
GOLD:	“ That same hour the judgment was fulfilled , and Nebuchadnezzar was driven from human society . He ate grass like a cow , and he was drenched with the dew of heaven . He lived this way until his hair was as long as eagles ' feathers and his nails were like birds ' claws .

ID:	3847
INPUT:	Ákohgo áshidííniid , Daniel yinílyéii , t'áadoo nił yé'í , háálá <unk> dą́ą'di nijéí bee bik'idi'deeshtį́į́ł ninizį́į'go tsídíníkééz yę́ędą́ą́' áádóó niDiyin God bich'į' adahojiinilbá'í ádi'nilyaa yę́ędą́ą́' nidiizts'ą́ą́' áádóó t'áá ni ádíníinii biniyé naa níyá .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Do n't understand what I did to do . I did n't understand what you did to do to you when you were afraid of your God .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Do n't be afraid , Daniel . Since the first day you began to pray for understanding and to humble yourself before your God , your request has been heard in heaven . I have come in answer to your prayer .

ID:	3848
INPUT:	áádóó bahojoobá'íii t'áadoo éé' baa nínilgóó doo shich'į' ahééh niizį́į́'góogoínda shidibé bighaa' bee éé' ádaalyaaígíí t'áadoo yee ná'iidziilgóogo ,
PRED:	If you refuse to eat the clothing of clothing , if you refuse to eat or clothing ,
GOLD:	did they not praise mefor providing wool clothing to keep them warm ?

ID:	3849
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God nílíinii , díí baa niséyáago , shíla' bee doo ákwii át'éii áát'įįdgo ,
PRED:	O Lord my God , I have done these things , O Lord my God .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	3850
INPUT:	Engíí<unk> gi David éí Saul t'áadoo yiyiisxį́į da
PRED:	David Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	David Spares Saul 's Life

ID:	3851
INPUT:	Áko ch'ikę́ę́h t'áá íiyisí nizhóní áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii hazhó'ó yaa áhályą́ągo yá naal'a' ; nidi aláahgo naat'áanii t'áadoo hoł ałt'áá'áazh da .
PRED:	So the girl was very angry with the king and his servant girls .
GOLD:	The girl was very beautiful , and she looked after the king and took care of him . But the king had no sexual relations with her .

ID:	3852
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus éí diné yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áyidííniid , Nihokáá' dine'é bá adinídíín nishłį́ ; t'áá háiida shikéé' joogáłígíí éí doo chahałheełgóó nináájídáa da doo , nidi iiná bee adinídíinii hwee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I am the light of the world , but those who follow me will live in darkness , but those who follow me will live forever . ”
GOLD:	Jesus spoke to the people once more and said , “ I am the light of the world . If you follow me , you wo n't have to walk in darkness , because you will have the light that leads to life . ”

ID:	3853
INPUT:	T'áá éí bik'ehgo t'ááłá'í nootínígo nihik'is nihich'į' bąąhági ádaat'į́įgo nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' doo t'áá aaníí bá yóó'anídahidoh'aahgóó , shiTaa' yá'ąąshdi hólóonii ałdó' t'áá ákónihił'į́į doo .
PRED:	And if you love your brother , your brother will forgive your heart , you will live in heaven , and you will obey me .
GOLD:	“ That 's what my heavenly Father will do to you if you refuse to forgive your brothers and sisters from your heart . ”

ID:	3854
INPUT:	Náájidi'yoołnihgo nááhidoonihii éí hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' nááhizhdoołnihígíí éí dibé nanilkaadii biką'ii , doodaii' bi'áadii hadaałt'éii ła' nízdidoolóosgo nááhizhdoołnih .
PRED:	“ If you present a peace offering to the Lord , you must present a male goat to the Lord , or a male lamb or female goat for the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If you present an animal from the flock as a peace offering to the Lord , it may be a male or a female , but it must have no defects .

ID:	3855
INPUT:	Nidi tł'é'ííłníi'go ła' hazhdoolghaazh yists'ą́ą́' , Aadę́ę́' iiyehii yigááł ! Nihílááh bidááh nohkááh .
PRED:	But when he called out , he shouted , “ Get up ! Go and meet him ! ”
GOLD:	“ At midnight they were roused by the shout , ‘ Look , the bridegroom is coming ! Come out and meet him ! '

ID:	3856
INPUT:	Shidine'é bitahgóó ádił nida'iilzíihii éí doo yá'át'éehii doo nihidídóołniił da , doo nihaa nídóot'įįł da , daanínígíí éí t'áá át'é diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił .
PRED:	The people of my people will say , ‘ You will not be killed , for they will not be killed . '
GOLD:	But all the sinners will die by the sword — all those who say , ‘ Nothing bad will happen to us . '

ID:	3857
INPUT:	Atsį' biniyé dibé nidadootsiłii nidahoniidlingo ánihiinilaa . Índa ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó tanihiníníłkaad .
PRED:	You have made the flesh of your sheep , and we will scatter you among the nations .
GOLD:	You have butchered us like sheepand scattered us among the nations .

ID:	3858
INPUT:	Azhą́ nihída , doodaléi' yá'ąąshdę́ę́' diyingo naal'a'ída átséédą́ą́' hane' yá'át'éehii bee nihił dahwiilne' yę́ę bits'ą́ą́jí hane' łahgo ánáánát'éii yee nihił náádahalne'go , háni'dii éí biniinaa ádahodi'dooldįįłgo há hada'doodzih !
PRED:	But if you do n't understand the Good News from heaven , you will say that the Good News will be preached to the Good News of the Good News .
GOLD:	Let God 's curse fall on anyone , including us or even an angel from heaven , who preaches a different kind of Good News than the one we preached to you .

ID:	3859
INPUT:	Nik'i néijah doo , nidi nił honishłǫ́ǫgo nił yisdáhásh'aashígíí bee doo nik'eh dazhdidlį́į da doo , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But I will rescue you from your enemies , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	They will fight you , but they will fail.For I am with you , and I will take care of you.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	3860
INPUT:	Áadi naazínígíí ła' bit'áahjį' niníyáago díí áhoodzaaígíí t'áá aaníí ááhyiłníinii t'áá át'é bínabídééłkidgo yee shił náhoolne' áádóó shił bééhózingo áshiilaa .
PRED:	As he went to the place where I was going to tell you the truth , and he told me what he meant .
GOLD:	So I approached one of those standing beside the throne and asked him what it all meant . He explained it to me like this :

ID:	3861
INPUT:	Áko éidí Éran áádóó biye'ké daabí dooleeł , áko éí hodiyingo haz'ání góne' nídeidį́įh doo ; jó , éí aláahgo dílzinii át'éego nááyiiłniihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo náádahaniihii ádaat'éego éí ła' ahóyéel'áágóó bee nihoní'áanii át'é .
PRED:	So Aaron and his sons will eat the sacred offerings , and they will eat it in the sanctuary of the Lord . They will offer sacrifices to the Lord as a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	The loaves of bread will belong to Aaron and his descendants , who must eat them in a sacred place , for they are most holy . It is the permanent right of the priests to claim this portion of the special gifts presented to the Lord . ”

ID:	3862
INPUT:	T'áá áłahjį' shidinits'a'ígíí shił bééhózin , nidi díí diné kǫ́ǫ́ naazínígíí shííníł'a'ígíí deidoodląął biniyé binááł ádíshní .
PRED:	You know what I am telling you the truth , but you will believe me as you believe in me .
GOLD:	You always hear me , but I said it out loud for the sake of all these people standing here , so that they will believe you sent me . ”

ID:	3863
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God hazhó'ó biinéé' deísółts'ą́ą'go díí bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é bee nihich'į' haasdziihígíí ádaa dasoosįįdgo t'éiyá nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from the Lord your God : Be careful to obey all these commands that I am giving you today .
GOLD:	You will receive this blessing if you are careful to obey all the commands of the Lord your God that I am giving you today .

ID:	3864
INPUT:	Áko ak'áán nááhidoonihígíí nízhdiiką́ągo hálák'ee hadeezbingo ła' hajííjaa'go bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'jį' abínígo didlidgo nááhániihii bóóltą'go jidííłid .
PRED:	Then he took some of the grain offering and placed it on the altar of burnt offering . He burned them on the altar of burnt offering and burned them on the altar .
GOLD:	He also presented the grain offering , burning a handful of the flour mixture on the altar , in addition to the regular burnt offering for the morning .

ID:	3865
INPUT:	Doo áhályáanii t'óó ałnádéesnii'go té'é'į́ bi'niiłhééh .
PRED:	If a fool is open to the wicked , it is a fool .
GOLD:	“ Fools fold their idle hands , leading them to ruin . ”

ID:	3866
INPUT:	T'áá ak'eh deesdlį́'ígíí algaigo hadadít'ée doo , áádóó iináájí naaltsoos biyi'dóó házhi' ts'ídá doo k'éé'deeshchǫǫł da . ShiTaa' índa bidiyingo nidaal'a'í dabinááł házhi' bee ádee hadideesdzih .
PRED:	I will pour out the blood on the plains of the field , and I will pour out my name on my holy name . ”
GOLD:	All who are victorious will be clothed in white . I will never erase their names from the Book of Life , but I will announce before my Father and his angels that they are mine .

ID:	3867
INPUT:	náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí t'áá k'adę́ę oolghalígíí nidahalin , áádóó náshdóí yáázh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí t'áá nant'inee aa naa'na'ígíí nidahalin .
PRED:	Your young lions are like a lion , like a lion 's young lion .
GOLD:	They are like hungry lions , eager to tear me apart — like young lions hiding in ambush .

ID:	3868
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham tó hahaas'nilígíí biniinaa Abímelek yideezteh , háálá Abímelek bá nidaal' a'í t'áá na'níle'dii haghadeideest'ą́ ,
PRED:	So Abimelech took the water from the well of Abimelech , for he had taken his army to Abimelech 's officers .
GOLD:	Then Abraham complained to Abimelech about a well that Abimelech 's servants had taken by force from Abraham 's servants .

ID:	3869
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é t'ahídą́ą́' bee bi'ílnii'ii
PRED:	The Land Given to Israel
GOLD:	A Message about Samaria

ID:	3870
INPUT:	Dabi'disnáanii tsxį́įłgo béédadidoochił áádóó a'áán góyaa doo dadínóonéeł da índa bibááh doo ádadoodįįł da .
PRED:	Do n't let them go into exile , or they will die . They will die and die .
GOLD:	Soon all you captives will be released ! Imprisonment , starvation , and death will not be your fate !

ID:	3871
INPUT:	Áko Jew dine'é éí ákwii Jesus nijigháago dayíínii'go haa nánísą́ , nidi doo t'áá hó t'éí haniyé da , nidi Lázaras daaztsą́ą́ nít'ée'go náábizdiisáhígíí ałdó' deidoołtsééł biniyé haa nánísą́ .
PRED:	When Jesus heard the Jewish leaders , he remembered that he was dead , he did n't believe that he was dead , but he was dead . But he did n't believe that he was dead .
GOLD:	When all the people heard of Jesus ' arrival , they flocked to see him and also to see Lazarus , the man Jesus had raised from the dead .

ID:	3872
INPUT:	Áko Féro názyizgo t'óó yah anáádzá ; díigi ádzaago t'áadoo nidi bijéí bidiisnáa' da .
PRED:	So Pharaoh left Pharaoh 's heart and refused to eat .
GOLD:	Pharaoh returned to his palace and put the whole thing out of his mind .

ID:	3873
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí diné ba'áłchíní éí kin haal'áii índa kin wót'ááh yí'áii yindaash'nishígíí jidínóoł'įįł biniyé hadahojííle' .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord opened the Temple of the Lord , and he placed it in front of the Temple .
GOLD:	But the Lord came down to look at the city and the tower the people were building .

ID:	3874
INPUT:	Nidi Férisii danilíinii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo ádahodííniid , Shoo , nídahooł'aahii háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' doo bee haz'ánígíí yaa naakai .
PRED:	But when the Pharisees saw him , they said , “ Look at the Sabbath day of the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	But some Pharisees saw them do it and protested , “ Look , your disciples are breaking the law by harvesting grain on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	3875
INPUT:	Łoh łeeyi' haba' niit'ą́ ; łoh biishdoogáałii hadáahgi si'ą́ .
PRED:	The light of the wicked are set into a trap for a trap .
GOLD:	A noose lies hidden on the ground.A rope is stretched across their path .

ID:	3876
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii biye' yił ch'ídaaskaigo naat'á ch'ah bik'i dazdeez'ą́ áádóó bee ak'e'ashchíinii bee bééhániihii bílák'edadzistsooz , áádóó Jiihóíyada índa biye'ké éí ak'ah hak'i yadayiiziidgo aláahgo naat'áanii ádahoolaa índa ádaaní , Aláahgo naat'áanii as'ahgóó hináa le' !
PRED:	Then the king took the crown of the king and put them on his head on the heads of Jehoiada , the king of Jehoiada , his sons , the king , the king , the king , and his sons .
GOLD:	Then Jehoiada and his sons brought out Joash , the king 's son , placed the crown on his head , and presented him with a copy of God 's laws . They anointed him and proclaimed him king , and everyone shouted , “ Long live the king ! ”

ID:	3877
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii náohkąąh , áko ayóó át'éego ni'dilch'ilígíí índa nílótsoh naałtinígíí áhodidoolzih , áádóó nihéé'deesh'nihgo náásgóó doo t'áá kǫ́ǫ́ kénááhóht'į́į da doo .
PRED:	O Lord , hear the great storm , and let there be no plague in the land .
GOLD:	Please beg the Lord to end this terrifying thunder and hail . We 've had enough . I will let you go ; you do n't need to stay any longer . ”

ID:	3878
INPUT:	Nidi shí ánihidishní , T'áá háiida ła' hak'is bich'į' háhóóchįįdígíí bee haa náhódóot'įįłii bą́ą́h jílį́į doo , áádóó t'áá háiida hak'is yáábí'jii'įįdígíí naat'áanii danilíinii yee aa nídaat'íinii bą́ą́h jílį́į doo , índa t'áá háiida hak'is nilíinii , Diigis nílį́ , bizhdííniidígíí biniinaa hool'áágóó kǫ' bii' ti'hoo'nííh bą́ą́h jílį́į doo .
PRED:	But I tell you , ‘ If anyone commits adultery , you will be ashamed of your brother 's anger , and anyone who refuses to do what is wrong . ' ”
GOLD:	But I say , if you are even angry with someone , you are subject to judgment ! If you call someone an idiot , you are in danger of being brought before the court . And if you curse someone , you are in danger of the fires of hell .

ID:	3879
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	3880
INPUT:	Áko bá áhwiinít'į́įgo hach'į' yáłti' , áádóó Bábilangi bił aláahgo naat'áanii dajílínígíí biláahdi dah honeesdá .
PRED:	He spoke to him and sent him to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	He spoke kindly to Jehoiachin and gave him a higher place than all the other exiled kings in Babylon .

ID:	3881
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí ak'ah yíkánígíí ła' binishtł'ají bílák'eejį' yeidooziłgo
PRED:	Then the priest will pour some of the olive oil on the left side of the altar .
GOLD:	“ Then the priest will pour some of the olive oil into the palm of his own left hand .

ID:	3882
INPUT:	Jó , díidíígíí t'áá ałtso diné náádaała' bida'ílnííh biniyé ádabi'dool'įįd , áádóó nihí bee nidanihidi'nitin biniyé bee ak'eda'ashchį́ , háálá nihí díí hoolzhishígíí k'adę́ę bił niit'éehii daniidlį́ .
PRED:	And we are witnesses of all these things , and we are writing to others . We are witnesses of what we are saying , for we are going to die .
GOLD:	These things happened to them as examples for us . They were written down to warn us who live at the end of the age .

ID:	3883
INPUT:	t'áá náábíláahgo naalyéhé baa nidahaniihígíí áádóó naalyéhé yaa ádahalyáanii , áádóó Aréíbiyadę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá ałtso índa kédaayahdóó naat'áanii danilíinii ałdó' óola haa dayiiyeeh .
PRED:	The king of Arabia , and all the kings of Arabia .
GOLD:	This did not include the additional revenue he received from merchants and traders , all the kings of Arabia , and the governors of the land .

ID:	3884
INPUT:	Áko Nébukadnézzar ádííniid , Shéídrak , Mííshak áádóó Abédniigo biDiyin God baa ha'niih le' , háálá bidiyingo naal'a'í yiníł'a'go binaal'a'í baa dadzólíii yisdáyíínil , áko aláahgo naat'áanii yee haadzíi'ii łahgo ánáyiidlaa , áádóó diyin t'áá bóhólníhígíí bá na'al'a'go bich'į' nahadláhígíí biláahgo díí diné tált'éego bits'íís atídoolnííł biniyé t'áá bí biDiyin God yich'į' nidahałáhígíí yaa ádadeest'ą́ .
PRED:	Then Nebuchadnezzar said , “ Shadrach , Meshach , Meshach , and Abednego that God has sent his angels to be saved . He has put to death for those who have been put to death , and those who have been put to death . ”
GOLD:	Then Nebuchadnezzar said , “ Praise to the God of Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego ! He sent his angel to rescue his servants who trusted in him . They defied the king 's command and were willing to die rather than serve or worship any god except their own God .

ID:	3885
INPUT:	hódzą́ saad ayóó ánóolninii doo bee yáshti' da nít'éé' , nidi Níłch'i Diyinii binaanish áádóó bibee adziilii ííshjání áshłéehgo hashne' nít'éé' .
PRED:	I could speak to you , but I 'm not speaking in the Holy Spirit . I 'm speaking in the power of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	And my message and my preaching were very plain . Rather than using clever and persuasive speeches , I relied only on the power of the Holy Spirit .

ID:	3886
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Héi' ! Héi' ! Ayóó át'éego kin haal'áii jílį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii , naak'ą' tsídídééh nahalingo índa naak'ą' ałchxíí' bee hazhdít'éii yę́ę , óola , tsé da'ílíinii , índa diichiłí bee nijishch'ąą' yę́ę !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the city ! ” they exclaimed . “ How terrible it is a beautiful robe that has been stripped of blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ How terrible , how terrible for that great city ! She was clothed in finest purple and scarlet linens , decked out with gold and precious stones and pearls !

ID:	3887
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii ábijiní , Baa nanináhígíí índa nibee hódzáanii shikéyahdi bee naa hane'go di<unk> ą́'ígíí t'áá aaníí lá .
PRED:	Then the king told him , “ She has been torn down in the land of Shechem , and there is no joy . ”
GOLD:	She exclaimed to the king , “ Everything I heard in my country about your achievements and wisdom is true !

ID:	3888
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá biniyé Bóhólníihii díí kéyahjį' ch'ínihiní'eezh ? Da' <unk> łishísh bee naa'adanihízdiyoolghałgo nihida'asdzą́ą́ índa nihada'áłchíní yisnááh dadooleeł ? T'óó Ííjip kéyahgóó nihéédahaakaigo nihá yá'át'éeh doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Why have you brought us out of the land of the Lord ? Are you afraid of your wives and your wives and your wives ?
GOLD:	“ Why is the Lord taking us to this country only to have us die in battle ? Our wives and our little ones will be carried off as plunder ! Would n't it be better for us to return to Egypt ? ”

ID:	3889
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yaa bił hózhǫ́ǫ dooleełii nabídanohtaahgo bídahooł'aah .
PRED:	Let us be glad in the Lord 's womb .
GOLD:	Carefully determine what pleases the Lord .

ID:	3890
INPUT:	Áko haa'íshą' Níłch'i Diyinii k'ehgo nidaniniilzánígíí t'áá áníiltso t'áá ákót'éego nitsídeiikees doo , nidi ha'át'íhígíida t'áá ał'ąą át'éego baa nitsídaahkeesgo , éí ałdó' Diyin God nihił ííshjání íidoolííł .
PRED:	And if we do what we say , we will be sure that we will be able to understand what we do .
GOLD:	Let all who are spiritually mature agree on these things . If you disagree on some point , I believe God will make it plain to you .

ID:	3891
INPUT:	K'ad Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ná naal'a'í shizhé'é David yę́ę bich'į' saad bee háínídzíi'ii éí t'áá aaníi le' .
PRED:	“ Now , O Lord , the God of Israel , are your servant David .
GOLD:	Now , O Lord , God of Israel , fulfill this promise to your servant David .

ID:	3892
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh nízinii índa yee ba'ahódlíii Ízrel dine'é yee yénáálnii' . Nahasdzáán nidanees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso nihiDiyin God bibee yisdá'iildéehii dayiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	He remembered his unfailing love and faithfulness , his faithful love from the ends of the earth .
GOLD:	He has remembered his promise to love and be faithful to Israel.The ends of the earth have seen the victory of our God .

ID:	3893
INPUT:	<unk> niteelí yíchxǫ'ii binahjį' na'nitinii
PRED:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Linen Loincloth

ID:	3894
INPUT:	Móses bisodizin
PRED:	Joseph 's Prayer for His Brothers
GOLD:	Making Bricks without Straw

ID:	3895
INPUT:	Danihizhé'é yę́ę honoojíigi mána dayííyą́ą́' ; t'áá bee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego , Yá'ąąshdę́ę́' bááh baz'níłtsood .
PRED:	You ate manna in the wilderness of our ancestors in the wilderness , and you ate manna from heaven .
GOLD:	After all , our ancestors ate manna while they journeyed through the wilderness ! The Scriptures say , ‘ Moses gave them bread from heaven to eat . ' ”

ID:	3896
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii éí t'áá ákogi ááníiłii ayóó'áyó'ní , áádóó bidiyį́į́' danilíinii doo yóó'iidi'aah da . Hool'áágóó baa áháyą́ą doo , nidi doo yá'áshóonii ba'áłchíní éí ádooldįįł .
PRED:	For the Lord loves the godly , and he loves those who love the godly will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For the Lord loves justice , and he will never abandon the godly.He will keep them safe forever , but the children of the wicked will die .

ID:	3897
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Sámuel ádeidííniid , T'áadoo áhodiilzéhí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihá néinikąąhgo Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' yisdánihidoonił .
PRED:	Then the Israelites said to Samuel , “ Do n't be afraid of the Lord your God , for he will rescue us from the Philistines . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't stop pleading with the Lord our God to save us from the Philistines ! ” they begged Samuel .

ID:	3898
INPUT:	Ákohgo yáłti'go diséts'ą́ą́' , áko diséts'ą́ą'go t'óó báhádzidgo bił niizį́į'go ni'jį' nikidiníish'ą́ągo iiłhaazh lá .
PRED:	When I heard this , I heard what was happening to you , I was very angry with them .
GOLD:	Then I heard the man speak , and when I heard the sound of his voice , I fainted and lay there with my face to the ground .

ID:	3899
INPUT:	Nílááh , bąąhági át'éii biniyé Béthel kin shijaa'jį' dadohkááh ; Gílgal kin shijaa'gi bąąhági át'éii bee tsi'haohkááh ; t'áá ákwíí abíní náádahidoołnihii nidahohjááh , t'áá táá' yoołkááł bik'eh nihee dahólóonii neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' nidahohjááh .
PRED:	“ Go back to Bethel , ” says the Lord . “ Go back to Gilgal and offer a solemn sacrifice for the sins of every kind of sin .
GOLD:	“ Go ahead and offer sacrifices to the idols at Bethel.Keep on disobeying at Gilgal.Offer sacrifices each morning , and bring your tithes every three days .

ID:	3900
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	3901
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Parable of the Lamp

ID:	3902
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Need for Workers

ID:	3903
INPUT:	Díí jį́ Bóhólníihii shílák'ee nididoo'áałgo naa anízhdeeshtł'į́į́ł áádóó nitsiits'iin nidi'deesh'ááł , áko díí jį́ tsídii áádóó nahasdzáán bikáa'gi naaldlooshii da'ałchinii bich'į' Filístiya dine'é bisiláo dabits'íís nidaaztseedii ahideeshtł'ił , áko éí bee nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́góó kéédahat'íinii díí bił béédahodoozįįł : Ízrel dine'é bitahgi Diyin God hólǫ́ .
PRED:	“ I will hand you over to the Lord , and I will hand you on the horns of the earth and on earth . I will pour out the blood of the earth on the earth , and I will scatter you among the nations . ”
GOLD:	Today the Lord will conquer you , and I will kill you and cut off your head . And then I will give the dead bodies of your men to the birds and wild animals , and the whole world will know that there is a God in Israel !

ID:	3904
INPUT:	Christ éí diyingo nidaal'a'í biláahdi ájít'é
PRED:	The King of Christ
GOLD:	The Son Is Greater Than the Angels

ID:	3905
INPUT:	T'áá nihí yá'át'éehgo ádaa hane'ésh baa nínáádiit'áázh ? Da' yá'át'éehgo nihaa hane'go nihich'į' naaltsoos ádoolníłígíísh ádá bídin niidlį́ ? Éí doodaii' naaltsoos ákót'éii aají nihits'ą́ą́dóó deezna'iísh ałdó' ádá bídin niidlį́ ?
PRED:	So why are you doing good ? Is it right with you ? Is n't it right to be a good child ? Is n't it right to be a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave to us ?
GOLD:	Are we beginning to praise ourselves again ? Are we like others , who need to bring you letters of recommendation , or who ask you to write such letters on their behalf ? Surely not !

ID:	3906
INPUT:	Amínadab éí Júdah dine'é nilį́įgo biye' Náshan ,
PRED:	Nahshon son of Amminadab , son of Amminadab .
GOLD:	JudahNahshon son of Amminadab

ID:	3907
INPUT:	Ákódzaago daal'aadii índa ałk'isóó danilíinii Judíyagi kéédahat'ínígíí , doo Jew dine'é danilíinii ałdó' Diyin God bizaad yaa dadzoozlíí' ha'níigo dayíínii' .
PRED:	Then the apostles and sisters who were in Judea and sisters in Judea , who believed in God 's message .
GOLD:	Soon the news reached the apostles and other believers in Judea that the Gentiles had received the word of God .

ID:	3908
INPUT:	Da' Píyor kin shijaa'diísh t'įįhdígo doo ákwii ádeiit'įįd da ? Jó , t'áá nihí nidi doo nihida'dódééh át'ée da . Azhą́ Bóhólníihii bidine'é dah yinéłígíí bee atí'él'íinii yee atíyiilaa nidi ákóniit'é .
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the Lord has done to us ? Even though we have not sinned against me ? Even though the Lord has struck us with his anger .
GOLD:	Was our sin at Peor not enough ? To this day we are not fully cleansed of it , even after the plague that struck the entire community of the Lord .

ID:	3909
INPUT:	Bąąhági át'éego saad yee yádaałti'go biniinaa yee ádaa dadzódlíhígíí háni'dii łoh nahalingo yiih hikááh . Háálá da'ódziih áádóó dabiyooch'íidgo yádaałti' .
PRED:	Those who follow evil spirits are like a trap , for those who follow evil spirits are like a trap .
GOLD:	Because of the sinful things they say , because of the evil that is on their lips , let them be captured by their pride , their curses , and their lies .

ID:	3910
INPUT:	Ats'á'ázhdeeltį́įgo ádee hadzoodzíi'go hóyoołkááł biyi' doo hatsii' doolzhih da ; Bóhólníihii bich'į' t'áá ats'á'ázhdeet'ánígíí bíighah azlį́į'jį' jidiyin doo , áádóó bíni'dii hatsii' nineez dooleeł .
PRED:	“ On the eighth day he made a vow to the Lord , they will be cut off from their heads , and they will be ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	“ They must never cut their hair throughout the time of their vow , for they are holy and set apart to the Lord . Until the time of their vow has been fulfilled , they must let their hair grow long .

ID:	3911
INPUT:	Nik'a' dadeeníigo aláahgo naat'áanii bi'ana'í dabijéí baa ahilyeed , áko ał'ąą dine'é niyaajį' naa'ahinidééh .
PRED:	But the king 's anger burns against his enemies , so he can crush us with his enemies .
GOLD:	Your arrows are sharp , piercing your enemies ' hearts.The nations fall beneath your feet .

ID:	3912
INPUT:	Tsxį́įłgo áłah wohłeeh ; hágo , nihokáá' dine'é danohłíinii , t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' áłah wohłeeh . Bóhólníihii áadi nisiláo dahayóii hadani'éésh .
PRED:	“ Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! Get up from the presence of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Come quickly , all you nations everywhere.Gather together in the valley. ” And now , O Lord , call out your warriors !

ID:	3913
INPUT:	Agrípa shinanit'a'í nílíinii , da' Diyin God yá dahalne'iísh yinídlą́ ? Yinídlą́ągo lá shił bééhózin ni .
PRED:	“ Son of King Agrippa , why do you know what you believe in me ?
GOLD:	King Agrippa , do you believe the prophets ? I know you do — ”

ID:	3914
INPUT:	Ła' éí ánahat'i' áádóó ná'<unk> xis , ła' béésh da'ahólzha'í bee dah dabi'diistł'ǫ́ǫgo awáalyaa góne' ti'dahooznii' .
PRED:	Some of them were bound in chains and chains , along with iron chains and chains .
GOLD:	Some were jeered at , and their backs were cut open with whips . Others were chained in prisons .

ID:	3915
INPUT:	Díí béeso anídahohniłígíí naalkaahgo Christ baa hane' yá'át'éehii bee ádee hadahidohdziihgo bik'eh dahonoł'ínígíí binahjį' Diyin God yaa dahaniih doo , áádóó nihił dahadlee'go Diyin God bidiyį́į́' bá índa náádaała'ígíí t'áá ałtso bá béeso adahohníłígíí ałdó' binahjį' Diyin God yaa dahaniih doo ;
PRED:	“ Write this letter to the money of Christ , and give it to the Good News that is good and good and good to God for all who have received the gift of God and the gift of God .
GOLD:	As a result of your ministry , they will give glory to God . For your generosity to them and to all believers will prove that you are obedient to the Good News of Christ .

ID:	3916
INPUT:	Doodaii' yik'ee diniihgo t'áá na'níle'dii nihíideestsisgo , doodaii' yaa niheedzáago t'áadoo le'é yee yííníiłne'go yiyiisxį́į́ ládą́ą́' ,
PRED:	“ Oh , what sorrow awaits you by taking the path of the night , and they are afraid of what he has done .
GOLD:	So if someone hates another person and waits in ambush , then pushes him or throws something at him and he dies , it is murder .

ID:	3917
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yee nihá has'ánígi át'éego na'áłchíní ła' t'áá aaníinii yik'ehgo dayíkáahgo shił bééhoozinígíí t'áá íiyisí baa shił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	I know the Father of God 's Father 's Father , just as I tell you the truth .
GOLD:	How happy I was to meet some of your children and find them living according to the truth , just as the Father commanded .

ID:	3918
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Iiláíyashib biye' Jóíyada biye' ła' éí Hóran dine'é Sanbálat yaadaaní nilį́į́ lá ; éí bąą hó éí níwehjį' ahonííłchą́ą́' .
PRED:	When the high priest was sitting beside the high priest 's family , he was very old . ( This was the very angry . )
GOLD:	One of the sons of Joiada son of Eliashib the high priest had married a daughter of Sanballat the Horonite , so I banished him from my presence .

ID:	3919
INPUT:	Jó , nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é t'áá bí naazínígi t'áá ła' bizhi'ee t'áá ałtso doo bąąh daachinígóó ída'diilyaa . Yisnááh danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę bá atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii biniyé dabik'isóó nááda'iiłniihii danilíinii bá áádóó t'áá daabí ałdó' ádá dibé yázhí nideistseed .
PRED:	For all the priests and Levites were chosen by lot of the Passover and the Passover offerings of the priests , the priests , and the priests who were slaughtered by the Passover offerings .
GOLD:	The priests and Levites had purified themselves and were ceremonially clean . So they slaughtered the Passover lamb for all the returned exiles , for their fellow priests , and for themselves .

ID:	3920
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso yéego hahodííłdláád áádóó tł'éé' bíighah daachago yiską́ .
PRED:	So the entire community of Israel gathered at night , and the night they waited for the night .
GOLD:	Then the whole community began weeping aloud , and they cried all night .

ID:	3921
INPUT:	Na'nitin doo t'áá aaníinii bits'ąą ádaa áháyą́
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Warnings against False Teachings

ID:	3922
INPUT:	Áko bíni'dii ha'ahóní nihinaalnishgo ałtso ła'yilééh , ákót'éego nihe'oodlą' bee ts'ídá t'áá ákóne' ádanoht'éego índa t'áadoo bee nihich'į' anáhóót'i'ígóó dahinohnáa doo .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone tell you what I am saying to you . Do n't let anyone live in this way , so that you will live forever .
GOLD:	So let it grow , for when your endurance is fully developed , you will be perfect and complete , needing nothing .

ID:	3923
INPUT:	Aláahgo nihinanit'a'í áda'azįįd niiní'ą́ą́ góne' naat'áanii danilíinii yił wáin deidlą́ągo nídadí'néesdlą́ą́' ; nidahałt'i'ígíí yił ahił dandlį́ .
PRED:	The kings of our kings are filled with wine with wine , and they drink wine with wine .
GOLD:	On royal holidays , the princes get drunk with wine , carousing with those who mock them .

ID:	3924
INPUT:	Áko naal'a'í éí Saul ánéidoo'niid , <unk> , kǫ́ǫ́ béésh łigaii shékel wolyéhígíí dį́į'go shijaa'ígíí t'ááłá'í si'ą́ bíighahgo shee hólǫ́ , áko diné éí Diyin God bił hólóonii baa deeshniłgo náádiit'ashgóó yee nihił hodoolnih .
PRED:	Then Saul said to Saul , “ I will bring four silver silver silver silver , silver , and I will tell you what God has done . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , ” the servant said , “ I have one small silver piece . We can at least offer it to the man of God and see what happens ! ”

ID:	3925
INPUT:	Nidi diyingo naal'a'í áshidííniid , Ha'át'íísh bik'ee t'óó nił ahayóí ? Asdzání áádóó naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii bitsiits'iin tsosts'idgo índa bidee' neeznáá , asdzání bik'i dah sidáhígíí ááhyiłníinii doo bééhózin da yę́ę bee nił hodeeshnih .
PRED:	But the angel said to me , “ Why are you frightened ? Why do you know the seven women and women , women , women , women , women , and women will never be able to understand the seven days of the beast . ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you so amazed ? ” the angel asked . “ I will tell you the mystery of this woman and of the beast with seven heads and ten horns on which she sits .

ID:	3926
INPUT:	áádóó t'áá biyi'ídi nitsíkeesgo íinízin , Haaléit'ée dooleeł lá ? Náníłt'ánígíí la' t'áadoo nooh náá<unk> chíiłgi da .
PRED:	“ How can you think , ‘ What do you think ? ' And if you do n't know what you do ? ”
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

ID:	3927
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahí daígíí nahont'indę́ę́' dayółt'óóh . T'áadoo hooyání dahółt'óohgo doo bił daayée' da .
PRED:	The leaders of the men who were at night , and they were afraid of them at night .
GOLD:	They shoot from ambush at the innocent , attacking suddenly and fearlessly .

ID:	3928
INPUT:	Naat'á ch'ah nihik'eelts'id ; dooládó' hojooba' ániit'ée da ; ádił da'siilziih lą́ą !
PRED:	We are the crown of the wicked , and we have sinned .
GOLD:	The garlands have fallen from our heads.Weep for us because we have sinned .

ID:	3929
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , Jerúsalemgi kéédahoht'íinii áádóó Júdahgi diné danohłíinii , nánihooshkąąh : shí daats'í , doodaii' shich'il na'atł'o'ii k'idoolyáhígíí daats'í yá'át'ééh , éí nidadinoh'aah .
PRED:	And now , you people of Jerusalem , Judah , Judah , Judah , Judah , and Judah . Do you think I am going to do what is right . ”
GOLD:	Now , you people of Jerusalem and Judah , you judge between me and my vineyard .

ID:	3930
INPUT:	Hadáń'da'dítį́į́h yę́ę łeeh daaskai ; bich'ą́ą́h dáń'da'dilkał yę́ę niyiizti'go niyiishchxǫ' ; aláahgo hananit'a'í nilíinii áádóó binaat'áanii danilíinii ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó dabi'disná ; bee haz'áanii doo nááhódlǫ́ǫ da áádóó áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó doo bił ádahat'į́į da .
PRED:	He destroyed the gates , and he destroyed the kings of the surrounding nations . He destroyed the kings of the surrounding nations , just as the Lord had destroyed them .
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's gates have sunk into the ground.He has smashed their locks and bars.Her kings and princes have been exiled to distant lands ; her law has ceased to exist.Her prophets receiveno more visions from the Lord .

ID:	3931
INPUT:	nidi nihinanit'a'í ánínígi át'éego ná nidaal'a'í éí dadoobah yiniyé hasht'e'ádadiilyaaígíí t'áá ałtso Bóhólníihii yinááł ha'naa nidoonééł .
PRED:	But our master will fight against us at once , just as the Lord had commanded us to fight against us .
GOLD:	But all who are able to bear arms will cross over to fight for the Lord , just as you have said . ”

ID:	3932
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro bibee adlání dah yish'áałgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii ni'diinilgo Féro bibee adlání biyi'jį' bitoo' bąąh sénihgo Féro bílák'ééką́ nisin .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh took his cup of wine and gave it to Pharaoh 's cup of wine , and I gave it to Pharaoh .
GOLD:	I was holding Pharaoh 's wine cup in my hand , so I took a cluster of grapes and squeezed the juice into the cup . Then I placed the cup in Pharaoh 's hand . ”

ID:	3933
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í honíle'go Áfra kin shijaa'gi Jó'ash joolyéii Éíbiyíízer dine'é jílį́įgo hachéch'il yiyaagi neezdá . Jó'ash biye' Gídiyan éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' nazhniłhaałgo ch'il na'atł'o'ii yiljizh góne' baa nijigháago Mídiyan dine'é bits'ąą nazhnił'in .
PRED:	When he arrived at the Temple of the Lord , he took care of his servant Joash and placed the grapes in the valley of Gideon . He seized the grapes in the valley of Midian .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord came and sat beneath the great tree at Ophrah , which belonged to Joash of the clan of Abiezer . Gideon son of Joash was threshing wheat at the bottom of a winepress to hide the grain from the Midianites .

ID:	3934
INPUT:	Dooládó' nibee haz'áanii ayóó'óósh'níi da ! Shá bíighah nabik'ítséskeesgo shee e'e'ááh .
PRED:	How I love your law , for I am filled with love .
GOLD:	Oh , how I love your instructions ! I think about them all day long .

ID:	3935
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Éí lá bąą shizhé'é , nánooshkąąh , shizhé'é bighangóó hodíł'á ,
PRED:	“ Please let my father marry my father , ” he said . “ Send me home . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the rich man said , ‘ Please , Father Abraham , at least send him to my father 's home .

ID:	3936
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego , Lą'ígo nídajiizlá'ígíí doo ła' há ch'ínííłna' da , índa t'áá áłch'į́į́dígo nídajiizlá'ígíí doo hats'ą́ą́' bi'oh silį́į' da .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ If you have already been circumcised , it is only a little while you have already been circumcised , and if you have died . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ Those who gathered a lot had nothing left over , and those who gathered only a little had enough . ”

ID:	3937
INPUT:	Sámuel éí ch'iyáán ííł'íní áyidííniid , Atsį' hasht'e'nidííkááł , nidííniid yę́ę nídiikaah ; tádiin daats'í yilt'éego nidahaaskai lá .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to the food , “ Get up early spring , and prepare fifty days for forty days . ”
GOLD:	Samuel then instructed the cook to bring Saul the finest cut of meat , the piece that had been set aside for the guest of honor .

ID:	3938
INPUT:	áko Jerobówam áyidííniid , Neheesdǫ́zígíí neeznáago nídiinííł , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God ání , Shoo , Sálaman dadine'é bee hóhólníhígíí haghahideeshxą́ąłgo neeznáago dine'é naa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	Then Jeroboam said to Jeroboam , “ I will destroy the people of Israel , for the Lord , the God of Israel , says the Sovereign Lord . I will give you the water of the dead . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to Jeroboam , “ Take ten of these pieces , for this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : ‘ I am about to tear the kingdom from the hand of Solomon , and I will give ten of the tribes to you !

ID:	3939
INPUT:	Ałníí'góó ní'áa dooígíí éí t'áá níléijį' ha'naa hadii'áago áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the middle of the Tabernacle , and he made it clear to the top of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He made the middle crossbar to attach halfway up the frames ; it ran all the way from one end of the Tabernacle to the other .

ID:	3940
INPUT:	Nidi Paul haadzíi'go ání , Ha'át'íísh biniyé daahchago shijéí ti'dabiyołnííh ? Háálá Jerúsalemdi doo t'óó dashidi'yootł'ółígíí t'éiyá biniyé hasht'e'í'diishyaa da , nidi Bóhólníihii Jesus bízhi' bá dadeestsaałígíí ałdó' biniyé hasht'e'í'diishyaa .
PRED:	But Paul replied , “ Why are you looking for me ? Why do n't you want me to die ? For I am the Lord , who lives in Jerusalem ? ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Why all this weeping ? You are breaking my heart ! I am ready not only to be jailed at Jerusalem but even to die for the sake of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	3941
INPUT:	Bee hahíínídzíi'ii baa shił nihoozhǫǫh ; éí kót'éego dashiłníinii ádaat'é .
PRED:	I delight in your laws , for your laws are my delight .
GOLD:	Your laws please me ; they give me wise advice .

ID:	3942
INPUT:	Doo hodíína' ákǫ́ǫ́ dohjeeh , áadi nihishoojée'go índa doo nantł'agóó ádeeshłííł . Éí bąą éí kin haal'áii Zó'er hoosye' .
PRED:	Do n't let me go out into the desert , where I will make the town of Zoar .
GOLD:	But hurry ! Escape to it , for I can do nothing until you arrive there. ” ( This explains why that village was known as Zoar , which means “ little place . ” )

ID:	3943
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída shízhi' bee dayínóhkeedgo , éí ádeeshnííł , aYe' bee aTaa' baa ha'niih doo biniyé .
PRED:	And if you ask me , I will praise you , and I will praise the Son of Man .
GOLD:	You can ask for anything in my name , and I will do it , so that the Son can bring glory to the Father .

ID:	3944
INPUT:	Áko kéyahgi kéédahojit'ínígíí éí Mólek diyin bidi'níinii yich'į' diné ba'áłchíní ła' nááyiisnii'ígíí t'áadoo baa nídajist'įįdgóó índa t'áadoo dajiisxį́į́góó
PRED:	So the people who lived in the land of the Lord had killed anyone who had been defiled by the murder of the people who had been killed .
GOLD:	And if the people of the community ignore those who offer their children to Molech and refuse to execute them ,

ID:	3945
INPUT:	,
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested

ID:	3946
INPUT:	áko níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í áhodííniid , Díí bee ídahólníihgo bił nahaz'áanii índa yee ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá át'é naa dideesh'ááł , háálá éí shaa deet'ą́ , áádóó t'áá háiida baa dideesh'ááł niizį́'ígíí éí baa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	Then the devil said to him , “ I will give you the glory of the Kingdom of great power and power , for I will give you the glory of my great power . ”
GOLD:	“ I will give you the glory of these kingdoms and authority over them , ” the devil said , “ because they are mine to give to anyone I please .

ID:	3947
INPUT:	Diné badahojoobá'íii áádóó hojooba' nahas'áanii yá atéét'įįd , áko díí kódzaaígíí t'áá ákóne' í'iilaa ; éí ts'ídá shéého'dílzinii át'é , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	The poor and poor have done this : “ This is what the Lord has done to me . ”
GOLD:	He gave justice and help to the poor and needy , and everything went well for him.Is n't that what it means to know me ? ” says the Lord .

ID:	3948
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbram ádííniid , Shoo , áłchíní t'áadoo shéínínil da , áko shighangi yizhchínígíí t'éiyá shee hólóonii bíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	But Abram replied , “ You have not brought me from my household , and you are my inheritance .
GOLD:	You have given me no descendants of my own , so one of my servants will be my heir . ”

ID:	3949
INPUT:	Łah Jéíkab éí atoo' jiłbéezhgo Íísa t'áá íiyisí dichin bi'niiłhį́įgo halgaidę́ę́' haa nádzá .
PRED:	One day Jacob got up early the next morning , so that Jacob got up and buried him .
GOLD:	One day when Jacob was cooking some stew , Esau arrived home from the wilderness exhausted and hungry .

ID:	3950
INPUT:	Zedekáíyah éí naadiin ła' binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' áádóó Jerúsalemgi ła'ts'áadah nááhaijį' aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' . Bimá éí Hamútal wolyéego Líbnahdóó Jeremáíyah yitsi' nilį́ .
PRED:	Zedekiah was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . His mother was Libnah . His mother was Libnah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . His mother was Hamutal , the daughter of Jeremiah from Libnah .

ID:	3951
INPUT:	Ádíshní , ShiDiyin God nílíinii , she'iina' ałníi'jį' ashíyííłką́ągo t'ah shííyisgo shił dah doó'aash lágo . Oochííłgóó t'áá ałtso nibéédahaháahii bitah honílǫ́ .
PRED:	“ O my God , ” I said , “ you are trying to hide me from all day of my enemies .
GOLD:	But I cried to him , “ O my God , who lives forever , do n't take my life while I am so young !

ID:	3952
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii t'ááłá'ígíí índa bik'ehgo hoogáałii t'ááłá'ígíí éí nihí áádóó dé'éyóní t'óó átsééd kéédahat'ínígíí bił nihá át'ée doo .
PRED:	“ All the regulations must be given to your regulations and regulations . This is a permanent law for you .
GOLD:	The same instructions and regulations will apply both to you and to the foreigners living among you . ”

ID:	3953
INPUT:	Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é doo ádahozdiilts'a'ii hach'į' sháhodoochįįłgo áádóó hashké dínéesdzįįłgo k'ééhodideeshdlííł .
PRED:	I will destroy the nations , and I will pour out my fury on them .
GOLD:	I will pour out my vengeanceon all the nations that refuse to obey me . ”

ID:	3954
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God doo dayoodlą́ą da , índa dziil yee yisdá'iiníiłii doo yaa dadzólíi da nít'éé' .
PRED:	For God did n't believe in his salvation , and he refused to trust in his power .
GOLD:	for they did not believe Godor trust him to care for them .

ID:	3955
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Pharisees Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	3956
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God nihíká ádííniidígíí diyin nilínígi át'éego nihí ałdó' t'áá ałtsojį' diyingo dahinohnáa doo .
PRED:	But God will be holy to you , just as you are holy .
GOLD:	But now you must be holy in everything you do , just as God who chose you is holy .

ID:	3957
INPUT:	índa biyáázhké nidilt'éego ałdó' yił dah diikai ; éí ła' Gérsham wolyé , háálá łah ájíní , Dé'éyóní nishłį́įgo kéyah doo ééhonisindi naashá ;
PRED:	and two sons were born to their sons , and they were born to a foreign land . They said , “ I am a stranger , but I am a foreigner in a land .
GOLD:	( Moses ' first son was named Gershom , for Moses had said when the boy was born , “ I have been a foreigner in a foreign land . ”

ID:	3958
INPUT:	Bee aha'deet'áanii ániidíii yee nidaal'a'ii
PRED:	Hope for a new covenant
GOLD:	The Glory of the New Covenant

ID:	3959
INPUT:	Hazhé'é , doodaii' hamá , doodaii' hak'is , doodaii' halah ła' daaztsą́ągo bee t'áá hó doo bi'didéehii doo ázhdi'doolníił da , háálá haDiyin God bá bee hwééhózinii diyingo bits'ąą hasti'go hatsii'káa'gi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	“ If your father or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother , he will be able to be able to be able to stand in the presence of God .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	3960
INPUT:	Jó , Mózes nidi dówózhii biyi'dę́ę́' bich'į' ha'oodzí'ígíí baa hane' binahjį' da'neeznáádę́ę́' náádi'yiijeehígíí ííshją́ą́ áyiilaa , háálá ádííniid , Bóhólníihii éí Éíbraham biDiyin God áádóó Áízak biDiyin God índa Jéíkab biDiyin God nilį́ .
PRED:	But Moses told them , “ This is the message of the Lord , the God of the dead — the dead — the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob — the God of Jacob — the God of Jacob .
GOLD:	“ But now , as to whether the dead will be raised — even Moses proved this when he wrote about the burning bush . Long after Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had died , he referred to the Lord as ‘ the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . '

ID:	3961
INPUT:	Dį́į́' nídízííd binih índa náhást'éí yoołkááł góne' éí kin haal'áagi ayóó át'éego hodííchįįdígíí biniinaa diné éí ch'iyáán bits'ą́ą́' ádaasdįįd .
PRED:	On January 15 , during the fifth year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , the city of Susa has been destroyed .
GOLD:	By July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , the famine in the city had become very severe , and the last of the food was entirely gone .

ID:	3962
INPUT:	T'áá bee shich'į' ha'oodzí'ígíí bik'ehgo haasdzíí' , áko dahiná daazlį́į'go deizį' áádóó ayóó ánéelą́ą́' yíl'á .
PRED:	This is what I said to me : “ As soon as soon as I live in the valley . ”
GOLD:	So I spoke the message as he commanded me , and breath came into their bodies . They all came to life and stood up on their feet — a great army .

ID:	3963
INPUT:	Áko Niihemáíyah ání , Shoo , nihiDiyin God nílíinii , nihidiits'į́į́h , háálá nihi'doot'įįd , áádóó yee nihá nidahałt'i'ii bik'ijį' nináhádleehgo ánílééh índa kéyah yisnááh hólǫ́ǫdi dabidilnééh .
PRED:	Then Nehemiah said , “ Listen , O God ! Listen to us , O God , for he has killed us in the desert .
GOLD:	Then I prayed , “ Hear us , our God , for we are being mocked . May their scoffing fall back on their own heads , and may they themselves become captives in a foreign land !

ID:	3964
INPUT:	Áádóó Názarait nilíinii bá díí bee haz'áanii át'é : ats'á'ádeet'ą́ągo bíyoołkáłígíí bíighah azlį́į'go níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'jį' hoł dadookah ,
PRED:	“ If you present this offering to the Tabernacle , you must be offered to the Tabernacle entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law for Nazirites . At the conclusion of their time of separation as Nazirites , they must each go to the entrance of the Tabernacle

ID:	3965
INPUT:	<unk> , Ii<unk> , Níífeg , Jafáíya ,
PRED:	From there they said ,
GOLD:	Ibhar , Elishua , Nepheg , Japhia ,

ID:	3966
INPUT:	Áádóó nízhdii'na'go kin bii' áłah ná'ádleehí biyi'dę́ę́' ch'ízhníyáago , Sáíman bighangi yah ajííyá . Nít'éé' Sáíman be'asdzą́ą́ bimá t'áá íiyisí bitah honeezgai lá , áko yá nídahookąąh .
PRED:	As Jesus left the synagogue , Simon 's mother went out to the house of Simon Peter 's mother . So Simon 's mother was sick .
GOLD:	After leaving the synagogue that day , Jesus went to Simon 's home , where he found Simon 's mother-in-law very sick with a high fever . “ Please heal her , ” everyone begged .

ID:	3967
INPUT:	Ashdla' nołt'éego neeznádiingo nihaa nídadidoojah ; neeznádiin nołt'éego neeznáadi míilgo nihik'ee nidanichée doo áádóó nihi'ana'í nihilą́ąjį' diltłish bee bił nidadziilghaał doo .
PRED:	You will send fifty men to you , but you will chase after you . You will chase after you , and you will chase you with your sword .
GOLD:	Five of you will chase a hundred , and a hundred of you will chase ten thousand ! All your enemies will fall beneath your sword .

ID:	3968
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné t'áá íiyisí nídaasdzíidgo ádahodííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ánít'į́ ? Háálá nida'ał'eełii Jónah éí Bóhólníihii hólǫ́ǫ́dóó yits'ąą yóó'eelwodígíí bił béédahoozin ; jó , t'áá ákót'éego bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	The people were terrified and asked , “ Why are you looking for yourself ? ” And the Lord told them , “ The Lord is far away from those who are far away from them . ”
GOLD:	The sailors were terrified when they heard this , for he had already told them he was running away from the Lord . “ Oh , why did you do it ? ” they groaned .

ID:	3969
INPUT:	Nidi ádił ni'jít'įįhgo ádee hanáázdoodzíí' , Diné baa nídaaht'ínígíí doo bééhasin da nihidishní .
PRED:	But if you do n't have a vow , you must not know it .
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know this man you 're talking about ! ”

ID:	3970
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	David 's Prayer of Thanks

ID:	3971
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Sáíras wolyéii ak'ah yik'i yayiiziidgo yiyíísį́į'ii éí ał'ąą dine'é bidáahgi nideeshniłgo áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii yee áká daaszaazii nítłóo'go ádeeshłííł índa béésh łitsoii dáń'dítį́hí naakigo ąą ádooníiłgo doo dáń'di'dootį́įł da biniyé bíla' nish'náájí yótą'go yich'į' yáłti'go ííłní ,
PRED:	“ The Lord has anointed King Cyrus of Persia , the king of Persia , the king of the nations , and I will open the doors of the Babylonians . I will open their weapons , and I will open the gates .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Cyrus , his anointed one , whose right hand he will empower.Before him , mighty kings will be paralyzed with fear.Their fortress gates will be opened , never to shut again .

ID:	3972
INPUT:	Ákohgo éí ałdó' kódaaníigo hach'į' t'ą́ą́' háádadoodzih , Bóhólníihii , hádą́ą'shą' dichin nílį́įgo , doodaii' dibáá' nílį́įgo , doodaii' dé'éyóní nílį́įgo , doodaii' ni'éé' ádingo , doodaii' dantsaahgo , doodaii' awáalyaa góne' sínídáago daniiltsą́ągo , t'áadoo naa ádahosiilyąąd da ?
PRED:	Then they will say , ‘ The Lord will answer you and hungry , or thirsty , hungry , or thirsty , or thirsty , or thirsty , or thirsty , or thirsty ? '
GOLD:	“ Then they will reply , ‘ Lord , when did we ever see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison , and not help you ? '

ID:	3973
INPUT:	Nihí índa k'idadooláii dibáá' áádóó dláád índa níló bee atínihiishłaa , nidi t'áadoo shich'į' ninánoohkai da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ But I have made you thirsty and thirsty , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I sent blight and mildew and hail to destroy everything you worked so hard to produce . Even so , you refused to return to me , says the Lord .

ID:	3974
INPUT:	áko nihida'ana'í t'áá át'é t'áá nihí ádíts'ą́ąjį' nihaa ch'ídahidoojah ; jó , ákót'éego Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	All your enemies will come from you , for the Lord has spoken to us .
GOLD:	You will drive out all the enemies living in the land , just as the Lord said you would .

ID:	3975
INPUT:	Naadiin tsosts'id yihah góne' , áłtsé nídízííd binih , ła'a jį́į́ góne' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	On March 7 , during the first year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On April 26 , the first day of the new year , during the twenty-seventh year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	3976
INPUT:	Ákondi éí diné ła' aTaa' nilíinii yiyiiłtsą́ , doo dishníigo ádíshníi da , t'áá hazhó'ó Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' hojílónígíí t'éiyá , éí aTaa' jiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	But I did n't say , ‘ I have seen the Father , and I saw that he is from the Father . ' ”
GOLD:	( Not that anyone has ever seen the Father ; only I , who was sent from God , have seen him . )

ID:	3977
INPUT:	<unk> shan áádóó Áshįįh kin haal'áii índa Engíídai ; éí bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił hastą́ągo kin hadaas'áhígíí ałdó' Júdah dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	They also captured the towns of En-gedi . They also included the towns of Judah and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Nibshan , the City of Salt , and En-gedi — six towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3978
INPUT:	Shizhé'é kóníigo Diyin God binááł hashiyííłdzíí' , Shoo , dadeestsaał ; Kéínan kéyahdi t'áá shí ádá tséní'íígeedgi yóó'áshidíílííł . Éí bąą k'ad , t'áá shǫǫdí , sha'di'ní'aahgo ákǫ́ǫ́ deesháałgo áadi shizhé'é yóó'ádeeshłííł , áádóó índa áádę́ę́' nínáádeeshdááł .
PRED:	“ This is what the God of my father says : Look , I will die in the field of Canaan . I will return to the ground , and I will return to my father , and I will return to the ground . ”
GOLD:	Tell him that my father made me swear an oath . He said to me , ‘ Listen , I am about to die . Take my body back to the land of Canaan , and bury me in the tomb I prepared for myself . ' So please allow me to go and bury my father . After his burial , I will return without delay . ”

ID:	3979
INPUT:	Áádóó yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá ałtso baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh doogo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'idzisdli' ; éí nihí áádóó niha'áłchíní áádóó Líívai dine'é índa dé'éyóní nihitahgi kéédahat'ínígíí bił nihaa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	May the Lord your God be filled with joy and Levites in the land of the Lord your God has given you .
GOLD:	Afterward you may go and celebrate because of all the good things the Lord your God has given to you and your household . Remember to include the Levites and the foreigners living among you in the celebration .

ID:	3980
INPUT:	Doo yá'át'ééhgóó hane'ii doo bik'ee bił yée' da ; Bóhólníihii yaa dzólíigo bijéí bohoníłdzil .
PRED:	Do n't let them be afraid of their plans , for the Lord 's heart is silent .
GOLD:	They do not fear bad news ; they confidently trust the Lord to care for them .

ID:	3981
INPUT:	éí nihí nihida'ana'í bits'ą́ąjį' , índa nihik'ee dadiniihii t'áá ałtso bílák'eedę́ę́' yisdáhidiikah biniyé ,
PRED:	We have saved our enemies from our enemies ; let us run from our enemies .
GOLD:	Now we will be saved from our enemiesand from all who hate us .

ID:	3982
INPUT:	háálá Mózes yik'ee bił niiłch'iihgo ádayiilaa , áko t'áá na'níle'dii saad yee hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	For Moses did what was good , and he taught them with bitter sorrow .
GOLD:	They made Moses angry , and he spoke foolishly .

ID:	3983
INPUT:	Kintah da'nítiingi wáin yíká daacha ; ił hózhóonii t'áá ałtso ásdįįd ; kéyah bikáá'góó dloh hasinii bił ahóóyá .
PRED:	The city is filled with weeping ; the city is filled with violence .
GOLD:	Mobs gather in the streets , crying out for wine.Joy has turned to gloom.Gladness has been banished from the land .

ID:	3984
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Éran índa biye'ké Eliyéízar áádóó Íthamar ííłní , Nihitsii' t'ááká bik'i da'doołtsóós lágo , danihi'éé' t'ááká ák'indaołdlaad lágo , áko doo dadínóohnéeł da índa diné t'áá ałtso doo atíbidi'doolníił da biniyé ákódadoohnííł . Nidi bíni'dii danihik'isóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso éí Bóhólníihii ahodííłk'ą́'ígíí yaa atínídadindleeh .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Do n't let us eat any food ? Do n't let us go to the ground , or we will die in the land you will die . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons Eleazar and Ithamar , “ Do not show grief by leaving your hair uncombed or by tearing your clothes . If you do , you will die , and the Lord 's anger will strike the whole community of Israel . However , the rest of the Israelites , your relatives , may mourn because of the Lord 's fiery destruction of Nadab and Abihu .

ID:	3985
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní yóó'adíí'ą́ ; shíi'ii bits'áníyá ; shii' sizíinii hánígo ayóó'ádayó'nínígíí bida'ana'í baa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	My children have abandoned me ; I have given them all who love me .
GOLD:	“ I have abandoned my people , my special possession.I have surrendered my dearest ones to their enemies .

ID:	3986
INPUT:	Ákohgo Sámson éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' sodoolzingo ání , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , shéénílnííh baa nánooshkąąh ; Diyin God nílíinii , shidziilgo ánáshídlééh , áko Filístiya dine'é shináá' hadeiznilii t'ááłáhídiígíí ałtso k'éédideeshdlííł .
PRED:	Then Samson prayed to the Lord , “ O Sovereign Lord , my God , please give me victory over my eyes . Please let me go to the Philistines , and I will repay you for my eyes . ”
GOLD:	Then Samson prayed to the Lord , “ Sovereign Lord , remember me again . O God , please strengthen me just one more time . With one blow let me pay back the Philistines for the loss of my two eyes . ”

ID:	3987
INPUT:	Níyol nááshidiiłtéehgo shił yiyołgo ánáshiinil'įįh ; ayóó át'éego níyolígíí yááshiiłgohgo nínáshidíł'oł .
PRED:	When I fall , I fall into the wind , I bow down to the wind .
GOLD:	You throw me into the whirlwindand destroy me in the storm .

ID:	3988
INPUT:	<unk> dziihgo áádóó bina'adlo'go áádóó bináhoo<unk> go t'éí yáłti' ; ádílááh saad índa saad nichǫ́'íii yee yáłti' .
PRED:	Your lips are full of lies , and your words are filled with words .
GOLD:	Their mouths are full of cursing , lies , and threats.Trouble and evil are on the tips of their tongues .

ID:	3989
INPUT:	Nihits'ą́ą́dóó nidahachíihii bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo áádóó nihidáda'ak'eh bits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' áádóó nihilį́į́' nidahachíihii áádóó nihibéégashii índa nihidibé k'ee'ąą deílzhíishgo bee nihik'idahojidlíi doo .
PRED:	May your descendants be blessed with your descendants and your crops , your flocks , herds , herds , herds , herds , herds , herds , herds , herds , and herds of sheep .
GOLD:	Your children and your cropswill be blessed.The offspring of your herds and flockswill be blessed .

ID:	3990
INPUT:	Díí ałtso ła' yinilaago ninish'náajigo náádíníítéełgo Júdah dine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii bá dah yíyéeł doo ; dízdiin yiską́ąjį' kót'éego sínítį́į doo ; t'ááłá'í niyiiłkaahígíí éí t'ááłá'í náháhígíí bik'ehgo wólta'go naa diní'ą́ .
PRED:	“ All the people of Judah have taken your right hand , and it will be for forty days for forty days . This is the number of the number of silver for forty days .
GOLD:	After that , turn over and lie on your right side for 40 days — one day for each year of Judah 's sin .

ID:	3991
INPUT:	Saul ání , Haa'íshą' diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii danohłíinii t'áá ánółtso , hágo , áko nihił béédahodoozįįł áádóó dadínóoł'įįł háishą' jį́į́dą́ą́' ádił ni'iidzííh yaa naayá .
PRED:	Then Saul said to the elders , “ Come and see all the elders of Israel , and everyone will know that they are sinning . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul said to the leaders , “ Something 's wrong ! I want all my army commanders to come here . We must find out what sin was committed today .

ID:	3992
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Páílat áhodííniid , T'áá aaníiniishą' éí ha'át'íí óolyé ? Áádóó kódííniidgo , Jew dine'é yich'į' ch'ínáánádzáago áyidííniid , Yee ádąąh dah hast'áanii doo ła' bá shił bééhoozin da .
PRED:	“ What do you want ? ” Pilate asked . “ What do you want ? ” And he replied , “ I do n't know it ! ”
GOLD:	“ What is truth ? ” Pilate asked . Then he went out again to the people and told them , “ He is not guilty of any crime .

ID:	3993
INPUT:	Áádóó éí diné béhé aghajíltínígíí bitsásk'ehgi dibé yázhí dį́į́' ninázhdoodlééł , háálá díí kójíít'įįdgo doo aa a'áhí jiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	But if she has been purchased , she will pay it back for four sheep , for he has rejected it .
GOLD:	He must repay four lambs to the poor man for the one he stole and for having no pity . ”

ID:	3994
INPUT:	Áadi índa ábidííniid , Yínííł nitsaii bii' dahoniidlǫ́ǫgo nihił béédahózin ; Jerúsalem kin haal'á t'áá ádzaaí silį́į́' índa bidáń'daditį́įhii adahideezk'ą́ą́' ; sołtį' , doo t'óó nihá ninááhát'i' da doo biniyé Jerúsalem ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'in dooígíí háádadiitł'į́į́ł .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Get up and rebuild the gates of Jerusalem . The city will be rebuilt , and the gates will be burned up to the gates of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	But now I said to them , “ You know very well what trouble we are in . Jerusalem lies in ruins , and its gates have been destroyed by fire . Let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem and end this disgrace ! ”

ID:	3995
INPUT:	T'áadoo hasht'edaalyaa da yę́ę hasht'edadííliił biniyé Kríitdi nininíłtį́ , áádóó t'áá kin hadaas'áhígi da'oodlání áłah nádleehgi oodlání yá aląąjį' naazíinii nidahidíínił . Bee ándííniidii béénílniih :
PRED:	“ Do n't be ready to prepare the church in addition to the church in addition to the church in the synagogues and in the church . You must remember the elders of the church .
GOLD:	I left you on the island of Crete so you could complete our work there and appoint elders in each town as I instructed you .

ID:	3996
INPUT:	Háálá ajéí bii'dę́ę́' nichxǫ́'ógo nitsáhákees hahwiileeh , diné naatseed , adilyé , na'ageh bee tsi'na'adá , ani'į́į́' , wooch'íidgo hane' , t'áá ádzaagóó aa hane' .
PRED:	For the heart of a sinful heart is full of sin . It is a liar and sexual immorality , sexual immorality , sexual immorality , sexual immorality .
GOLD:	For from the heart come evil thoughts , murder , adultery , all sexual immorality , theft , lying , and slander .

ID:	3997
INPUT:	Áko Jáshowa hak'ijisdli'go hwéé'níłnii' áádóó dahaghangóó anídadziiskai .
PRED:	Then Joshua blessed them and left them .
GOLD:	So Joshua blessed them and sent them away , and they went home .

ID:	3998
INPUT:	éí ła' diné , ałdzéhí nilį́įgo , Sáíman ałdó' yolyéego tábąąhgi bighan , ákwii ba'ałk'ee dzizdá . [ Éí baa nidíínaałii bee nił hozhdoolnih . ]
PRED:	“ A man named Simon , a man named Simon , a man named Simon , a man named Simon , who lives in his house .
GOLD:	He is staying with Simon , a tanner who lives near the seashore . ”

ID:	3999
INPUT:	Díí éí Líívai dine'é bídadéét'i' : naadiin ashdla'dóó yówehgo béédááhaígíí éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' nidaal'a' doo ,
PRED:	“ These are the Levites who were twenty years old when the Tabernacle came to the Tabernacle ,
GOLD:	“ This is the rule the Levites must follow : They must begin serving in the Tabernacle at the age of twenty-five ,

ID:	4000
INPUT:	háálá díí na'al'a'go cho'oot'ínígíí Diyin God bidiyį́į́' yídin danilíinii doo t'óó bee bíká aná'álwo'ii t'éiyá át'ée da , nidi t'áá bilááh ánéelą́ą'go Diyin God bich'į' baa ahééh hwiindzin k'ee'ąą yilzhishgo áyoolííł .
PRED:	For this is no hope for God 's people , not those who do n't need to help God 's faithful love .
GOLD:	So two good things will result from this ministry of giving — the needs of the believers in Jerusalem will be met , and they will joyfully express their thanks to God .

ID:	4001
INPUT:	Éísa éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo tádiindóó ba'aan tseebíí náhááh binih Ámrii biye' Éíhab éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í náánásdlį́į́' , áko Ámrii biye' Éíhab Samériyagi Ízrel dine'é yinant'áago naadiin naaki nááhai .
PRED:	Omri son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the twentieth year of King Omri 's reign in Israel . He reigned in Samaria twelve years .
GOLD:	Ahab son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-eighth year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty-two years .

ID:	4002
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí tónteel yikáa'jigo dah didiilnii'go Bóhólníihii éí ha'a'aahdę́ę'go tł'éé' bíighah ayóó át'éego níyolgo áyiilaa ; éí bee tónteel t'ą́ą́' anáálzhiizh ; tónteelígíí ałts'á yííłk'olgo ni' yíłtseigo áyiilaa .
PRED:	So Moses laid the sea on the sea , and the Lord opened the wind of the sea , and the wind covered the sea with a mighty wind .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand over the sea , and the Lord opened up a path through the water with a strong east wind . The wind blew all that night , turning the seabed into dry land .

ID:	4003
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bízhi' ayóó át'éii yą́ą́h nilíinii bee baa dahohniih ! Náádahidoołnihii deínóhjáahgo bikin bii' sohodizin góne' yah ahohkááh !
PRED:	Sing to the name of the Lord ! Praise the glorious name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Give to the Lord the glory he deserves ! Bring your offering and come into his courts .

ID:	4004
INPUT:	Áko ts'ídá ayóó át'éii haidiní'ą́ągo bąą diné danilíinii áádóó ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii índa bizaad ał'ąą át'éego yee yádaałti'ii t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí bitah nidahwiiłnáago hak'ee bił daayéé' nít'éé' . Diyeeshhééł yó'níinii <unk> xeed nít'éé' , áádóó bił yá'át'éehii éí dahináago áyósin nít'éé' . A'ohgo át'éii atisgo át'éego ádeile' nít'éé' , áádóó atisgo át'éii a'ohgo át'éego ádeile' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when the great storm was great , the people of the world began to kill them and kill them . They were afraid of them , and they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	He made him so great that people of all races and nations and languages trembled before him in fear . He killed those he wanted to kill and spared those he wanted to spare . He honored those he wanted to honor and disgraced those he wanted to disgrace .

ID:	4005
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Hananáíyah bich'į' dínáahgo kóbidiní , Tsin bee azéédéetání ádaalyaii dahíníti' , nidi bitsásk'ehgi béésh nitł'izii bee azéédéetání ádeinilaa .
PRED:	“ Say to me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Go to the yoke of iron , but you have broken the yoke of iron chains .
GOLD:	“ Go and tell Hananiah , ‘ This is what the Lord says : You have broken a wooden yoke , but you have replaced it with a yoke of iron .

ID:	4006
INPUT:	Doo hwiih nileehígíí biniinaa Asíriya dine'é ałdó' bich'į' íłjił nít'éé' ; t'áá aaníí bich'į' íłjił nidi , t'áadoo hwiih sínílį́į' da .
PRED:	You gave them this command to Assyria , but you would not have sex with milk and honey . But you have enough to eat any milk .
GOLD:	You have prostituted yourself with the Assyrians , too . It seems you can never find enough new lovers ! And after your prostitution there , you still were not satisfied .

ID:	4007
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá awołí bee da'iinohdląąh , áádóó doo éí t'éiyá da nidi ts'ídá yá'át'éehgo ádaahníił doo , áádóó nihił éédahodoozįįł ,
PRED:	Do n't believe in me , but you will understand what is right and right , but you will understand what you say .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	4008
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii éí yínííł nilį́į doo ; naat'áanii éí t'áá íiyisí bąąh nahóókaad doo ; éí kéyah bii' diné kéédahat'íinii yéé' bitah dahóó<unk> doo ; ádajíít'įįdígíí bik'ehgo k'éédahodideeshdlííł ; t'áá hó aa nídajit'íinii bik'ehgo haa nídadéesht'įįł ; áadi índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will punish the king , and they will be afraid of their kings . I will punish them for their sins , and they will know that I am the Lord . I will punish them for their sins . ”
GOLD:	The king and the prince will stand helpless , weeping in despair , and the people 's handswill tremble with fear.I will bring on themthe evil they have done to others , and they will receive the punishmentthey so richly deserve.Then they will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	4009
INPUT:	Gad nahalingo bitsee' yiwod , bitsosk'id gónaa bits'id a<unk> ghahgo neelzhee' .
PRED:	He ran out to the east side of the heavens and ran out to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	Its tail is as strong as a cedar.The sinews of its thighs are knit tightly together .

ID:	4010
INPUT:	Áłtséhé góne' dahooghanígíí éí tsosts'idóó ałníi'go ké naazlá ádahoníłtso , ná'á<unk> góne' dahooghanígíí náhást'éí ké naazlá ádahoníłtso , áádóó índa táá' ná'á<unk> góne' dahooghanígíí éí neeznáádóó ałníi'go ké naazlá ádahoníłtso , háálá á daní'áhígíí éí doo kin bá nídaastł'inígíí bighá daaz'áa da doo biniyé kin bá nídaastł'inígíí bąąh dah náhást'ą́ągo ahééhool'áago áyiilaa , áko á daní'áhígíí bikáa'gi dah naaztą́ .
PRED:	She also gave seven sons to the entry room of the upper room , for there is no one to rebuild the walls of the upper room . And there is no one to enter the walls of the world .
GOLD:	The complex was three stories high , the bottom floor being 71/2 feet wide , the second floor 9 feet wide , and the top floor 101/2 feet wide . The rooms were connected to the walls of the Temple by beams resting on ledges built out from the wall . So the beams were not inserted into the walls themselves .

ID:	4011
INPUT:	Háí diné shį́įshą' Job nahojílin ? Éí tó jidlánígi át'éego nahat'i' jidlą́ ,
PRED:	“ Is it like a deer ? Is it like a drink ?
GOLD:	“ Tell me , has there ever been a man like Job , with his thirst for irreverent talk ?

ID:	4012
INPUT:	Áádóó tsídii t'ááłá'ígo tó nílínídę́ę́' tóhígíí hashtł'ish łeets'aa' bee siką́ągo bik'ijį' yidiyoołhééł .
PRED:	He will send a clay pot on the spring of water , and the water will kill it .
GOLD:	He will slaughter one of the birds over a clay pot filled with fresh water .

ID:	4013
INPUT:	Áko Sámson ázhdííniid , Télii biyaats'iin bee míilgo diné nisíłts<unk> go ałk'i dadeesk'idgo áshłaa .
PRED:	Samson said to them , “ My head is my head , and I have laid my hands on the mountains. ”
GOLD:	Then Samson said , “ With the jawbone of a donkey , I 've piled them in heaps ! With the jawbone of a donkey , I 've killed a thousand men ! ”

ID:	4014
INPUT:	K'ad díí kót'éego éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin ázhdoolíłígíí Sálaman bee nahodi'neestą́ą́' . Áłtséédą́ą́' bí'néél'ąądígíí t'áá éí bik'ehgo náásee'go náhást'édiin ké silá áádóó tádiin ké silá áníłtéél .
PRED:	Now this is what the Lord says : The Temple of the Lord was 30 feet high , 30 feet high and 27 feet high .
GOLD:	These are the dimensions Solomon used for the foundation of the Temple of God ( using the old standard of measurement ) . It was 90 feet long and 30 feet wide .

ID:	4015
INPUT:	Dadine'é áádóó nihokáá' bee bídahólníihgo bił nahaz'áanii Bóhólníihii yá nidaal'a' doo biniyé áłah silį́į'go yaa dahodoolnih .
PRED:	The rulers of the world and the Lord has sent them to preach the Good News .
GOLD:	when multitudes gather togetherand kingdoms come to worship the Lord .

ID:	4016
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii bik'ee ił yée'ii áádóó yee ayóó át'éii bits'ádi'nílíidii bits'ąą tséníí' góne' adoohkahgo łeeyi' nídadidooht'į́į́ł .
PRED:	So you will be filled with joy , and you will hide in the dust of the Lord 's glorious presence .
GOLD:	Crawl into caves in the rocks.Hide in the dustfrom the terror of the Lordand the glory of his majesty .

ID:	4017
INPUT:	Nidi yaa nitsídaakeesígíí hoł bééhózingo ábizhdííniid , Ła' hooghandóó danilíinii t'áá bí ałk'i néijahgo éí t'áá ádzaaí neheleeh , áádóó łahgo dah oonééł t'áá bí ałk'i néijahgo t'óó ałts'á'áldah doo .
PRED:	But he knew what he meant . He said to them , “ A man 's home will die , and many people will die . ”
GOLD:	He knew their thoughts , so he said , “ Any kingdom divided by civil war is doomed . A family splintered by feuding will fall apart .

ID:	4018
INPUT:	Binaagóó éí yah ada'iildéhígíí dahólǫ́ , áko nááseego dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódahonízah , áádóó naaniigo éí tseebíí ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódahoníłtéelgo yah ada'iiztiin .
PRED:	The top of the Temple was 30 feet long and 27 feet wide , and it was 871/2 feet high . The entry room was 871/2 feet long and 27 feet wide .
GOLD:	( The entry rooms of the gateways leading into the inner courtyard were 14 feet across and 433/4 feet wide . )

ID:	4019
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii hach'į' haadzíi'go ání , Bath-shííba shá hágo bidiní . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' nizhníyáago bidááhdę́ę́' dziizį' .
PRED:	Then the king said to Bathsheba , “ Yes , my lord the king ! ” So the king stood up and stood before him .
GOLD:	King David responded , “ Call Bathsheba ! ” So she came back in and stood before the king .

ID:	4020
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar éí Jeremáíyah kódadoohłííł , níigo siláo binanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan yich'į' haadzíí' ,
PRED:	“ Write this message to Jeremiah from the guard of Babylon ,
GOLD:	King Nebuchadnezzar had told Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , to find Jeremiah .

ID:	4021
INPUT:	Nidi na'nitiní t'áadoo bee danihi'dójíhí , háálá t'ááłá'í nihiNa'nitiní nilį́ , áádóó nihí t'áá ánółtso ałk'isóó danohłį́ .
PRED:	But we do n't say , ‘ Teacher , ' for we are all brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	“ Do n't let anyone call you ‘ Rabbi , ' for you have only one teacher , and all of you are equal as brothers and sisters .

ID:	4022
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí yá bich'į'go bigish yił yadidiilnii' , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí nida'dilch'ilgo ni'dóó hahidinaadgo nílótsoh naałtingo áyiilaa , áko Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip kéyah bik'ijį' nílótsoh nayííłtą́ .
PRED:	So Moses took the staff and took the staff to the Lord and said , “ Let them see that the Lord had healed the forest of Egypt . Then he burned the land of Egypt , and he burned the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses lifted his staff toward the sky , and the Lord sent thunder and hail , and lightning flashed toward the earth . The Lord sent a tremendous hailstorm against all the land of Egypt .

ID:	4023
INPUT:	Doo ádahalyánígíí bee hool'iní dah deidiijaa'go ak'ah iih nídoodziłígíí t'áágééd dah diikai ,
PRED:	They kept the lamps of olive oil for the lamps of olive oil ,
GOLD:	The five who were foolish did n't take enough olive oil for their lamps ,

ID:	4024
INPUT:	Áko éí Ófer hoolyéedi bił da'ní'éél , áádóó óola dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin tálent bíighahgo shóda<unk> t'e' , índa éí aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman baa dadziizyį́ .
PRED:	So they took a gold of gold , and he brought them to the king of Cyprus , and they brought him to Solomon .
GOLD:	They sailed to Ophir and brought back to Solomon some sixteen tons of gold .

ID:	4025
INPUT:	Ha'át'éegoshą' binaa ahééda'astł'inii naa'ííníłkaad ? Áko yą́ą́h nídadikahii aneest'ą' dayóbé .
PRED:	Why do you break the walls of the wall ? What sorrow awaits the builders ?
GOLD:	But now , why have you broken down our wallsso that all who pass by may steal our fruit ?

ID:	4026
INPUT:	T'áá ádzaagóó hodílzingo doo adą́ ádeił'íinii bił ííshją́ą́ ádahóle'
PRED:	But when they fast , they will show no justice to the truth .
GOLD:	A Call to Justice and Mercy

ID:	4027
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaadóó biiskání hoos'įįdgo Néíbal hasht'e'ninádzáago , hwe'asdzą́ą́ díí t'áá ałtso yee hoł hoolne'go bik'ee hajéí niiltłah áádóó tségi ájít'é dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	The next day Nabal got up early the next day , and his wife became very sick .
GOLD:	In the morning when Nabal was sober , his wife told him what had happened . As a result he had a stroke , and he lay paralyzed on his bed like a stone .

ID:	4028
INPUT:	K'ad Josáíyah łahjį' yaa naayáhígíí áádóó Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii bii' nídaháasdzooígíí bik'ehgo yá'át'éehgo ádzaii
PRED:	The rest of the events in Josiah 's reign , are recorded in The Book of the Lord 's reign .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Josiah 's reign and his acts of devotion ( carried out according to what was written in the Law of the Lord ) ,

ID:	4029
INPUT:	Azhą́ Bóhólníihii aláahgo bóhólnííh nidi , a'ohgo ádaat'éii yaa ntsíkees , nidi ádaa dahoji'niihii éí nízaadi hats'ą́ądi hólǫ́ǫgo haa nitsékees .
PRED:	But the Lord detests the plans of the wicked , but he hears their plans .
GOLD:	Though the Lord is great , he cares for the humble , but he keeps his distance from the proud .

ID:	4030
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ągo náá'iiłniihii nááhodínóoł'įįł , áko hakáá'góó k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizh lágo éí náá'iiłniihii , Doo ni'didéeh da lá , hodidooniił ; éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii naałniih át'é .
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the affected area , and the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . The priest will pronounce the person ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the person again . If the affected area has spread on the skin , the priest must pronounce that person ceremonially unclean , for it is clearly a serious skin disease .

ID:	4031
INPUT:	Áko ne'ajooba'ii sha'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii hool'áágóó doo bits'ą́ąjį' ádíílíił da . Bóhólníihii éí David bi'ana'í t'ááłá'í nítínígo nahasdzáán bikáa'gi áyoołdįįłgo doo nihits'ą́ąjį' kódíílíił da .
PRED:	“ Do not defile my family forever ; do not let the Lord destroy your enemies .
GOLD:	treat my family with this faithful love , even when the Lord destroys all your enemies from the face of the earth . ”

ID:	4032
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Peter hanáánáádzíi'go áhodííniid , Jó , nihí nihee dahólǫ́ǫ́ nít'é'ígíí ałtso bits'ą́ą́' dah dahidiikaigo , nikéé' dayíníikááh . Ákoshą' ha'át'íí nihíí' dadooleeł ?
PRED:	Then Peter said , “ Look , we will follow everything we have done . We will follow you and follow him ? ” And they asked .
GOLD:	Then Peter said to him , “ We 've given up everything to follow you . What will we get ? ”

ID:	4033
INPUT:	Áko Féro bits'ą́ą́dóó ch'ízhníyáago Bóhólníihii níjooskan .
PRED:	So Pharaoh left Pharaoh and pleaded with the Lord .
GOLD:	So Moses left Pharaoh 's court and pleaded with the Lord .

ID:	4034
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' Míriyam éí níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ą́góó kóho'diilyaa , áko diné t'áadoo niheenéhí Míriyam bił yah anídadziskaijį' índa .
PRED:	On the seventh day Miriam came from the camp of the camp , Miriam and Miriam came to Miriam and Miriam .
GOLD:	So Miriam was kept outside the camp for seven days , and the people waited until she was brought back before they traveled again .

ID:	4035
INPUT:	Samériyagi Jííhu éí Ízrel dine'é yinant'áago naadiin tseebíí nááhai .
PRED:	Jehu reigned in Samaria eight years .
GOLD:	In all , Jehu reigned over Israel from Samaria for twenty-eight years .

ID:	4036
INPUT:	Asdzání doo ałchíhígíí ba'áłchíní haleehgo bił hózhǫ́ǫgo bighan yaa áhályą́ągo ádeiile' . Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Let your children be glad in your household , and let the Lord enjoy his palace .
GOLD:	He gives the childless woman a family , making her a happy mother.Praise the Lord !

ID:	4037
INPUT:	Ts'ídá dílzingo nideet'áanii , éí diné ts'ídá dílzingo niidiní'ánígíí éí doo nááhidoonih da , nidi t'áádóo nídí ádooldįįł .
PRED:	“ You must not be defiled by the sacred offering . But you will not be completely destroyed .
GOLD:	No person specially set apart for destruction may be bought back . Such a person must be put to death .

ID:	4038
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó hodílzingo doo adą́ tágí jį́ azlį́į'go Esther éí naat'á éé' nizhóníii biih jííyáago aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bich'éédą́ą'gi haz'ání góne' yah ajííyá , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bibik'i dah asdáhí bikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah sidáago binaashiidę́ę́' dziizį' .
PRED:	On the third day of the guard , he went into the royal robes and put it in the palace of the royal palace . Then he stood in front of the king and stood in front of the royal palace .
GOLD:	On the third day of the fast , Esther put on her royal robes and entered the inner court of the palace , just across from the king 's hall . The king was sitting on his royal throne , facing the entrance .

ID:	4039
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí łichíi'go índa t'áá át'é ditł'ogo akágí éé' nahalin , áko éí Íísa bee dahojíízhi' .
PRED:	His oldest son was like a leather , and his body was as white as a leather .
GOLD:	The first one was very red at birth and covered with thick hair like a fur coat . So they named him Esau .

ID:	4040
INPUT:	<unk> bee atí'ályaaígíí
PRED:	A Plague of Blood
GOLD:	A Plague of Festering Boils

ID:	4041
INPUT:	Éí diné dabiyooch'íidgo t'óó ádahodil'į́įgo nida'nitinii éí t'áá aaníinii áádóó doo t'áá aaníí danilíinii yee ádaa ákodadínóodzįįł yę́ę , doo yee ádaa ákodanoozį́į́' át'ée da daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	They have become proud and false teachers , but they will not be ashamed of their sinful nature .
GOLD:	These people are hypocrites and liars , and their consciences are dead .

ID:	4042
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave me this message :

ID:	4043
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ákwíí jį́ hach'į' yaa yádaałti' , ákondi doo jíists'ą́ą' da , Mórdiikai yiniinaa át'ínígíí daats'í bá dínóodzįįł biniyé Héíman bee bił hóóne' , háálá Jew dine'é nishłį́ jiníigo bee bił dahojoolne' .
PRED:	So all the people agreed to listen to Mordecai , but they decided to listen to Mordecai . “ I 'm going to tell the Jews about the Jews . ”
GOLD:	They spoke to him day after day , but still he refused to comply with the order . So they spoke to Haman about this to see if he would tolerate Mordecai 's conduct , since Mordecai had told them he was a Jew .

ID:	4044
INPUT:	Áádóó díí t'ah biláhígo doo bą́ą́h anishłíinii baa naasháa doo , áádóó t'áá shí hózhǫ́ a'ohgo ádíí'níszin ádi'deeshnííł , índa ch'ikéí nidaal'a'í baa yáníłti' yę́ę ánísht'éii bił danilį́į doo .
PRED:	I will do this before you , and I will punish you for doing what I am doing . I will be the best of your young men and young women .
GOLD:	Yes , and I am willing to look even more foolish than this , even to be humiliated in my own eyes ! But those servant girls you mentioned will indeed think I am distinguished ! ”

ID:	4045
INPUT:	Áko Korníílyas ání , Dį́į́' yiskánídą́ą́' , [ hodínísingo doo ashą́ą́góó] kojį' daats'í o'oolkidgo , wózhǫ́ yaa adeez'ą́ągo sodizin biniyé hoo'a'go shighan góne' sodiszin nít'éé' ; jó'akon , diné léi' shidááhdóó bi'éé' bits'ádi'nílíidgo sizį́ .
PRED:	Then Cornelius said to him , “ My eyes are looking for help , but I pray to the one who had been praying to me . ”
GOLD:	Cornelius replied , “ Four days ago I was praying in my house about this same time , three o'clock in the afternoon . Suddenly , a man in dazzling clothes was standing in front of me .

ID:	4046
INPUT:	Áko nihí t'áá áníiltso t'áadoo nihinii'jį' bik'ída'asti'í bii' adéest'į́į́' biyi'jį' adéest'į́'ígi át'éego Bóhólníihii bee bits'ádi'nílíidii daníil'į́ , áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Níłch'i Diyinii nilį́įgo nihiyi' naalnishgo Bóhólníihii bits'ádi'nílídígi át'éego t'áá ałkéé' honí'ą́ągo nihí ałdó' nihits'ádi'nílííd dadiidleeł .
PRED:	We will be completely completely destroyed , and we will see the word of the Lord our God . We will see that we are like the breath of the Lord our God , just as we are .
GOLD:	So all of us who have had that veil removed can see and reflect the glory of the Lord . And the Lord — who is the Spirit — makes us more and more like him as we are changed into his glorious image .

ID:	4047
INPUT:	béégashii éí tádiindóó ba'aan hastą́ądi miil ánéelą́ą́' ,
PRED:	72,000 cattle ,
GOLD:	36,000 cattle ,

ID:	4048
INPUT:	áko índa Diné Silį́į'ii bee bééhózinii yádiłhił biyi'di yidooltsééł , áadi índa nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso dadoocha , índa yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' Diné Silį́į'ii k'os bił yildohgo áádóó bee adziil índa ayóó át'é ats'ádi'nílííd yił yigáałgo deizdoołtsééł .
PRED:	Then the Son of Man will see that the Son of Man will see the glory of the heavens and the earth , and the glory of the Son of Man will see the glory of the Son of Man .
GOLD:	And then at last , the sign that the Son of Man is coming will appear in the heavens , and there will be deep mourning among all the peoples of the earth . And they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory .

ID:	4049
INPUT:	Áko dah nízhdiikaigo , jó'akon , Jóseph nayiiyeełgo Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaago ábidííniid , Nídiidááh , áádóó ashkii áłts'íísígíí bimá bił ts'ídá tsxį́įłgo Ííjipgóó dohkááh . Nił ná<unk> ne'jį' áadi nihighan doo , háálá Hérad éí ashkii yidiyoołhééł biniyé háidínéeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	So Jacob went to the angel of the Lord and said to Joseph , “ Listen to the angel of the Lord ! Let 's go to Egypt , and let him go to Egypt . ” So Herod told him , “ Come and let 's go to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	After the wise men were gone , an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream . “ Get up ! Flee to Egypt with the child and his mother , ” the angel said . “ Stay there until I tell you to return , because Herod is going to search for the child to kill him . ”

ID:	4050
INPUT:	Náhookǫs índa shádi'ááh íinilaa , Dził Téíbor áádóó Dził Hérman bił hózhǫ́ǫgo nízhi' yaa haniih .
PRED:	He made us his unfailing love , and he has given us his name to Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	You created north and south.Mount Tabor and Mount Hermon praise your name .

ID:	4051
INPUT:	Áko Jó'ab éí deenásts'aa' bidee' bee í'dílzoołí yee ádííniid , áádóó Ízrel dine'é yikéé' deíjeehígíí t'ą́ą́' hahaazhjéé' ; jó , Jó'ab éí diné yéé'níłnii' .
PRED:	Then Joab blew the ram 's horn and said to the people of Israel , “ The men of Moab have come to fight ! ”
GOLD:	Then Joab blew the ram 's horn , and his men returned from chasing the army of Israel .

ID:	4052
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Éíbraham áyidííniid , Jó , Sérai ne'asdzą́ą́ éí Sérai doo nááhodidíí'niił da ; k'ad éí Sárah bee hwíínízhíi doo .
PRED:	Then God said to Abraham , “ This is what the wife of Sarai , Sarai , Sarai 's wife . This is the wife of Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Then God said to Abraham , “ Regarding Sarai , your wife — her name will no longer be Sarai . From now on her name will be Sarah .

ID:	4053
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Danizhé'é yę́ę bikéyahgóó índa nik'éítahgóó nídídááh , áko nił honishłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Jacob , “ Your ancestors will stand in the land of Jacob , and I will be with you . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Jacob , “ Return to the land of your father and grandfather and to your relatives there , and I will be with you . ”

ID:	4054
INPUT:	Naat'áanii t'áá bí íinízingo Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádi'yoołnihgo éí didlidgo nááhániihii , doodaii' hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii át'éego éí ha'a'aahjigo dáń'dítį́hígíí há ąą ánál'įįh doo ; t'áá háá'áyį́į́h jį́ náá'iiłnihígi át'éego didlidgo nááhániihii , doodaii' hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii nááyiiłnih doo áádóó índa ch'ééjiidáahgo hakéédę́ę́' dáń'dílkał doo .
PRED:	“ The prince will present a peace offering to the Lord , a peace offering , a peace offering , a peace offering , a peace offering , and its accompanying grain offering and peace offerings and peace offerings .
GOLD:	When the prince offers a voluntary burnt offering or peace offering to the Lord , the east gateway to the inner courtyard will be opened for him , and he will offer his sacrifices as he does on Sabbath days . Then he will leave , and the gateway will be shut behind him .

ID:	4055
INPUT:	Doo nihich'į' báhodoochįįłígíí biniyé índa deínókááhgóó doo ádadoohdįįł da biniyé biYe' nilíinii t'óó baa ádadiyoht'aah . Diné éí Diyin God yaa deidzólíhígíí t'áá ałtso bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	Do n't let them go to death , and you will destroy the Son of God . He is faithful to those who trust in him .
GOLD:	Submit to God 's royal son , or he will become angry , and you will be destroyed in the midst of all your activities — for his anger flares up in an instant.But what joy for all who take refuge in him !

ID:	4056
INPUT:	Biníí' gónaa bidziilgo áyiił'įįh , áádóó bigaan ałdó' bidziilgo áyiił'įįh .
PRED:	He trains his arm for his arm , and he destroys it .
GOLD:	She is energetic and strong , a hard worker .

ID:	4057
INPUT:	Jó , doo tsį́įłgo ch'ídoohkah da , doo nidi ch'ídadínóohchéeł da , háálá Bóhólníihii t'áá bí nihilą́ąjį' yigáał doo , índa Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God éí t'áá nihikéédę́ę́' nihaa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	Listen , you will not escape , for the Lord your God will protect you from the land of Israel , for he will protect you from your own land .
GOLD:	You will not leave in a hurry , running for your lives.For the Lord will go ahead of you ; yes , the God of Israel will protect you from behind .

ID:	4058
INPUT:	Díliyan , Mízpeh , <unk> hiyel ,
PRED:	Mizpah , Mizpah , Mizpah , Mizpah ,
GOLD:	Dilean , Mizpeh , Joktheel ,

ID:	4059
INPUT:	Éí t'ah nahą́ądę́ę́' doo ná choo'į́į da nít'éé' , nidi k'ad éí ná choo'į́ , shí ałdó' shá choo'į́ .
PRED:	But now you are defiled because you are defiled , but now you are buried with me .
GOLD:	Onesimus has n't been of much use to you in the past , but now he is very useful to both of us .

ID:	4060
INPUT:	Tsin tł'óół naakits'áadah bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii bee Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih , tsin tł'óół neeznáá bąąh daneelzhee'go bee bá nidaahnéego dahohtaał !
PRED:	Sing to the music of the twelve lyre and praise the Lord .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord with melodies on the lyre ; make music for him on the ten-stringed harp .

ID:	4061
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' hodílzinii binaa haz'ánígi biná'ázbaalgo ádíílííł , índa bich'é'étiingi aníbaalgo ádíílííł .
PRED:	Place the curtain in the courtyard of the Tabernacle , and put his feet in the door of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then set up the courtyard around the outside of the tent , and hang the curtain for the courtyard entrance .

ID:	4062
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' bikáá' náá'iiniihí ájiilaaígi bikáá'dóó didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii táadi náájiilnih t'ááłá'í nínáhahjį' áádóó Bóhólníihii binááł bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáá' didlidgo łikání halchin nízhdíłi' . Kót'éego kin ałtso ájiilaa .
PRED:	Solomon built a peace offering to the Lord and burned it on the altar of burnt offering . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It is a pleasing aroma to the altar .
GOLD:	Three times each year Solomon presented burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built for the Lord . He also burned incense to the Lord . And so he finished the work of building the Temple .

ID:	4063
INPUT:	Áko nihí da'iisiidląądii t'éiyá háá'áyį́į́h Diyin God yee hooł'a'ígíí biih hiikááh . Jó , t'áá bí ádííniid , T'óó báhádzidgo atí'ésh'íinii binahjį' ádee hadeesdzíi'go ádííniid , Háá'áyį́į́h bee hooł'a'ígíí ts'ídá doo biih dazhdookah da ! Azhą́ nahasdzáán ałtso niiní'ą́ąjį' binaanish ła'yiyiilaa nidi ádííniid .
PRED:	And we said to God , “ We have taken into the Sabbath days of my Sabbath days . For God has made me an oath that I would never enter the rest of my Sabbath days . ”
GOLD:	For only we who believe can enter his rest . As for the others , God said , “ In my anger I took an oath : ‘ They will never enter my place of rest , ' ” even though this rest has been ready since he made the world .

ID:	4064
INPUT:	Áko hastą́ą́h yiską́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Jesus , éí Peter áádóó James índa bitsilí John ałdó' dziłghą́ą́'góó t'áá sáhí hajizh'eezh .
PRED:	On the sixth day Jesus took Peter 's brother , James , and John climbed up the mountain .
GOLD:	Six days later Jesus took Peter and the two brothers , James and John , and led them up a high mountain to be alone .

ID:	4065
INPUT:	T'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchínígi át'éego : Bił hadlee'go na'aznii' , diné badahojoobá'íii yitaa'aznii' . Bit'áá ákogi é'ét'éii éí hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	The Scriptures say , “ Good News is good to those who are rich , and those who are godly will inherit justice . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ They share freely and give generously to the poor.Their good deeds will be remembered forever . ”

ID:	4066
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehgo iiná doo jinízinii hasht'e'nináho'deedlóozgo bik'ee ti'hwiizhdoonih áádóó hach'aho'dishkéii jijoołxáii éí dazdootsaał .
PRED:	The seeds of life will be put to death , and those who hate correction will die .
GOLD:	Whoever abandons the right path will be severely disciplined ; whoever hates correction will die .

ID:	4067
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é haa dahodiizts'ą́ą'go a'áán ádayiilaago yee hoł dadeezdéél ; béésh da'ahólzha'í yee Ííjip kéyahdi dahazlóóz .
PRED:	When the nations heard him , they captured their enemies and threw them into a cave in Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the nations heard about him , and he was trapped in their pit.They led him away with hooksto the land of Egypt .

ID:	4068
INPUT:	Áko Féro ádííniid , Nílááh , ákǫ́ǫ́ dínáahgo nizhé'é yóó'ánílééh ; Diyin God binááł haniyííłdzí'ígíí bik'ehgo ánílééh .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said , “ Go and bury your father , and do what pleases God . ”
GOLD:	Pharaoh agreed to Joseph 's request . “ Go and bury your father , as he made you promise , ” he said .

ID:	4069
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'óó báhádzidgo báhóóchįįd bijį́įdi béésh łigaii áádóó óola bee dahólóonii ts'ídá doo yisdábónííł át'ée da doo , nidi łe'niizį́'ígíí diiltłahgo nahasdzáán t'áá át' <unk> nít'éé' ałtso iididoołk'ą́ą́ł , áko nahasdzáán bikáá' kéédahojit'íinii t'áá ádzíłtso t'áadoo kót'é'ílíní áhodoołdįįł .
PRED:	The fierce anger of the Lord was very angry with silver and gold , but the fire of the earth will be taken away from the earth . The earth will be destroyed , and the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Your silver and gold will not save youon that day of the Lord 's anger.For the whole land will be devouredby the fire of his jealousy.He will make a terrifying endof all the people on earth .

ID:	4070
INPUT:	Táyi'dę́ę́' kéyah hadaaz'á danohłíinii , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' , áádóó ał'ąą dine'é danohłíinii nízaadi kéédahoht'íinii , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' ; Bóhólníihii éí iishch'id biyi'dę́ę́' shíká ádííniid ; shimá bitsą́ądi sétį́įgo shízhi' shá ályaa .
PRED:	Listen to me from the land of the earth ! Listen to me from distant lands , O Sovereign Lord , you who are far away from me .
GOLD:	Listen to me , all you in distant lands ! Pay attention , you who are far away ! The Lord called me before my birth ; from within the womb he called me by name .

ID:	4071
INPUT:	Bee nóhólníihii náásgóó k'ee'ąą yilzhish le' . Áádóó bee íinínízinii t'áá yá'ąąshdi ááníłígi át'éegonahasdzáán bikáa'gi ááníił le' .
PRED:	May the time of your enemies be filled with prosperity , but the earth will be seen in heaven .
GOLD:	May your Kingdom come soon.May your will be done on earth , as it is in heaven .

ID:	4072
INPUT:	Jerúsalem nílíinii , Bóhólníihii baa hóniih ! Záíyan nílíinii , niDiyin God baa hóniih !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , O Zion , O Zion , O Zion !
GOLD:	Glorify the Lord , O Jerusalem ! Praise your God , O Zion !

ID:	4073
INPUT:	diné doo yá'áshóonii t'óó kónígháníjį' ak'idiyaa danilį́ , áádóó t'óó áhodil'íinii yee bił hózhónígíí t'óó deiltse' .
PRED:	The wicked are like the wicked , and their eyes are dried up with eyes .
GOLD:	the triumph of the wicked has been short livedand the joy of the godless has been only temporary ?

ID:	4074
INPUT:	Éí Diyin God hadeintáago t'ah nít'ée'da haa ákodaniizįįhgo hak'ídaakah łeh nízingo ákót'éego áyiilaa . Azhą́ t'ááłá'í niitínígo nihits'ą́ądi doo nízaadi hojílǫ́ǫ da nidi ,
PRED:	And if God has done these things , he will show them what they have done . But if they do n't know what is right , they will be far away from a distance .
GOLD:	“ His purpose was for the nations to seek after God and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him — though he is not far from any one of us .

ID:	4075
INPUT:	Índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii éí kwáart bee í'neel'ąąhí bee wáin t'ááłáhídi haaką́ągo dibé yázhí t'ááłá'ígo bił náádahołniih doo ; hodiyingo haz'ą́ągi wáin bidziilii yanáadzi'go nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	Then one of them must also give one wine as a liquid offering to the Lord . This is a liquid offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Along with it you must present the proper liquid offering of one quart of alcoholic drink with each lamb , poured out in the Holy Place as an offering to the Lord .

ID:	4076
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God bibee ajooba' t'áá jíík'e ainíláhígíí binahjį' t'áá ákogi ádajít'éego há háádoodzihgo Christ Jesus nááhwiisnii'ígíí bee hwéédahideeshchid .
PRED:	But if God 's grace is right with us , we will be free from the way of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Yet God , in his grace , freely makes us right in his sight . He did this through Christ Jesus when he freed us from the penalty for our sins .

ID:	4077
INPUT:	Diné k'asdą́ą́' t'áá ałtso t'ááłá'í nítínígo dajooba'ígíí yaa dahalne' , nidi diné ba'ahódlíii bídin hóyéé' .
PRED:	There is no resurrection of the poor , but we have no fear .
GOLD:	Many will say they are loyal friends , but who can find one who is truly reliable ?

ID:	4078
INPUT:	Háálá Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Bábilan bich'é'é éí tł'oh naadą́ą́' habí'dool<unk> jį' ahoolzhiizhgo bikáa'gi habé'él'éesii nahojílin ; t'óó nááhodoo'náá'ígo dabidi'doogishjį' bee haa hodoolzhish .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ It is like a wheat harvest of wheat in the morning . It will be like a harvest of wheat harvest .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Babylon is like wheat on a threshing floor , about to be trampled.In just a little whileher harvest will begin . ”

ID:	4079
INPUT:	Dził Lébanan góde hasínáahgo dílwosh , áádóó Dził Béíshandi chánahgo handziihgo dílwosh . Bił ałch'į' dah danilwo'ii t'áá ałtso atélyaago daneeznánígíí biniinaa Dził Ábarim atiindóó ninínáahgo dílwosh .
PRED:	“ Come and shout to the mountains of Lebanon , and shout to the distant lands of Bashan , “ Come down to the distant lands of the mountains ! ” And shout , “ Come and shout , ‘ Come and shout ! '
GOLD:	Weep for your allies in Lebanon.Shout for them in Bashan.Search for them in the regions east of the river.See , they are all destroyed.Not one is left to help you .

ID:	4080
INPUT:	Nidi áádóó naaki nááhaigo <unk> Féstas éí Fííliks naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ęgi naat'áanii nilį́į doo biniyé níyá , áádóó Fííliks éí Jew dine'é bił dahodeeshǫǫł niizį́į'go , Paul t'áá awáalyaa sidáa doogo yee nihoní'ą́ągo dah diiyá .
PRED:	But Festus was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Rome . He went to meet the Jews in prison , and he went to meet Paul .
GOLD:	After two years went by in this way , Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus . And because Felix wanted to gain favor with the Jewish people , he left Paul in prison .

ID:	4081
INPUT:	Ído , Gíniitho , Abáíjah ,
PRED:	Besides , Abijah , Abijah ,
GOLD:	Iddo , Ginnethon , Abijah ,

ID:	4082
INPUT:	Nidi díí éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' át'éhígíí hazhé'é índa hamá doo bił bééhózin da , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Filístiya dine'é bíká doot'áałgi yíká déez'į́į́' nít'éé' . Ákwii hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' Filístiya dine'é ts'ídá ayóó át'éego Ízrel dine'é yee ádídahólnííh nít'éé' .
PRED:	But this is what the Lord had said to his father and mother , for he had not been afraid of the Philistines . And when the Philistines saw that the Philistines had come to fight the Philistines .
GOLD:	His father and mother did n't realize the Lord was at work in this , creating an opportunity to work against the Philistines , who ruled over Israel at that time .

ID:	4083
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é ła'ígíí kin haal'áhídóó éí yich'į' ch'íníjéé' , ákohgo Éí'ai dine'é éí Ízrel dine'é bita'gi tsístł'aaskai , áko Ízrel dine'é ałts'ą́ą́hjí niníjée'go ałtso nidahastseed ; łá'í nidi doo ła' joodzíi' da , índa doo ła' yisdájííyáhí da .
PRED:	So the men of Israel went out to the town of Ai , and the people of Ai were defeated . The people of Israel were trying to save themselves , and no one could save them .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Israelites who were inside the town came out and attacked the enemy from the rear . So the men of Ai were caught in the middle , with Israelite fighters on both sides . Israel attacked them , and not a single person survived or escaped .

ID:	4084
INPUT:	danihizhé'é yee nihił dahoolne' áádóó dasidiits'ą́ą'go nihił béédahózin yę́ę bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	We know that our ancestors taught you , and I will answer you .
GOLD:	stories we have heard and known , stories our ancestors handed down to us .

ID:	4085
INPUT:	K'ad ániishłaaígi át'éego Bihíímath wolyéii íishłaaígíí níníł'į́ ; éí béégashii nahalingo ch'il yiłchozh .
PRED:	Now I am telling you , ‘ This is what I said : I am going to ruins , like a tree . '
GOLD:	“ Take a look at Behemoth , which I made , just as I made you.It eats grass like an ox .

ID:	4086
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii yá nidaal'a'í danilíinii bíni' chaha'oh áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí bita'gi daachago kódaaníi le' , Bóhólníihii , nidine'é yisdánínííł ; níí' nilíinii t'ááká baa yáhásinii baa dóó'áałgo ana'í danilíinii bee ádidahólnííh lágo ! Áko ha'át'íísh biniyé , Háájíshą' biDiyin God ? dabidi'níi doo .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the priests of the Lord , our servants , who call on the altar of the Lord : Do n't let us be able to save us , O Lord our God ? Do n't let us be able to save us ? ”
GOLD:	Let the priests , who minister in the Lord 's presence , stand and weep between the entry room to the Temple and the altar.Let them pray , “ Spare your people , Lord ! Do n't let your special possession become an object of mockery.Do n't let them become a joke for unbelieving foreigners who say , ‘ Has the God of Israel left them ? ' ”

ID:	4087
INPUT:	áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii ábidííniid , Bíni' aláahgo naat'áanii hool'áágóó hiná ; jó , biniyéii baa yínííł nishłį́ , háálá kin haal'á nít'é'ídi dashizhé'é yę́ę bii' yóó'ádaalyaa yę́ędi t'áá ádzaagóó nihidadíl'á áádóó dáń'daditį́hí adahideesk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ I am the king of Israel , for I am innocent in the city . I am the ruins of my ancestors . ”
GOLD:	but I replied , “ Long live the king ! How can I not be sad ? For the city where my ancestors are buried is in ruins , and the gates have been destroyed by fire . ”

ID:	4088
INPUT:	Háálá shá nidahałt'i'go saad shich'į' adayiiníiłgo dashódziih áádóó ana'í índa k'éédidoo'níiłii biniinaa t'óó ádaa yániisdzį́į́' .
PRED:	For I am telling you what I am saying , and your enemies are useless .
GOLD:	All we hear are the taunts of our mockers.All we see are our vengeful enemies .

ID:	4089
INPUT:	Bee naa yáhodoosįįłígíí biniyé ni'éé' ninii' bilááhgóó de ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will make you ashamed of your clothing , and I will make you ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	I myself will strip youand expose you to shame .

ID:	4090
INPUT:	Áko shich'į' nahosínísáago , díí t'áá át'é ni dooleeł .
PRED:	And you have said to me , ‘ This is what you have done . '
GOLD:	I will give it all to you if you will worship me . ”

ID:	4091
INPUT:	Nidi Jew dine'é doo da'oodlánígíí éí doo Jew dine'é danilíinii yił hadahoneeshchaadgo , hódeidéé'į́į'go ádayiilaa .
PRED:	But when the Jewish leaders saw that they were not talking about their faith , they did n't see what they were saying .
GOLD:	Some of the Jews , however , spurned God 's message and poisoned the minds of the Gentiles against Paul and Barnabas .

ID:	4092
INPUT:	Éí níl'į́įgo t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego bik'ee hóyée'go Mózes ání , T'áá íiyisí bik'ee shił yée'go shitah hoditłid .
PRED:	That is why the terrible anger of Moses says : “ My eyes are terrified and terrified me .
GOLD:	Moses himself was so frightened at the sight that he said , “ I am terrified and trembling . ”

ID:	4093
INPUT:	Áko k'ad , Júdah dine'é índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii , diné áádóó asdzánída nihinaalte' danilį́į dooleeł danohsingo daołtsood . Áko nihí nidi nihiDiyin God Bóhólníihii bich'į' ádił nida'ayoosíi'go át'é .
PRED:	And now , you people of Judah and Jerusalem will be a slave to the people of Judah and Jerusalem . You will have sinned against the Lord your God , and you will be utterly destroyed .
GOLD:	And now you are planning to make slaves of these people from Judah and Jerusalem . What about your own sins against the Lord your God ?

ID:	4094
INPUT:	Ákódzaago yikáít'áahjį' ayííłką́ągo kǫ' éí k'os bił níyizgo yildohígíí biníkáádę́ę́' Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é siláo yinééł'į́į'go yich'į' hodiisnáá' .
PRED:	On that day the Lord appeared to Zedekiah and saw that he had seen the pillar of fire . He saw that the Egyptians had seen the Lord .
GOLD:	But just before dawn the Lord looked down on the Egyptian army from the pillar of fire and cloud , and he threw their forces into total confusion .

ID:	4095
INPUT:	Éíhaz naadiin binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' , áádóó hastą́'áadah nááhaijį' Jerúsalemgi nant'áá nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo t'áá ákogi ájít'į́įgo Bóhólníihii haDiyin God binááł jideeyáa da ; hazhé'é David áátįįdígi t'áadoo ádziidzaa da .
PRED:	Jehoahaz was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He refused to do what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight . He did what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord his God .
GOLD:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He did not do what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord his God , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	4096
INPUT:	Jó , Éíhaz éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizindę́ę́' áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bighandę́ę́' índa naat'áanii danilíinii dabighandę́ę́' da'ílíinii ch'íyiizhjaa'go Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í aa yílyáii át'éego baazhnínil , nidi éí t'áadoo háká eelwod da .
PRED:	But Ahaz released the Temple of the Lord from the Temple of Ahaz , and he released them from the royal palace of Assyria . But he did n't let them go out to Assyria .
GOLD:	Ahaz took valuable items from the Lord 's Temple , the royal palace , and from the homes of his officials and gave them to the king of Assyria as tribute . But this did not help him .

ID:	4097
INPUT:	Díí éí Ísakar dine'é bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ ; éí hastą́diindóó ba'aan dį́įdi mííldóó ba'aan táadi neeznádiingo ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	These were the clans of Issachar . Their registered troops numbered 40,500 .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Issachar . Their registered troops numbered 64,300 .

ID:	4098
INPUT:	Jó , tooh nílínígíí wó'ądaanah nidi , doo bik'ee bił yée' da ; azhą́ bizée'jį' Jórdan tooh bínízdeełhałgo nílį́į nidi , doo ya'ólíi da .
PRED:	Look at the side of the Jordan River , but he was afraid of him . He did n't trust him in his presence , but he did n't trust him .
GOLD:	It is not disturbed by the raging river , not concerned when the swelling Jordan rushes around it .

ID:	4099
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é bi'deesteh bijį́įdi t'áadoo nídoodleełí da . T'áádóo nídí ádooníłígíí Ízrel dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó baa hashne' .
PRED:	Do n't be fooled by the day of Israel , but no one will rescue Israel .
GOLD:	One thing is certain , Israel : On your day of punishment , you will become a heap of rubble .

ID:	4100
INPUT:	Hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehjį' diné bida'asnii'ígi át'éego t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' báádahadzidii shik'ijį' bi'iyíníłnii' , áko Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįd bijíní góne' doo ła' yóó'anííchą́ą' da , doo nidi ła' yidzíi' da ; bił nída'iisdis yę́ę índa danísą́ yę́ę shi'ana'í ałtso ádabisdįįd .
PRED:	As for the people , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has poured out my fury on every side of every direction . They will be destroyed by their enemies , and no one will disappear .
GOLD:	“ You have invited terrors from all around , as though you were calling them to a day of feasting.In the day of the Lord 's anger , no one has escaped or survived.The enemy has killed all the childrenwhom I carried and raised . ”

ID:	4101
INPUT:	Jó , éí bitł'éé' doo bí'ootsą́ą da le' ; éí bitł'éédą́ą́' t'áadoo diné bił dahózhóní le' .
PRED:	That night the night is no longer , and let the men sleep with you .
GOLD:	Let that night be childless.Let it have no joy .

ID:	4102
INPUT:	Áko bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ájíní , Jó , kin haal'áhígíí bine'dę́ę'go baa nihidoohkah . Kin haal'áhídóó t'áadoo nízaadgóó anáhjahí , nidi t'áá ánółtso hasht'e'ádadíínółzin dooleeł .
PRED:	Then he told them , “ You must celebrate the city of the city . Be sure to enter the city of refuge .
GOLD:	with these orders : “ Hide in ambush close behind the town and be ready for action .

ID:	4103
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God , k'éédidíí'níiłii nílíinii , Diyin God k'éédidíí'níiłii nílíinii , ííshjání í'dílnééh !
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , your God , and show yourself what you have done .
GOLD:	O Lord , the God of vengeance , O God of vengeance , let your glorious justice shine forth !

ID:	4104
INPUT:	Hwe'oodlą' át'éii
PRED:	faith in faith
GOLD:	Great Examples of Faith

ID:	4105
INPUT:	Éí bi'é'él'į' nilíinii Rome dine'é daniidlį́įgo t'áadoo bee nihá haz'áanii deidiiltsołgo bik'eh dayíníikáah dooleełígíí yínanihiniłtin .
PRED:	“ Do n't worry about Rome , ” they demanded . “ We want to tell us what we want to do . ”
GOLD:	“ They are teaching customs that are illegal for us Romans to practice . ”

ID:	4106
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hinishná ; ákót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' bee ádee hadzoodzíi'ii jíí'įįdii , áádóó hoł aha'deet'áanii doo bik'eh hojííł'įįdii éí aláahgo naat'áanii jílį́įgo áhoolaii kééhat'į́įgi ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bábilandi dazhdootsaał .
PRED:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I have sworn this message to the king : ‘ As surely as I live , I will surely die in Babylon . ' ”
GOLD:	No ! For as surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , the king of Israel will die in Babylon , the land of the king who put him in power and whose treaty he disregarded and broke .

ID:	4107
INPUT:	Jériko kin haal'áádóó diné táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdla' .
PRED:	The citizens of Jericho
GOLD:	The citizens of Jericho345

ID:	4108
INPUT:	Áko diné éí ha'ázdidoolziłgo índa díí bááh jidooyį́į́ł áádóó díí doodlį́įłii jidoodlį́į́ł .
PRED:	He will eat this bread and bread , and he will eat it .
GOLD:	That is why you should examine yourself before eating the bread and drinking the cup .

ID:	4109
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí da'atsidii dį́į'go shił yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord showed me four blacksmiths .

ID:	4110
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh biniinaa ná k'éé'deeshchxǫǫł ? Áko na'áłchíní yóó'adashideez'ą́ , áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii yee ádee hadadeesdzíí' . <unk> daazlį́į'jį' ba'iistsóód nít'ée'go da'díílá , áádóó dah naazhjaa'go ałjiłnii bighan naaznilgóó tádadookai .
PRED:	“ What will I destroy them ? ” they demanded . “ They have taken away their children , and they have defiled their gods . ”
GOLD:	“ How can I pardon you ? For even your children have turned from me.They have sworn by gods that are not gods at all ! I fed my people until they were full.But they thanked me by committing adulteryand lining up at the brothels .

ID:	4111
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóram éí Jííhu yiyiiłtsą́ągo ání , K'éésh biniyé ánít'į́ , Jííhu ? Haadzíi'go ání , Nimá Jézebel be'ajił áádóó álílee k'ehgo yee hoołáałii t'ah náás deít'éehgo haash yit'éego k'é hólǫ́ǫ doo ?
PRED:	When Jehu saw this , he asked Jehu , “ What are the mother of Jesse ? ” But Jehu asked Jehu , “ What should we know ? ”
GOLD:	King Joram demanded , “ Do you come in peace , Jehu ? ” Jehu replied , “ How can there be peace as long as the idolatry and witchcraft of your mother , Jezebel , are all around us ? ”

ID:	4112
INPUT:	Ákoshą' háí ba'ahódlíigo índa hóyą́ągo naal'a'í nilį́ , éí binanit'a'í bighan haz'ą́ągi nidaakaígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá áajį' anáhwiilzhíishgo yaná'áltso' doo biniyé nibiníłtį́ ?
PRED:	“ Who is the one who lives in the house of the master and his officials , who lives in their homes ?
GOLD:	“ A faithful , sensible servant is one to whom the master can give the responsibility of managing his other household servants and feeding them .

ID:	4113
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é hodeeyá t'áá bítséedi néidiinilii doo yóó'iidíí'ą́ą da . Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii Iiláíjah yaa halne'iísh doo nihił béédahózin da ? Éí Ízrel dine'é baa yájíłti'go Diyin God níjookąąh yę́ędą́ą́' kózhdííniid ,
PRED:	But God did not abandon the people of Israel , but he said , “ You have not been unfaithful to the word of God and the prophets of Israel . ”
GOLD:	No , God has not rejected his own people , whom he chose from the very beginning . Do you realize what the Scriptures say about this ? Elijah the prophet complained to God about the people of Israel and said ,

ID:	4114
INPUT:	Nidi t'óó ák'eh dahal'į́įgo doo t'áá k'ad da'diizts'ą́ą́'góó deíkááh áádóó doo da'didoots'į́įł da biniyé jé'ádahodilkał nít'éé' .
PRED:	But if they listen , they would not listen or listen or listen .
GOLD:	“ Your ancestors refused to listen to this message . They stubbornly turned away and put their fingers in their ears to keep from hearing .

ID:	4115
INPUT:	David éí tsits'aa' dílzinii néidoo'ááł yiniyé dah diiyá
PRED:	David 's Plans for the Ark
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	4116
INPUT:	Háálá Jew dine'é danilíinii éí Diyin God bibee adziilii bee bééhózinii nihá ádoolnííł daaníigo dayókeed , áádóó Gríik dine'é danilíinii éí bee hódzáanii t'éí bił ayóó ádaat'é .
PRED:	For the Gentiles know that God is revealed to the Gentiles , and he is the power of the Jews .
GOLD:	It is foolish to the Jews , who ask for signs from heaven . And it is foolish to the Greeks , who seek human wisdom .

ID:	4117
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hatélii , doodaii' habéégashii , doodaii' hadibé , doodaii' halį́į́' bił kééhojit'íinii ba'ałk'ee nizhníłtį́įgo nít'éé' daaztsą́ągo , doodaii' haada yidzaago , doodaii' yóó'anoolchą́ą'go , nidi t'áadoo haideel'į́'í dago
PRED:	“ If someone saw a donkey or a donkey or a sheep or goats or sheep or goats or goats ,
GOLD:	“ Now suppose someone leaves a donkey , ox , sheep , or any other animal with a neighbor for safekeeping , but it dies or is injured or is taken away , and no one sees what happened .

ID:	4118
INPUT:	( Áko Béíshan kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Ag wolyéii yé'iitsoh ła' nilį́įgo éí t'éí yidziih . Jó , tsásk'eh yikáá' nitéhígíí béésh nitł'izii bá nidaaz'áago ályaa . Éí Ámon dine'é bikin haal'áhígi Rábah hoolyéegi si'ą́ . <unk> ts'áadahdóó ná'áłníi'go ké silá áníłnééz áádóó naaniigo éí hastą́ądi ké silá áníłtéél . <unk> wolyéhígíí ach'oozlaa'dóó ála' aníí'dę́'ígíí bílátahjį' bee í'neel'ąąhígíí át'é . )
PRED:	Then King Og of Bashan , who lived in the land of King Og of Bashan . He reigned in the middle of the city of Bashan , which was 71/2 feet long and 27 inches wide , and he reigned in the City of Ammon .
GOLD:	( King Og of Bashan was the last survivor of the giant Rephaites . His bed was made of iron and was more than thirteen feet long and six feet wide . It can still be seen in the Ammonite city of Rabbah . )

ID:	4119
INPUT:	Ła' tsé deez'áhígíí éí náhookǫsjí Míkmash báhátis bich'į'go deez'á , ła'ígíí éí shádi'ááhjí Gíbiyah kin haal'áii bich'į'go deez'á .
PRED:	“ The people of the north are east of the north , north , and the other north side of the north side of the north .
GOLD:	The cliff on the north was in front of Micmash , and the one on the south was in front of Geba .

ID:	4120
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí Gíbiyan kin haal'áadi wók'ą́ądi haz'ánídę́ę́' áádóó níbaal bii' dahozdísinii si'ą́ą́dę́ę́' dah nízdiidzáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áajį' nídzídzáago Ízrel dine'é binazhnit'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Solomon returned from Gibeon to the hill country of Gibeon , and he returned from the hill country of Israel and returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then Solomon returned to Jerusalem from the Tabernacle at the place of worship in Gibeon , and he reigned over Israel .

ID:	4121
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then another message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4122
INPUT:	Áádóó azhą́ shee hólóonii t'áá át'é badahojoobá'íígíí bi<unk> niih nidi , áádóó ashidi'doolk'ą́ąłjį' niná'ádinisht'ą́ą nidi , bee ayóó'ó'ó'níinii shii' ádingo t'áadoo shá nídoodleełí da .
PRED:	But if you love me , you will not let me drink from the way of the poor , but if you do n't love me .
GOLD:	If I gave everything I have to the poor and even sacrificed my body , I could boast about it ; but if I did n't love others , I would have gained nothing .

ID:	4123
INPUT:	Áko ádił ni'jít'įįhgo ádee hanáázdoodzíí' , Éí dinéhígíí doo bééhasin da . T'áá áko naa'ahóóhai biką'í ádííniid .
PRED:	He vowed , “ I do n't know that you have a vow to the male goat . ” And he said , “ I do n't know that you have a male goat . ”
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know the man ! ” And immediately the rooster crowed .

ID:	4124
INPUT:	áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' tooh nílį́į́ léi' bibąąhjį' kin haal'áádóó ch'íniikai , ákwe'é sodizin biniyé náhoot'aah łeh ; ákwii dineebingo asdzání ahíikaígíí bich'į' yádeiilti' .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day , a woman from the province of the Nile went out and began to worship other gods .
GOLD:	On the Sabbath we went a little way outside the city to a riverbank , where we thought people would be meeting for prayer , and we sat down to speak with some women who had gathered there .

ID:	4125
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí Nóah áyidííniid ,
PRED:	Then God said to Noah ,
GOLD:	Then God said to Noah ,

ID:	4126
INPUT:	Áko k'ad t'áá íídą́ą́' nihik'ijį' k'ídíshnii'go ni áádóó nidine'é t'áá bił naałniih bee atínihiishłaago nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ánihisíłdįįd doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	Now I am sending you to destroy you as I destroyed you , and I will destroy you as a plague .
GOLD:	By now I could have lifted my hand and struck you and your people with a plague to wipe you off the face of the earth .

ID:	4127
INPUT:	Áádóó kintahjį' Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii Éíhab bich'į' hane' nidei'áhígíí ayííł'a'go ííłní , Ben-héídad kóní ,
PRED:	Then King Ahab of Israel sent this message to Ahab :
GOLD:	Ben-hadad sent messengers into the city to relay this message to King Ahab of Israel : “ This is what Ben-hadad says :

ID:	4128
INPUT:	Ni lą́ą adziil bee áká sínílzaazii , nidziil bee dził nidasínínil .
PRED:	You are my strength , O God.Pay attention to your strength .
GOLD:	You formed the mountains by your powerand armed yourself with mighty strength .

ID:	4129
INPUT:	Háálá diné t'áá ákogi át'éego na'nitin doo yich'į' hada'ólníi da dooleełígíí baa dahodoolzhish , nidi t'áá bí deinízinígíí t'éiyá dayíists'ą́ą'go bił yá'ádaat'éeh doo , t'áá bí yidádanoolníinii bik'ehgo nida'nitinii t'éiyá yíchą́deídéelni' doo .
PRED:	For those who are honest will be punished , but those who do what is right . But those who do what is right .
GOLD:	For a time is coming when people will no longer listen to sound and wholesome teaching . They will follow their own desires and will look for teachers who will tell them whatever their itching ears want to hear .

ID:	4130
INPUT:	Níníí'dę́ę́' bee náhidíyoołii bee tó ahąh íinilaa ; tó ałt'ah nehegeehgo nídiidzá ; tó ditáanii bitł'áahjį'go tónteel yíníłtł'is .
PRED:	You have made the water from the middle of the water of the water of the water of the earth , and you can keep the water from the sea .
GOLD:	At the blast of your breath , the waters piled up ! The surging waters stood straight like a wall ; in the heart of the sea the deep waters became hard .

ID:	4131
INPUT:	Nidi Férisii danilíinii ła' ádadííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' doo bee haz'ánígíí baa naahkai ?
PRED:	But some Pharisees asked , “ Why do you want to eat the Sabbath day ? ”
GOLD:	But some Pharisees said , “ Why are you breaking the law by harvesting grain on the Sabbath ? ”

ID:	4132
INPUT:	Áko ábididííniił , Bóhólníihii , Hííbrew dine'é biDiyin God nilíinii , nich'į' shiníł'a' kóníigo , Shidine'é béé'níłnííh , áko éí honoojíidi shich'į' nidahałáa doo , jó'akon , nidi t'ahdii doo shíísíníłts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	Say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You are the Hebrews , the God of my people , and you will listen to me , but you will not listen to me .
GOLD:	Then announce to him , ‘ The Lord , the God of the Hebrews , has sent me to tell you , “ Let my people go , so they can worship me in the wilderness. ” Until now , you have refused to listen to him .

ID:	4133
INPUT:	Doo nádiinághánídę́ę́' shił bééhoozinígíí éí k'ad baa hodeeshnih<unk> shiilaii t'áá ákogi át'éii nilį́įgo ííshjání ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	And now I will show you the way I have made you right with God , who made me right with you .
GOLD:	I will present profound argumentsfor the righteousness of my Creator .

ID:	4134
INPUT:	Áko ni'góó łeezhgi át'ée doogo bik'ída'iiséłhaal ; kintah atiingóó hashtł'ishígi át'éego bik'i niséyáago nídíí'eez .
PRED:	So I went out to the roof and found my feet in the streets .
GOLD:	I ground them as fine as the dust of the earth ; I trampled them in the gutter like dirt .

ID:	4135
INPUT:	áko nihokáa'gi t'áá háiida t'áá bí ák'iníjídlíii éí Diyin God t'áá aaníinii bik'ijidlíi doo , áádóó nihokáa'gi t'áá háiida ádee hadoodzíi'ii éí Diyin God t'áá aaníinii yee ádee hadidoodzih , háálá ach'į' nahwii'ná yę́ę baa hoyoosnahgo shits'ąą nídees'į́į́' .
PRED:	And if you are faithful to God , you will not be blessed in God 's presence , and you will not listen to me , for I will answer those who fear God .
GOLD:	All who invoke a blessing or take an oathwill do so by the God of truth.For I will put aside my angerand forget the evil of earlier days .

ID:	4136
INPUT:	Áádóó doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí yee ádaa dahalne'go dabizhé'é yę́ę doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áhát'íinii yee doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádashííł'įįdgóó yee ádaa dahoolne'go áádóó ałdó' shits'ą́ą́jí t'óó shik'ijį' danilínígíí áádóó ałdó' shik'ijį' danilį́įgo deíkááh nít'é'ígíí yee ádaa dahalne' .
PRED:	They did what was evil in their sinful practices . They told me what they had done . They told me what they had happened to me , and they would follow my example .
GOLD:	“ But at last my people will confess their sins and the sins of their ancestors for betraying me and being hostile toward me .

ID:	4137
INPUT:	Bee ída'diiljeehí naaltsoos bee bidáda'deeshjée'ii ashdla' góne'ígíí ąą yidinízǫ́ǫzgo , bikáá' náá'iiniihí biyaagi Diyin God bizaad yaa dahalne'go áádóó t'áá éí yee ádaa ch'ídahwiist'ą́ągo biniinaa nidabi'diztseedii bii' naazíinii yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	When the Lamb broke the fourth seal , he opened the fourth seal of the altar and saw that the Scriptures say , “ I have seen the word of God . ”
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the fifth seal , I saw under the altar the souls of all who had been martyred for the word of God and for being faithful in their testimony .

ID:	4138
INPUT:	Háálá shi'ana'í hahóół'á , áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii shich'į' nidahwiiłná . Háálá doo ákwii át'éii shik'ijį' deidiyiił<unk> , áádóó bádahachį'go dashijoołxá .
PRED:	For my enemies taunt me , and the wicked despise me , for they are filled with violence .
GOLD:	My enemies shout at me , making loud and wicked threats.They bring trouble on meand angrily hunt me down .

ID:	4139
INPUT:	Áádóó Iiláíyakim éí aláahgo naat'áanii bighan bee bóhólníhígíí áádóó Shébna éí naaltsoos ííł'íní índa hastóí nááda'iiłniihii éí tł'oh yishbizh bik'ídaasti'go Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah Diyin God yá halne'ii nilíinii bich'į' ajiis'a' .
PRED:	Then Eliakim the palace administrator ; Shebna the court secretary ; Shebna the court secretary , and Joah son of Amoz sent his message to Isaiah son of Amoz .
GOLD:	And he sent Eliakim the palace administrator , Shebna the court secretary , and the leading priests , all dressed in burlap , to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz .

ID:	4140
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ła'da , Shoo , kǫ́ǫ́ Christ naaghá , éí doodaléi' , Shoo , níláhjí naaghá , danihiłníigo t'áadoo deinohdlání .
PRED:	“ And if someone tells you , ‘ Look , ' or ‘ Look , ' or the Messiah is here . '
GOLD:	“ Then if anyone tells you , ‘ Look , here is the Messiah , ' or ‘ There he is , ' do n't believe it .

ID:	4141
INPUT:	Mózes áádóó Éran náás ahoolchíiłii
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Moses and Aaron

ID:	4142
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph bik'isóó yíkai ; ha'níigo Féro bighandi baa hóóne'go Féro índa bá nidaal'a'í yaa bił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	So Joseph 's brothers returned to Pharaoh 's palace , and his officials went to Pharaoh 's palace .
GOLD:	The news soon reached Pharaoh 's palace : “ Joseph 's brothers have arrived ! ” Pharaoh and his officials were all delighted to hear this .

ID:	4143
INPUT:	Ákohgo íídą́ą́' Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é dabinááł Kéínan kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Jéíbin wolyéii yik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' .
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel defeated the land of Canaan , and they defeated the kings of Canaan .
GOLD:	So on that day Israel saw God defeat Jabin , the Canaanite king .

ID:	4144
INPUT:	Nidi asdzání Jézebel , Diyin God yá halne'ii nilį́įgo ádójíii , éí shá nidaal'a'í na'ageh yee tsi'nidaakai doogo , índa eda'alyaii bich'į' náádahaaznii'ii deiyą́ą doogo neinitingo t'áá áhoodzaagóó ayii'éeshgo bee bá nahosooł'ánígíí , éí t'éí nihik'ijį' séł'ą́ .
PRED:	But the prophet Jezebel replied , “ You are the prophets of the prophets who are born to me . They are trying to kill me , and you are trying to kill me . I am sending you out to kill you . ”
GOLD:	“ But I have this complaint against you . You are permitting that woman — that Jezebel who calls herself a prophet — to lead my servants astray . She teaches them to commit sexual sin and to eat food offered to idols .

ID:	4145
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God bá haleego ásdzaa . Jó , Ízrel dine'é nibee aha'deet'ą́ yóó'adeideez'ą́ ; nibikáá' nááda'iiniihí dayiistł'ííd , áádóó ná dahalne'ii diltłish yee nideistseed , áko shí , t'áá shí t'éiyá , ch'ééyá , áko k'ad dashidiyoołhééł biniyé hadashintá .
PRED:	Then he said , “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has made the covenant of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . The people of Israel have broken their covenant and killed them , and they will kill me . ”
GOLD:	Elijah replied , “ I have zealously served the Lord God Almighty . But the people of Israel have broken their covenant with you , torn down your altars , and killed every one of your prophets . I am the only one left , and now they are trying to kill me , too . ”

ID:	4146
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii kóní , Tooh nílį́ nahalingo ach'į' hózhóonii éí há bighą́ą́h nídideestsih áádóó ał'ąą dine'é yee ayóó ádaat'éii tó wó'ą́ą́lį́ nahalingo bá bighą́ą́h nídadi'deestsih , <unk> akon , áko índa da'ołt'o' doo , booshk'iizh yee nanihijaah doo áádóó bitsosk'idgi dah nanihijaah doo .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ Look , I will dry up like a tree of water , a tree of water for the nations of the earth , and the hills will be filled with water .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will give Jerusalem a river of peace and prosperity.The wealth of the nations will flow to her.Her children will be nursed at her breasts , carried in her arms , and held on her lap .

ID:	4147
INPUT:	Áko Arimathíya hoolyéédę́ę́' diné at'íinii léi' Jóseph wolyéego , éí ałdó' Jesus yíhooł'aahii nilį́įgo , hííłch'į'go níyá .
PRED:	So Joseph took a man named Joseph , a man named Joseph named Joseph , and he went to the Twelve .
GOLD:	As evening approached , Joseph , a rich man from Arimathea who had become a follower of Jesus ,

ID:	4148
INPUT:	Líyah éí ha'át'e' ádin joolnáá' , nidi Réíchel éí t'áá íiyisí ayóó ánóolnin áádóó baadzólní .
PRED:	Leah had no eyes , but she was very beautiful . She was very beautiful , and she became very beautiful .
GOLD:	There was no sparkle in Leah 's eyes , but Rachel had a beautiful figure and a lovely face .

ID:	4149
INPUT:	áádóó ła'ts'áadah náhááh góne' , tseebíí nídízííd góne' <unk> yiziłígíí binih kin ts'ídá ałtso hadidzaa ; ádoolnííł hodoo'niid yę́ęgi át'éego t'áá ákót'éego ályaa . Áko t'áá ájíléehgo tsosts'id nááhai .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the month , during the fourth year of the reign of the year of the reign of the reign of the reign of the month . Then he said , “ He must prepare seven years for seven years . ”
GOLD:	The entire building was completed in every detail by midautumn , in the month of Bul , during the eleventh year of his reign . So it took seven years to build the Temple .

ID:	4150
INPUT:	Ha'a'ááhdóó e'e'áahjį' Bóhólníihii bízhi' éí baa ha'niih biniyé át'é !
PRED:	Praise the name of the Lord , and he is the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Everywhere — from east to west — praise the name of the Lord .

ID:	4151
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é índa ał'ąą dine'é ts'ídá t'áá ałtso chaha'ohgi hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh bida'jił'į́į doo biniyé doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ałnáádajikahígíí díí bee atídaho'dil'į́į doo .
PRED:	All the nations of Egypt will look at the Festival of Shelters , and the Festival of Shelters will be punished .
GOLD:	Egypt and the other nations will all be punished if they do n't go to celebrate the Festival of Shelters .

ID:	4152
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é yínííł danilį́ , áádóó bidáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó naháaztą́ągo áda daho<unk> xáá' . Bidine'é tsé'yaa naazhjée'go daacha áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'ínígíí éí nída'ookąąhgo hahosiilts'įįh .
PRED:	“ The people of Judah are in the gates , and they will cry out to their surrounding villages . They will cry out to the people of Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ Judah wilts ; commerce at the city gates grinds to a halt.All the people sit on the ground in mourning , and a great cry rises from Jerusalem .

ID:	4153
INPUT:	Áádóó jó'akon , Bóhólníihii bizaad náázdiizts'ą́ą'go ánááhodoo'niid , Díí doo hóó' dooleeł da ; t'áá ni niye' bíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ The Lord has not given this land . This is what the Lord has promised . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to him , “ No , your servant will not be your heir , for you will have a son of your own who will be your heir . ”

ID:	4154
INPUT:	T'áá háiida díí daaztsą́ągo bits'íís nidzistínígíí éí ha'éé' jidoogis , áko i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didoodah da .
PRED:	“ If you touch this body , you will wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water .
GOLD:	If you pick up their carcasses , you must wash your clothes , and you will remain defiled until evening .

ID:	4155
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá ákwii é'ét'é ak'eh didlį́įgo áyiilaajį'lók'aatsoh yisk'isii nidi doo k'íidootih da , índa bee hool'iní biih yít'i'ígíí t'óó bilid nidi doo yidínóołtsis da ,
PRED:	He will break the smoke from his holy dwelling , but he will burn it into a burning burning burning fire . He will never be able to separate the smoke from the burning bush .
GOLD:	He will not crush the weakest reedor put out a flickering candle.Finally he will cause justice to be victorious .

ID:	4156
INPUT:	Díí ts'ídá nihił béédahózin le' : Diyin God bizaad biyi'dóó nee'ni'jį' ádahodooníiłii bee ak'eda'ashchínígíí doo diné ła' t'áá bí bíniik'ehgo yik'i'diitáanii át'ée da .
PRED:	This is what we say , ‘ We know that the Scriptures say , ‘ We do n't understand the meaning of the Scriptures . '
GOLD:	Above all , you must realize that no prophecy in Scripture ever came from the prophet 's own understanding ,

ID:	4157
INPUT:	Beríyadóó <unk> ter , <unk> biye' , áádóó Thesalonáíkadóó Aristárkas áádóó <unk> <unk> das , áádóó Dérbiidóó Géíyas , Timothy ałdó' , índa Éízhadóó Tíkakas áádóó Trófimas Éízhajį' hoł niikai .
PRED:	We were Silas , Silas , Silas , Silas , Silas , Silas , and Silas . We were traveling along the coast of the province of Asia .
GOLD:	Several men were traveling with him . They were Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea ; Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica ; Gaius from Derbe ; Timothy ; and Tychicus and Trophimus from the province of Asia .

ID:	4158
INPUT:	Éí bąą shiyázhí danohłíinii , dashíínółts'ą́ą́' ; saad bee yáshti'ígíí deísínółts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Listen to me , my young women ! Pay attention to what I say .
GOLD:	So listen to me , my sons , and pay attention to my words .

ID:	4159
INPUT:	áádóó binaa haz'ánígíí índa ch'é'étiin bitł'ááh naaznilígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí áádóó níbaal bii' hodílzinii índa binaa haz'ánígi bá anídaalkałígíí ałdó' éí béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	He also made the courtyard for the posts of the courtyard , the posts of the Tabernacle , and the bronze bases .
GOLD:	Bronze was also used to make the bases for the posts that supported the curtains around the courtyard , the bases for the curtain at the entrance of the courtyard , and all the tent pegs for the Tabernacle and the courtyard .

ID:	4160
INPUT:	Áádóó díí éí t'óó baa'ih danohsin doo ; nidaat'a'ígíí doo daadáanii éí baa'ihii ádaat'é : atsá áádóó jeeshóó' índa dzílí
PRED:	You must not eat any of these things , and you will be defiled by the weight of the sky .
GOLD:	“ These are the birds that are detestable to you . You must never eat them : the griffon vulture , the bearded vulture , the black vulture ,

ID:	4161
INPUT:	Jesus t'éiyá Dził Álivz bighą́ą́'góó dashdiiyá .
PRED:	Jesus went to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Jesus returned to the Mount of Olives ,

ID:	4162
INPUT:	háálá díí shidił bee aha'deet'áanii ániidíii , t'óó ahayóí bąąhági át'éii bá yóó'ahididoot'ááł biniyé bá deezna'ígíí át'é .
PRED:	For this is my covenant with my blood , and many sins will be forgiven .
GOLD:	for this is my blood , which confirms the covenant between God and his people . It is poured out as a sacrifice to forgive the sins of many .

ID:	4163
INPUT:	Diné biyódí yee hináanii ách'ą́ą́h <unk> yé , nidi diné baa hojoobá'ígíí t'áadoo bizéé' yidó'áłí da .
PRED:	Do n't let the poor get their trust in the mouth of the wicked .
GOLD:	The rich can pay a ransom for their lives , but the poor wo n't even get threatened .

ID:	4164
INPUT:	Diyin God éí nízaadgóó hólǫ́ áádóó diné éí t'óó
PRED:	God 's Anger at Sin
GOLD:	Book Four

ID:	4165
INPUT:	Áko Mózes ádííniid , Ákódeiidzaago doo beełt'ée da , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' nááda'iyeelnii'go éí Ííjip dine'é t'óó baa'ihígi yaa nitsídaakees doo . Jó , nihí Ííjip dine'é binááł náádahiilnii'ígíí t'óó baa'ihgo yaa nitsídaakeesígíí biniinaa nihił nidazdiyoołniił .
PRED:	But Moses replied , “ Look , for we have sinned against the Lord our God , for we have sinned against the Egyptians . We have never sinned before the Lord our God , and we will say , ‘ We will say to you . ' ”
GOLD:	But Moses replied , “ That would n't be right . The Egyptians detest the sacrifices that we offer to the Lord our God . Look , if we offer our sacrifices here where the Egyptians can see us , they will stone us .

ID:	4166
INPUT:	Shoo , Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bighangi asdzání daadziihígíí éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í naat'áanii biyaa sinilígíí baa dahidoot'ish , áko ádadidooniił , K'ad nahodits'ǫ' íínítłizhgo nik'isóó baa dzíínílíí nít'ée'ii ninda'azlo'go nik'eh dadeesdlį́į́' áádóó t'ą́ą́' dah nídahidiijéé' .
PRED:	“ Look , my lord , the king of Judah , the king of Judah , and the king of Babylon will come to meet you . The king of Babylon will return to the king of Babylon , and the king of Babylon will return to you .
GOLD:	All the women left in your palace will be brought out and given to the officers of the Babylonian army . Then the women will taunt you , saying , ‘ What fine friends you have ! They have betrayed and misled you.When your feet sank in the mud , they left you to your fate ! '

ID:	4167
INPUT:	t'ááłá'ígo ats'áz'áhígíí álman wolyéii bílátah yiigahígíí nahalingo táa'go ałkéé' honíką́ągo bee naashch'ąą' doo ; bílátah haleehii áádóó yiigahígíí t'áá bił , bee hool'iní bá yaa'áhígíí hastą́ągo bits'ádaaz'áhígíí ákót'éego ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	Each of the six branches will be cut off like a lamp of buds and petals . This is the center stem of the almond blossoms , which is the center stem , and the center stem of the almond tree .
GOLD:	Each of the six branches will have three lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	4168
INPUT:	Ákódzaago t'óó niyázhníłti'ígo aláahgo naat'áanii biye'ké yikai . Áádóó chaał adahoyiiníihgo daacha ; aláahgo naat'áanii índa bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso yił ayóó át'éego daacha .
PRED:	When he was talking , he tore his sons and wept , and all the kings of the king and all his officials were terrified .
GOLD:	They soon arrived , weeping and sobbing , and the king and all his servants wept bitterly with them .

ID:	4169
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá háiida doo danihinízingóó índa nihizaad doo deidiits'a'góó , éí hooghandóó , doodaii' kin haal'áádóó dah náádahidoohkáahgo nihikee' łeezh bąąh nidahołdéeh dooleeł .
PRED:	“ If you refuse to listen , you will listen to your ears , you will be open to the ground , and you will remain unclean .
GOLD:	If any household or town refuses to welcome you or listen to your message , shake its dust from your feet as you leave .

ID:	4170
INPUT:	Jerúsalemdi niikaigo , ałk'isóó danilíinii t'áá íiyisí nihaa bił dahóózhǫǫdgo k'é danihidííniid .
PRED:	But when he returned to Jerusalem , he said , “ We are very angry with us . ”
GOLD:	When we arrived , the brothers and sisters in Jerusalem welcomed us warmly .

ID:	4171
INPUT:	Líbna dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í , Adálam dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	He reigned in Libnah
GOLD:	The king of LibnahThe king of Adullam

ID:	4172
INPUT:	Nidi kóhóót'įįd : aláahgo naat'áanii Jiihó'ash naadiin táá' nááhaijį' aláahgo naat'áanii jílį́įgo hoolzhiizhígíí biyi' éí nááda'iiłniihii kin bii' sohodizin dááchxǫ' yę́ęgóó t'ah doo hasht'éédeidléeh da lá .
PRED:	But Joash was thirty years old when he became king , and he refused to rebuild the Temple of King Joash 's Temple .
GOLD:	But by the twenty-third year of Joash 's reign , the priests still had not repaired the Temple .

ID:	4173
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí diné bisodizin yidiizts'ą́'ígíí t'ah bítséedi áádóó bik'ijį' t'ah doo ákóhánéeh da nít'éé' , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yá anaa' áhoolaa .
PRED:	The Lord had heard the people of Israel , but he refused to listen to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	There has never been a day like this one before or since , when the Lord answered such a prayer . Surely the Lord fought for Israel that day !

ID:	4174
INPUT:	Dabitsee' séígo' bitsee' nidahalin , áádóó bizǫ́ǫ́z dahólǫ́ , ashdla' nídeezidjį' diné atídeił'į́į doogo dabitsee' yee dabidziil .
PRED:	Their mouths are like Moses , and they were thrown into the mouths of their heads , and they were thrown into the mouths of their heads .
GOLD:	They had tails that stung like scorpions , and for five months they had the power to torment people .

ID:	4175
INPUT:	Ayóó'ó'ó'níinii éí t'áá ałtsoní yéé'oo'níihgo t'óó yił át'é , t'áá ałtsojį' oodlą́ , t'áá ałtsojį' bił chohoo'į́ , t'áá ałtsoní yich'į' ha'ólní .
PRED:	Love is in every part of every kind of love , and Christ is in every way .
GOLD:	Love never gives up , never loses faith , is always hopeful , and endures through every circumstance .

ID:	4176
INPUT:	Háálá hódzą́ bee nandi'neestą́ą'go bíninil'ą́ągo dííbah , áádóó t'óó ahayóí kót'éego daaníinii hólǫ́ǫgi hasih haz'ą́ .
PRED:	For you have taught wisdom , and you have plenty of wisdom .
GOLD:	So do n't go to war without wise guidance ; victory depends on having many advisers .

ID:	4177
INPUT:	Asdzání adiléii éí ayį́į́h áádóó bizábąąh yé<unk> jołgo ániih , Doo ádił asésiih da .
PRED:	“ No , ” says the woman , “ I am filled with corruption .
GOLD:	An adulterous woman consumes a man , then wipes her mouth and says , “ What 's wrong with that ? ”

ID:	4178
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , Tsinaa'eeł binish'náájígo łóó' bee hahaltsósí taah daałtsóosgo ła' bee hadadoołtsos . Áko taah dadzistsooz , nít'éé' łóó' t'óó ahayóigo biniinaa ch'ééh hadadziłtsóós .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Make a large fish in the middle of the boat , and the nets were filled with nets . ” So they could n't enter the mountain .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Throw out your net on the right-hand side of the boat , and you 'll get some ! ” So they did , and they could n't haul in the net because there were so many fish in it .

ID:	4179
INPUT:	Háálá nahdę́ę́' t'áá ahą́ą́h t'áá ákót'éego diné baa nánít'į́į́ nít'ée'go nił bééhózin .
PRED:	For you know what you have been taken away from your own sins .
GOLD:	For you know how often you yourself have cursed others .

ID:	4180
INPUT:	Kót'éego Líívai dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yaa nídeidiyii'aahii danihíí' dooleełgo nihaa diní'ánígíí éí bits'ą́ą́dóó neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' Bóhólníihii bich'į' bił dah nídi'diilnihgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii baa dahidoh'aah doo .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the Levites , ” the Levites said , “ and give them a special gift to the Lord , which is given to the Levites , which is given to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give these instructions to the Levites : When you receive from the people of Israel the tithes I have assigned as your allotment , give a tenth of the tithes you receive — a tithe of the tithe — to the Lord as a sacred offering .

ID:	4181
INPUT:	Ákohgo táá' yiską́ągo éí tó yee ádidooldah áádóó tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' doo chin bąąh hólǫ́ǫ doo , nidi táá' yiską́ągo t'áadoo ádooldee'góó tsosts'id yiską́ąjį' chin bąąh hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	On the third day of the third day , the third day will be ceremonially clean , but three days will remain unclean until three days .
GOLD:	They must purify themselves on the third and seventh days with the water of purification ; then they will be purified . But if they do not do this on the third and seventh days , they will continue to be unclean even after the seventh day .

ID:	4182
INPUT:	Nihits'íís bee Diyin God ayóó át'éego bee baa ha'niih doo
PRED:	All glory to God 's glorious bodies ,
GOLD:	Avoiding Sexual Sin

ID:	4183
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hazhé'é éí Íífreiyim bitsii't'áagi dah deesnii'go dziiłtsą́ągo doo hoł aaníígóó Íífreiyim bitsii't'áádóó Manáseh bitsii't'áajį' hazhé'é dah bizhdidoołnih biniyé dah bizdees'nii' .
PRED:	When Joseph saw that his father had seen Ephraim , Joseph 's sons would lay their hands on their heads in Ephraim . He laid their hands on their heads in Ephraim and laid their hands on his head .
GOLD:	But Joseph was upset when he saw that his father placed his right hand on Ephraim 's head . So Joseph lifted it to move it from Ephraim 's head to Manasseh 's head .

ID:	4184
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo t'óó bił adahayóigo ádaaní , Haa lá yit'éego fig sikaadii tsxį́įłgo niiłna' ?
PRED:	When the disciples saw this , they asked him , “ How long will the fig tree ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were amazed when they saw this and asked , “ How did the fig tree wither so quickly ? ”

ID:	4185
INPUT:	áko Ízrel dine'é bitahgi honishłǫ́ǫgo shidine'é Ízrel doo yóó'adideesh'áał da .
PRED:	I will not abandon the people of Israel , and I will not abandon them .
GOLD:	I will live among the Israelites and will never abandon my people Israel . ”

ID:	4186
INPUT:	Ákohgo Íísa díí hoł bééhoozin : Áízak éí Jéíkab yik'ijisdli' lá , áádóó Péídan-éíram hoolyéédóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ dooleełii nízhdidoołtééł biniyé ákǫ́ǫ́ ahóół'a' , áádóó bik'ijiijisdli'go hazhó'ó bizhníłnii'go ábijiní , Kéínan dine'é bitsi'ké ts'ídá doo ła' ne'asdzą́ą́ ádíílíił da ,
PRED:	So Jacob realized that Jacob had blessed Jacob in Paddan-aram , Jacob blessed his wife . He blessed his wife in Paddan-aram , and he sent his daughters to marry his wife . Then he blessed them , and he blessed them .
GOLD:	Esau knew that his father , Isaac , had blessed Jacob and sent him to Paddan-aram to find a wife , and that he had warned Jacob , “ You must not marry a Canaanite woman . ”

ID:	4187
INPUT:	Nít'éé' shoo , i'íí'ą́ągo diné haastih léi' niilnishgo dá'ák'ehdę́ę́' náádááł ; éí ałdó' Dził Íífreiyimdę́ę́' naagháago Gíbiyah kin haal'áagi t'óó átsééd níyáá lá , nidi Bénjamin dine'é éí íiyisí ákwii kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	As soon as I was old , a man named Ephraim , a man named after the hill country of Benjamin , while the people of Benjamin had lived in the hill country of Benjamin .
GOLD:	That evening an old man came home from his work in the fields . He was from the hill country of Ephraim , but he was living in Gibeah , where the people were from the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	4188
INPUT:	ShiDiyin God nílíinii , shidiits'į́į́h ; nihiníníł'į́ áádóó nikin haal'áii nízhi' bee wójíhígi doo naagháhí daígíí níníł'į́ , háálá t'áá ákogi ádaniit'éego bąą doo nídaniikąąh da , nidi nee a'ááh hasin ayóó át'éii bąą nídaniikąąh .
PRED:	Listen to me , O God.Pay attention to my name , O God , for we do n't know your greatness .
GOLD:	“ O my God , lean down and listen to me . Open your eyes and see our despair . See how your city — the city that bears your name — lies in ruins . We make this plea , not because we deserve help , but because of your mercy .

ID:	4189
INPUT:	Áko naal'a'í éí binanit'a'í bik'édí silį́į'go bąąh hayííł'áhígíí t'óó yik'i adeezogo <unk> dííchid .
PRED:	The master threw his servant 's armor into the middle of the lake , so they could n't touch it .
GOLD:	Then his master was filled with pity for him , and he released him and forgave his debt .

ID:	4190
INPUT:	Áko t'ááłá'í nootínígo t'áá nihonít'i'jį' t'áá ákót'éego bídanoohdlį́į doo danihííníi'ní , áko bíká nihił chodahoo'íinii nihá bi'doolnííł .
PRED:	So each of us will be put to death , and we will be put to death .
GOLD:	Our great desire is that you will keep on loving others as long as life lasts , in order to make certain that what you hope for will come true .

ID:	4191
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá nihizhé'é yił hólǫ́ yę́ęgi át'éego nihił hólǫ́ǫ doo , áko doo t'óó nihi'doołnihgo yóó'anihididoo'áał da .
PRED:	The Lord your God is with you , just as he did . He will not abandon you as he did .
GOLD:	May the Lord our God be with us as he was with our ancestors ; may he never leave us or abandon us .

ID:	4192
INPUT:	Háálá nik'a' shaa adaazhjil , áádóó yéego shik'i dinilchid .
PRED:	For they wept for me and wept .
GOLD:	Your arrows have struck deep , and your blows are crushing me .

ID:	4193
INPUT:	Éíman naadiin naaki binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' ; Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naaki nááhai . Bimá éí Miishóliimeth wolyé ; éí Játbahdóó diné <unk> yitsi' nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was Maacah , and he reigned in chains .
GOLD:	Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem two years . His mother was Meshullemeth , the daughter of Haruz from Jotbah .

ID:	4194
INPUT:	Áko Mózes índa há naal'a'í Jáshowa bił dashdii'áázh áádóó Mózes éí Diyin God bidził góde dashdiigháahgo
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron went back to the mountain of God and went to the mountain of God .
GOLD:	So Moses and his assistant Joshua set out , and Moses climbed up the mountain of God .

ID:	4195
INPUT:	David éí Hííbran kin haal'áádę́ę́' níjí'náádóó bik'ijį' <unk> lem kin haal'áajį' jiníyáago hwe'asdzą́ą́ jíł'íní índa hwe'asdzą́ą́ ła' nínáájiisdláá' ; ákwe'é haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há nidayiishchį́ .
PRED:	So David returned to Hebron and gave his sons to the town of Hebron . He also took one of his wives and his sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After moving from Hebron to Jerusalem , David married more concubines and wives , and they had more sons and daughters .

ID:	4196
INPUT:	Jó , éí kót'éego bee ak'e'ashchínígíí át'į́ : Jó'akon , shá halne'ii nilą́ąjį' deesh'aał , éí ná honít'i'ii nilą́ąjį' ná hasht'eidoolííł .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ Look , I will give you the truth , and I will give you your own life . ”
GOLD:	John is the man to whom the Scriptures refer when they say , ‘ Look , I am sending my messenger ahead of you , and he will prepare your way before you . '

ID:	4197
INPUT:	Náftalai biye' ké éí <unk> ziyel áádóó <unk> áádóó Jíízer índa Shíllem daolyé ;
PRED:	The descendants of Naphtali were composed of the tribe of Naphtali . The descendants of Naphtali were named after their ancestor Pallu .
GOLD:	The sons of Naphtali were Jahzeel , Guni , Jezer , and Shillem .

ID:	4198
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bá nidaal'a'í ádabiłní , Díísh ha'át'íí baa nisíníyá ? T'áadoo íyání awéé' baa nicha nít'éé' , azhą́ t'ah hináa nidi , áko awéé' daaztsą́ągo índa nídini'na'go ííníyą́ą́' .
PRED:	“ What do you mean ? ” they asked the servants . “ Why did n't you die ? Even if the baby died ? ” And when the baby died , he died .
GOLD:	His advisers were amazed . “ We do n't understand you , ” they told him . “ While the child was still living , you wept and refused to eat . But now that the child is dead , you have stopped your mourning and are eating again . ”

ID:	4199
INPUT:	Shijéí t'áá íiyisí yidíłniih . Anoonééł bik'ee hóyée'ii shik'i dahoole' .
PRED:	My heart is filled with grief ; let my heart die .
GOLD:	My heart pounds in my chest.The terror of death assaults me .

ID:	4200
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hajaa' hólǫ́ǫgo azdiits'a'ígíí éí háni' ajíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand .
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	4201
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá aaníí , Diyin God yá halne'ii dajílį́įgo áádóó Bóhólníihii bizaad hoł dahólǫ́ǫ́ ládą́ą́' Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' łeets'aa' sinilígíí áádóó Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bikin góne' łeets'aa' sinilígíí índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi łeets'aa' sinilígíí doo Bábilangóó doojih da , dajiníigo t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii nídeizhdookąął .
PRED:	But the prophet also told him , “ The Lord has given him this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the palace of Judah , and in the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the king of Judah , and in Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	If they really are prophets and speak the Lord 's messages , let them pray to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Let them pray that the articles remaining in the Lord 's Temple and in the king 's palace and in the palaces of Jerusalem will not be carried away to Babylon ! '

ID:	4202
INPUT:	Judíyadóó Gáliliijį' Jesus jiníyáago , díidí naaki góne' habee adziilii bee bééhózinii baa nijiyáhígíí át'é .
PRED:	Then Jesus went to Galilee and told him what he had happened .
GOLD:	This was the second miraculous sign Jesus did in Galilee after coming from Judea .

ID:	4203
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii yee has'áanii bąą hoł nihoozhǫǫh ; t'áá ákwíí jį́ índa t'áá ákwíí tł'éé' yee has'áanii nabik'ítsídzíkees .
PRED:	But the Lord takes delight in his decrees , and night he sees all night .
GOLD:	But they delight in the law of the Lord , meditating on it day and night .

ID:	4204
INPUT:	Dine'é danohłíinii , t'áá nihí wołí bee ádaaht'į́įgo áádóó kódaníshéhégo ałtso nidahidoołtǫǫł ; kéyah nidahonees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' nidaahkaígíí da'íísínółts'ą́ą́' : t'áá nihí áká dasoołzaazgo kódaníshéhégo ałtso nidahidoołtǫǫł ; t'áá nihí áká dasoołzaazgo kódaníshéhégo ałtso nidahidoołtǫǫł .
PRED:	“ Son of man , flee in your gates , and you will be broken into pieces of iron , broken , and broken it will be broken into pieces of iron chains .
GOLD:	“ Huddle together , you nations , and be terrified.Listen , all you distant lands.Prepare for battle , but you will be crushed ! Yes , prepare for battle , but you will be crushed !

ID:	4205
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Hágith biyáázh Adonáíjah ayóó át'é í'diilyaago ání , Shí aláahgo naat'áanii deeshłeeł . Áádóó tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó siláo éí łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii índa diné ashdladiingo éí bilą́ąjį' naajeeh doo biniyé ádá hasht'eyiilaa .
PRED:	One day Adonijah said to Adonijah , “ I am the king of Babylon , and I will make fifty chariots and charioteers . ”
GOLD:	About that time David 's son Adonijah , whose mother was Haggith , began boasting , “ I will make myself king. ” So he provided himself with chariots and charioteers and recruited fifty men to run in front of him .

ID:	4206
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , díldzííł ! Diné t'áadoo ak'eh dadidlíní doo ; ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ni baa nánít'į́ !
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , and do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid of the nations !
GOLD:	Arise , O Lord ! Do not let mere mortals defy you ! Judge the nations !

ID:	4207
INPUT:	Áko Lííhai haz'ánígi hooldzis léi'gi Diyin God ąą áhoolaago áádę́ę́' tó háána'go éí joodlą́ą́' ; nít'éé' hwiih náhwiisdogo hasht'e'ninádzídzá . Éí bąą Enhá<unk> hoolyée doo , jidííniid . Díí jį́į́góó t'ahdii Lííhai haz'ánídi hólǫ́ .
PRED:	On the spring of the valley of God named the place of the valley of God , where he ate it and drank from the valley of Eshcol ( which means “ Yes , ” ) . ( This is the place where it was still called the valley of God . )
GOLD:	So God caused water to gush out of a hollow in the ground at Lehi , and Samson was revived as he drank . Then he named that place “ The Spring of the One Who Cried Out , ” and it is still in Lehi to this day .

ID:	4208
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí áhoot'ééjí nidiní'ą́ . Bik'eh hoogáałii shilą́ąjį' hólǫ́ǫgo íínísin !
PRED:	Your regulations are your regulations ; your regulations are your regulations .
GOLD:	I have chosen to be faithful ; I have determined to live by your regulations .

ID:	4209
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é hasht'éédadoolnííł
PRED:	God 's Anger at Sin
GOLD:	Hope for Restoration

ID:	4210
INPUT:	Háálá náhookǫsdę́ę'go ła' dine'é hak'ijį' nídidoonéełgo hakéyah doo naagháhígóó ádahodoolíiłgo ákwii doo ła' kééhat'íní da doo ; diné éí naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso yił ch'íheezná .
PRED:	For the north will pass through the north side of the north , and it will be completely wiped out to the land of the north .
GOLD:	For a nation will attack her from the northand bring such destruction that no one will live there again.Everything will be gone ; both people and animals will flee .

ID:	4211
INPUT:	Tax nahalyéii ła' nihá nísh'į́ . Áko béeso denériyas wolyéhígíí ła' haa deiz'ą́ .
PRED:	No , I have given you the money I worked for you .
GOLD:	Here , show me the coin used for the tax. ” When they handed him a Roman coin ,

ID:	4212
INPUT:	índa iiná doo ninít'i'ii baa hidish'aah , áko ts'ídá doo ádadoodįįł da , doo nidi ła'da shílák'eedóó haidiyoołhą́łí da .
PRED:	I tell you the life of life , and no one can destroy you .
GOLD:	I give them eternal life , and they will never perish . No one can snatch them away from me ,

ID:	4213
INPUT:	Jó , Júdah kéyahdi diné lą'í hach'ijí danilį́į doogo ádee hadadeesdzíí' , háálá Tobáíyah éí Éírah biye' Shekanáíyah baadaaní jílį́ , áádóó haye' Johéínan éí Berakáíyah biye' Miishálam bitsi' yił ahaa yít'áázh .
PRED:	I will make many men of Judah , for I have sworn this message from the land of Judah : Zechariah son of Meshullam , son of Meshullam , son of Meshullam , son of Meshullam .
GOLD:	For many in Judah had sworn allegiance to him because his father-in-law was Shecaniah son of Arah , and his son Jehohanan was married to the daughter of Meshullam son of Berekiah .

ID:	4214
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago bíyoołkááłdą́ą́' Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord during the reign of Jehoiakim son of Jehoiakim . He said to Jeremiah ,
GOLD:	This is the message the Lord gave Jeremiah when Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah :

ID:	4215
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' Kapérniyam góyaa , hamá áádóó hatsilíké índa hódahooł'aahii bił jíkai , áko áadi t'áá díkwíí dahwiiską́ .
PRED:	Then Jesus went to Capernaum to Capernaum , his mother , and his mother stayed with his brothers .
GOLD:	After the wedding he went to Capernaum for a few days with his mother , his brothers , and his disciples .

ID:	4216
INPUT:	Bitahdóó éí ła' naat'áanii nilį́į doo . Bitahdóó éí bá nant'áago binanit'a'í nilį́į dooleełii nídidoodááł . <unk> níhánígóó ninájídáahgo áhásh'į́į doo áádóó shaa jiigháah doo . Háishą' éí niná'ídidoot'áałgo shaa doogááł ? ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	He will become a prince among his master , and he will be the king of Israel . He will return to me , and he will return to me , and he will return to me . ”
GOLD:	They will have their own ruler again , and he will come from their own people.I will invite him to approach me , ” says the Lord , “ for who would dare to come unless invited ?

ID:	4217
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihik'isóó , kodi nihí lą'ígóó nihich'į' nidahwii'ná índa atídanihi'dil'į́į nidi , nihe'oodlą' bee chánah ánídanihoohdlaa ,
PRED:	And now , dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , we have put your faith in your faith .
GOLD:	So we have been greatly encouraged in the midst of our troubles and suffering , dear brothers and sisters , because you have remained strong in your faith .

ID:	4218
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Walks on Water

ID:	4219
INPUT:	Táítas ákǫ́ǫ́ dínááh bidishníigo néisiskan , áko nihik'is nilíinii ła' bił ákǫ́ǫ́ ííł'a' . Ákoósh Táítas t'áá ha'át'éhígoda łínihizhcháázh ? Da' doósh t'ááłá'í nitsáhákees bee íi'níił da ? Da' doósh t'ááłá'ígi át'éego nihidiiltaał da ?
PRED:	“ Oh , sir ! ” he said . “ I 'm not a friend of Titus . Are n't you a friend of Titus ? Are n't you looking for someone else to help you ? ”
GOLD:	When I urged Titus to visit you and sent our other brother with him , did Titus take advantage of you ? No ! For we have the same spirit and walk in each other 's steps , doing things the same way .

ID:	4220
INPUT:	Áko diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii yił áłah silį́į'go yaa nídaast'įįd , áko siláo éí béeso lą'í yaa deiznilgo ,
PRED:	So the elders gathered the council and prepared many money for many money .
GOLD:	A meeting with the elders was called , and they decided to give the soldiers a large bribe .

ID:	4221
INPUT:	Áko díí éí Jó'ash yik'ijį' nahaz'áanii éí Áman asdzání nilíinii Shímiyath biyáázh Zéíbad índa Mó'ab asdzání nilíinii <unk> biyáázh Jiihózabad wolyé .
PRED:	Joash also gave these instructions to the Law of Zadok son of Zadok and Shimei son of Zeruiah , who was the son of Zeruiah .
GOLD:	The assassins were Jozacar , the son of an Ammonite woman named Shimeath , and Jehozabad , the son of a Moabite woman named Shomer .

ID:	4222
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , ááhdishníinii éí díí , koshídę́ę́' hadziih , áko k'ad kodóó be'asdzą́ą́ dahazlį́'ígíi nidi , t'óó doo be'asdzą́ą́ dahólǫ́ǫ da nidahalingo dahináa doo ,
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , we do n't know what I am going to live .
GOLD:	But let me say this , dear brothers and sisters : The time that remains is very short . So from now on , those with wives should not focus only on their marriage .

ID:	4223
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Kóbididííniił , T'ááká ákóde dadohkááh lágo áádóó t'ááká anaa' ádahohłééh lágo , háálá doo nihitah honishłǫ́ǫ da ; t'áá nihí ákǫ́ǫ́ dasidoohkaigo nihi'ana'í nidanihidoołtsił .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Do not go to war against them . Do n't be afraid of them , for I am going to fight you . ”
GOLD:	“ But the Lord told me to tell you , ‘ Do not attack , for I am not with you . If you go ahead on your own , you will be crushed by your enemies . '

ID:	4224
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ yiizį'go ání , Hágo bidohní . Áko diné doo oo'ínígíí hágo deidííniidgo ádeiłní , Nił hózhǫ́ǫgo nídiidááh ; níláhdę́ę́' hágo niłní .
PRED:	Then Jesus stood and said , “ Come and tell the people what you say , ‘ Come and stand up ! ' Then he said , “ Get up ! ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard him , he stopped and said , “ Tell him to come here. ” So they called the blind man . “ Cheer up , ” they said . “ Come on , he 's calling you ! ”

ID:	4225
INPUT:	Nít'éé' nááda'iiłniihii hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'ékaigo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' k'os ni' nihisheegizh ,
PRED:	Then the priests returned from the sanctuary of the Lord filled the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When the priests came out of the Holy Place , a thick cloud filled the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	4226
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii yaa nayiizyeelígíí bee bił náhodoonih biniyé álílee k'ehgo ída'ooł'įįłii áádóó déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii áádóó álíleego yee nidahałáii índa Kaldíya dine'é dahóyáanii t'áá ałtso hágo yididooniiłgo yee haadzíí' . Ákohgo nidahaaskaigo aláahgo naat'áanii yidááhdóó áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	So the king ordered that the king had ordered that all the magicians , magicians , magicians , magicians , astrologers , and fortune-tellers were afraid of the Babylonians . Then the king spoke to the king and the Babylonians .
GOLD:	He called in his magicians , enchanters , sorcerers , and astrologers , and he demanded that they tell him what he had dreamed . As they stood before the king ,

ID:	4227
INPUT:	Áko Mííshah hoolyéédóó ha'a'aahjígo Dził <unk> bich'į'go kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	Her hands are written on their faces , toward the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	The territory they occupied extended from Mesha all the way to Sephar in the eastern mountains .

ID:	4228
INPUT:	Jó , bik'ijį' nídideeshdááł , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii , áádóó Bábilan kin haal'áhígíí áádóó diné daadzí'ígíí áádóó aye'ké índa atséłké ałtso áhodeeshdįįł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will return to Babylon , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ I will destroy the people of Babylon and their sons , horses , horses , horses , and disease .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I , myself , have risen against Babylon ! I will destroy its children and its children 's children , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4229
INPUT:	Díí nigaan bee baa nisíníyáhígíí bił béédahodoozįįł ; ni Bóhólníihii éí ákónít'į́ !
PRED:	Remember what you have done for your arm , and you will know what the Lord has done .
GOLD:	Let them see that this is your doing , that you yourself have done it , Lord .

ID:	4230
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Jerúsalem kin haal' áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Adónai-zíídek wolyéii díí yaa hodiizts'ą́ą́' : Jáshowa éí Éí'ai kin haal'áii yik'eh deesdlį́į'go ts'ídá ałtso íísdįįdígíí áádóó Jériko kin haal'áii aláahgo binanit'a'í t'áá bił áyííł'įįdígi át'éego Éí'ai kin haal'áii áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í ákónááyiidlaaígíí índa Gíbiyan dine'é éí Ízrel dine'é yił k'é da'ahó'níigo áyiilaa áádóó bił kééhojit'į́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	When the king heard that the king had heard that Joshua had heard the message that Joshua had taken up the town of Bethel , the king of Ai , the king of Ai , the town of Ai , and the king of Israel heard that the king of Israel had been captured .
GOLD:	Adoni-zedek , king of Jerusalem , heard that Joshua had captured and completely destroyed Ai and killed its king , just as he had destroyed the town of Jericho and killed its king . He also learned that the Gibeonites had made peace with Israel and were now their allies .

ID:	4231
INPUT:	Nídadidohłóosgo yá'át'éehgo baa ádahołyą́ą doo áádóó doo haada dadoohłíił da . Kót'éego shá ádaohłééh , nihiłníigo t'áá ákót'éego bá ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Do n't let me be taken away , and do n't let me eat what is right . ”
GOLD:	“ See that he is n't hurt , ” he said . “ Look after him well , and give him anything he wants . ”

ID:	4232
INPUT:	Nidi diné doo t'áá ałtso éí bił béédahózin da . Ła' díí jį́įdi eda'alyaii yídaneesdinígíí biniinaa e'elyaii bich'į' ch'iyáán nááhaaznii'ii át'é t'ahdii danízingo deiyą́ , áko t'áá íídą́ą́' doo ál'į́į da danízin nidi ádayoolíiłgo bąą t'ą́ą́' anídabii'nííł .
PRED:	But all people do n't know that they do n't know what they are saying . They do n't want to eat the sacred pillars , but they do n't want to eat the sacred pillars .
GOLD:	However , not all believers know this . Some are accustomed to thinking of idols as being real , so when they eat food that has been offered to idols , they think of it as the worship of real gods , and their weak consciences are violated .

ID:	4233
INPUT:	Díí ts'ídá baa ákodanohsin , diné na'ageh yee tsi'naagháii , doodaii' baa'ihgo hináanii , doodaii' diné adánoolníinii , éí e'elyaii yich'į' nahałáii danilíinii éí Christ índa Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii łá'í nidi łahdóó doo hó da .
PRED:	And if you do n't know this , you must not sin or sexual immorality or sexual immorality , or a person who does not worship the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	You can be sure that no immoral , impure , or greedy person will inherit the Kingdom of Christ and of God . For a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	4234
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí Ííjip dine'é binaalte' dajílį́įgo nidazhdi'ni'go diséts'ą́ą́' , nidi bił ahadadi'nisht'áanii bénáshniih .
PRED:	And I heard that the Israelites were slaves of Egypt , but I would never remember them .
GOLD:	You can be sure that I have heard the groans of the people of Israel , who are now slaves to the Egyptians . And I am well aware of my covenant with them .

ID:	4235
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso Ííjipgóó dadii'néełgo áadi kéédahwiit'į́į dooleeł , danízingo yee hasht'e'nitsídaazkézígíí éí diltłish áádóó dichin índa naałniih yik'ee dínóonééł , áko doo yá'át'éehii hak'ijį' bidííchidígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó doo ła' jidoodzih da , índa doo ła' yisdázhdooltéeł da .
PRED:	When the people flee to Egypt , they will return to Egypt and return to Egypt . They will be hungry , famine , famine , disease , famine , famine , and disease , and disease .
GOLD:	That is the fate awaiting every one of you who insists on going to live in Egypt . Yes , you will die from war , famine , and disease . None of you will escape the disaster I will bring upon you there . '

ID:	4236
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá aaníí áníigo índa doo yits'ą́ąjį' áńdoo'nííłgóó David yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' , Nits'ą́ą́dóó da'ahílchíihii ła' , bikáá'dóó nahó'áii yikáá' dah náhidinoobįįłgo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	But the Lord will make a solemn oath that David will be taken away from the earth . I will make a solemn oath that I will make you the kings of the earth . ”
GOLD:	The Lord swore an oath to Davidwith a promise he will never take back : “ I will place one of your descendantson your throne .

ID:	4237
INPUT:	háálá t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bá honít'i'jí Bóhólníihii bił bééhózingo yaa áhályą́ , nidi doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii bá honít'i'jí bił yóó'ahodoogááł .
PRED:	For the godly know what is right , but the Lord protects those who love him .
GOLD:	For the Lord watches over the path of the godly , but the path of the wicked leads to destruction .

ID:	4238
INPUT:	Nidi k'éhézdon honít'i' bits'áhóhjeehgo bąą áádóó t'áá ádzaagóó bee haz'áanii bee na'nitin biniinaa t'óó ahayóí ádił da'asiihgo Líívai bibee aha'deet'áanii daołchxǫ' lá , ní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	But if you turn away from the middle of the inner courtyard , you will be defiled by the Law of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	But you priests have left God 's paths . Your instructions have caused many to stumble into sin . You have corrupted the covenant I made with the Levites , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4239
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo bídahólníihii , aląąjį' naazíinii , naat'áanii danilíinii , ándahwii'aahii , yódí yaa ádahalyáanii , kót'éego daaníinii , yah ada'iiníiłii índa bídahólníihii nináneel'ą́ąjį' ts'ídá t'áá ałtso nidahaaskaigo aláahgo naat'áanii Nébukadnézzar e'elyaii áyiilaago yiyiisį'ígíí doolzįh biniyé hoo'a'ígíí yidááhdę́ę́' deizį' .
PRED:	Then the leaders said to the elders , “ The judges are standing before you , and the officials who worship him . Then they stood up before King Nebuchadnezzar and stood before before him .
GOLD:	So all these officials came and stood before the statue King Nebuchadnezzar had set up .

ID:	4240
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , hashísííd , áádóó shíní<unk> ; shijéí índa shíni' nabínítaahgo hanisííd .
PRED:	O Lord , hear my heart , and you have tested me .
GOLD:	Put me on trial , Lord , and cross-examine me.Test my motives and my heart .

ID:	4241
INPUT:	Áko Jesus hach'į' haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Ádaa ádahołyą́ , áko diné doo ła' yóó'adanihidínóo'ah da .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Be careful ! Do n't let anyone mislead you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ Do n't let anyone mislead you ,

ID:	4242
INPUT:	Éí bąągo bidinééh danilíinii éí Bóhólníihii doo hąą bił hózhǫ́ǫ da dooleeł , áádóó áłchíní dabizhé'é ádaadinii áádóó asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii doo yaa a'áhí dínóozįįł da , háálá t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'óó ádahozhdil'į́ áádóó doo yá'át'éhígi ádajit'į́ índa t'áá ádzaagóó yádajiłti' . Azhą́ díí t'áá ałtsojį' kóhoolaa nidi , t'ah hach'į' báháchį'go hak'ijį' k'ídées'nii' .
PRED:	The young men of the Lord will be angry with joy and joy , for the Lord 's anger will be filled with anger . He will punish the orphans and widows , and the wicked will be put to shame .
GOLD:	That is why the Lord takes no pleasure in the young menand shows no mercy even to the widows and orphans.For they are all wicked hypocrites , and they all speak foolishness.But even then the Lord 's anger will not be satisfied.His fist is still poised to strike .

ID:	4243
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é yaa ádahalyáanii bik'ijį' nílį́įgo handziih ; aa ádahojilyáanii t'áá hó hach'į' handziihgo áhodiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel dine'é yaa ádahalyáanii t'áá bí t'éiyá t'áá ádíighahígo t'áá bí t'éí da'ayą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Dibé yaa áhályáanii yee' dibé ya'ałtso' dooleeł .
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against the wise men of Israel , and teach them what they are saying , ‘ You are the Lord , the God of Israel , who judges the people of Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy against the shepherds , the leaders of Israel . Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : What sorrow awaits you shepherds who feed yourselves instead of your flocks . Should n't shepherds feed their sheep ?

ID:	4244
INPUT:	Gíbar ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii náhást'édiindóó ba'aan ashdla' .
PRED:	These were the clans of Gibeon .
GOLD:	The family of Gibbar95

ID:	4245
INPUT:	Tó tsi'na'iiłáii ałtso dayoodlą́ą'go t'áá áłahjį' bida'ajił yaa deíkááh ; binanit'a'í danilíinii baa yáhásinii t'éí bił ayóó ádahoot'é .
PRED:	They lie down to the Queen of all their wives , and they worship other gods .
GOLD:	When the rulers of Israel finish their drinking , off they go to find some prostitutes.They love shame more than honor .

ID:	4246
INPUT:	Béíyal wolyéii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náájiisnii'go biniinaa atíhodeeshłííł . <unk> tł'óół índa tsé da'ílíinii t'éí bee háázhdiit'įįh áádóó bił ałch'į' dah dajilwo'ii bikéé' yóó'aníjílwo' áádóó shaa jiyooznah , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will pour out my fury on the burnt offering to the people of Israel , and they have rebelled against me . They have rebelled against me , saying , “ The Lord has abandoned me , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	I will punish her for all those timeswhen she burned incense to her images of Baal , when she put on her earrings and jewelsand went out to look for her loversbut forgot all about me , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4247
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí adą́ą́dą́ą́' Néíbath bidił áádóó biye'ké bidił yiiłtsą́ągo kwe'é haz'ánígi k'éédideeshnííł , ní Bóhólníihii . K'ad Bóhólníihii yee haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo ni'jį' ahołhan .
PRED:	“ You will die , ” the Lord said . “ I will surely destroy the sins of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	‘ I solemnly swear that I will repay him here on this plot of land , says the Lord , for the murder of Naboth and his sons that I saw yesterday . ' So throw him out on Naboth 's property , just as the Lord said . ”

ID:	4248
INPUT:	áádóó dáń'dítį́įhgi ándahwii'aahii shik'is dajílį́įgo <unk> chíní bizhé'é ádaadinii bide ádahwíínísin ládą́ą́' ;
PRED:	“ If you are leading priests and teachers of religious leaders , do n't let me go to the city where you have taught me .
GOLD:	“ If I raised my hand against an orphan , knowing the judges would take my side ,

ID:	4249
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Féro éí Ízrel dine'é yéé'níłnii'go Diyin God éí Filístiya dine'é bikéyah góne' doo dahodii'eezh da , azhą́ áájí áhání nidi , háálá Diyin God ání , Éí doodaléi' anaa' hodooleeł yaa ákodaniizį́į'go łahgo át'éego tsíńdadookosgo Ííjip kéyahgóó t'ą́ą́' nihéédoo'nééł .
PRED:	So Pharaoh sent this message to Pharaoh : “ If the Philistines have led Israel into the land of Egypt , they will not repent of their sins , for they will repent of their sins and turn to Egypt .
GOLD:	When Pharaoh finally let the people go , God did not lead them along the main road that runs through Philistine territory , even though that was the shortest route to the Promised Land . God said , “ If the people are faced with a battle , they might change their minds and return to Egypt . ”

ID:	4250
INPUT:	Ayóó át'éii bik'a' dadeeníinii índa gad bitsííd lą́ą .
PRED:	He decorated his arrows with his mighty arrows , and his mighty power .
GOLD:	You will be pierced with sharp arrowsand burned with glowing coals .

ID:	4251
INPUT:	Behétł'óól tó t'óó ahayóí nílį́įjį' łeeh daneesánígíí bee bits'áoz'a' ayóó ádaníłnééz daazlį́į́' , áko ayóó át'éego t'óó baa dzólníigo sikaad .
PRED:	Its roots grew up , and the roots of the tree was buried like a tree .
GOLD:	It was strong and beautiful , with wide-spreading branches , for its roots went deepinto abundant water .

ID:	4252
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Kéin áyidííniid , Háájíshą' nitsilí Éíbel ? Áko ázhdííniid , Doo shił bééhózin da . Shí hanii bitsilí yaa áhályáanii nishłį́ ?
PRED:	But the Lord said to Cain , “ What is my brother 's brother ? ” And he replied , “ I am the father of Abel . I am the father of Abel . ”
GOLD:	Afterward the Lord asked Cain , “ Where is your brother ? Where is Abel ? ” “ I do n't know , ” Cain responded . “ Am I my brother 's guardian ? ”

ID:	4253
INPUT:	éí yá ch'énádáah doo índa yilą́ąjį' yah anáhádáahgo yoo'ish doo índa yah anáyii'éesh doo , áko éí Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó dah oonéłígíí doo dibé yaa áhályáanii bee ádinígíigi ádaat'ée da doo .
PRED:	He will enter the land and return to the Lord , and he will return to the people of the Lord . He will never return to the community of sheep .
GOLD:	Give them someone who will guide them wherever they go and will lead them into battle , so the community of the Lord will not be like sheep without a shepherd . ”

ID:	4254
INPUT:	2Kgs . 23 : 31-35
PRED:	The Land Given to Moses
GOLD:	Jehoiachin Rules in Judah

ID:	4255
INPUT:	Áko yééhoosįįdgo ádííniid , Jó , shiye' bi'éétsoh át'é ; naaldlooshii da'aldeełii boolghal sha'shin ; t'áá aaníí Jóseph yę́ę nibi'diisdláád lá .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Look , my son 's robe , and the wild animals that had happened to Joseph . ”
GOLD:	Their father recognized it immediately . “ Yes , ” he said , “ it is my son 's robe . A wild animal must have eaten him . Joseph has clearly been torn to pieces ! ”

ID:	4256
INPUT:	Hane' baa hózhóonii bił béédahózinii bik'idahojidlí . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , éí ninii' bee i'díídííngóó hool'ingo deíkááh .
PRED:	Those who know the joy of the Lord will be blessed by the light of the light .
GOLD:	Happy are those who hear the joyful call to worship , for they will walk in the light of your presence , Lord .

ID:	4257
INPUT:	Áádóó David éí didlidgo nááhániihii índa hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii ałtso náájiisnii'go t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bízhi' binahjį' diné yik'ijisdli' .
PRED:	Then David presented his peace offering and peace offerings and peace offerings to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	When he had finished his sacrifices , David blessed the people in the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4258
INPUT:	Éí kéyahdi dáń'dítį́į́h bine' na'adzi'gi bee ąąh oolch'íhí hatahgóó tádíítą́ . Ha'áłchíní haghahásh'nil . Shidine'é atéshłaa , háálá ádaat'éii t'áadoo yits'ąą t'ą́ą́' dah nídiikai da .
PRED:	On the day of your gates , I will pour out my song on the doorposts of my people , for I will not turn away from shame .
GOLD:	I will winnow you like grain at the gates of your citiesand take away the children you hold dear.I will destroy my own people , because they refuse to change their evil ways .

ID:	4259
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso nibee haz'áanii dayiitíihgo ádíníinii doo yik'eh dahóół'įįd da , áko Mózes ninaal'a'í nilíinii bee haz'áanii biyi' yee ak'e'ashchį́įgo hóyée'jį' nihá ha'oodzíi'go bee nihoot'áanii nihik'i hoole' , háálá Diyin God bich'į' ádił da'niilzíí' .
PRED:	But all the people of Israel did not obey the law of Moses . They said , “ We have sinned against the law of Moses , for we have sinned against God 's law . ”
GOLD:	All Israel has disobeyed your instruction and turned away , refusing to listen to your voice. “ So now the solemn curses and judgments written in the Law of Moses , the servant of God , have been poured down on us because of our sin .

ID:	4260
INPUT:	Mk . 2 : 1-12
PRED:	The Rich Man
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	4261
INPUT:	Áko t'áá háiida Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee józhíigo níjooskanígíí yisdáhodoołtééł , háálá Dził Záíyan bighą́ą'di índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áadi kéédahat' íinii bá ch'ídahwiizt'i' doo . Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' yę́ęgi át'éego daadzíi'ii bitahgi Bóhólníihii yíká ádííniidígíí kééhat'į́į doo .
PRED:	Those who worship the name of the Lord will be saved by the name of the Lord , for he said to them , “ The people of Jerusalem will live in Jerusalem , just as the Lord had promised . ”
GOLD:	But everyone who calls on the name of the Lordwill be saved , for some on Mount Zion in Jerusalem will escape , just as the Lord has said.These will be among the survivorswhom the Lord has called .

ID:	4262
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' índa Líívai dine'é t'áá bí ádá áádóó nááda'iiłniihii ałdó' yá da'ast'é , háálá nááda'iiłniihii Éran biye' náás ahoolchíiłii éí didlidgo náádahaniihii áádóó ak'ah náádayiiłniih bindaanishgo hiłiijį́į́' ; éí bąą Líívai dine'é t'áá bí ádá áádóó nááda'iiłniihii Éran biye' náás ahoolchíiłii ałdó' yá da'ast'é .
PRED:	He also brought all the Levites to the priests and Levites , for they were given to Aaron and all the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , and all the Levites .
GOLD:	Afterward the Levites prepared Passover offerings for themselves and for the priests — the descendants of Aaron — because the priests had been busy from morning till night offering the burnt offerings and the fat portions . The Levites took responsibility for all these preparations .

ID:	4263
INPUT:	áko abínígo índa Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii deidoołtsééł , háálá éí bich'į' saad dahonohłónígíí yidiits'a' . Nihíshą' ha'át'íí niidlį́įgo nihich'į' saad dahonohłǫ́ ?
PRED:	And when you see the glory of the Lord , what will you see ? What are you doing ? What are you saying ?
GOLD:	In the morning you will see the glory of the Lord , because he has heard your complaints , which are against him , not against us . What have we done that you should complain about us ? ”

ID:	4264
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é ádaaní , Ha'át'íishą' biniyé nihik'iidoohjahgo nihí niikánoohkai ? Nít'éé' ádahodííniid , Sámson bida'diitł'óół biniyé niikai ; t'áá ánihijiilaaígi áńdahodiilnííł .
PRED:	“ What do you want ? ” the men of Judah asked . “ Why are you going to capture us ? ” So Samson replied , “ We are going to make you Samson 's hand . ”
GOLD:	The men of Judah asked the Philistines , “ Why are you attacking us ? ” The Philistines replied , “ We 've come to capture Samson . We 've come to pay him back for what he did to us . ”

ID:	4265
INPUT:	John lá háádę́ę́' bee óhólníihii bik'ehgo tó yee asį́į́h nít'éé' , yá'ąąshdę́ę́' daats'í , éí doodaléi' diné bits'ą́ą́dóó daats'í ? Bee shił dahołne' .
PRED:	For John the Baptist was from heaven , and he asked them , “ Are I a man from heaven ? ”
GOLD:	“ Did John 's authority to baptize come from heaven , or was it merely human ? Answer me ! ”

ID:	4266
INPUT:	Ákohgo ádííniid , Nits'ą́ąjį' ch'íshidi'yeelghan ; azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , nikin bii' sohodizin dílzinii si'ą́ą́góó sonáádideeszįįł .
PRED:	Then he said , “ We have seen my house , but we will pray to the Temple of the Temple . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , ‘ O Lord , you have driven me from your presence.Yet I will look once more toward your holy Temple . '

ID:	4267
INPUT:	áko t'áadoo nidadeelchidígi át'éego doo haada nihidi'doolníił da , áádóó nihí yá'át'éehgi ádaniil'į́ , áádóó k'é daniidzingo yóó'adanisiil'a' , áko k'ad Bóhólníihii bik'ijidlíhígíí sínílį́į́' .
PRED:	We did n't let us be like this , so we will not be afraid of us . We will be afraid of our Lord , and we have saved us .
GOLD:	Swear that you will not harm us , just as we have never troubled you . We have always treated you well , and we sent you away from us in peace . And now look how the Lord has blessed you ! ”

ID:	4268
INPUT:	Áádóó tł'óo'jigo ahééhool'áhígíí bich'į'go ch'é'étiingi tsin yadaa'áhígíí bąąhjį' páam sikaadii bééda'alyaago nidaask'ęę' , áádóó dah náhást'ánígíí bich'į' tseebíigo ałk'i hoo'niłí haaz'á .
PRED:	The entry room was decorated with a palm tree was decorated with a palm tree with a palm tree .
GOLD:	The entry room to the south gateway faced into the outer courtyard . It had palm tree decorations on its columns , and there were eight steps leading to its entrance .

ID:	4269
INPUT:	Áko siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í , Díidí bee shił hwíínílne'ígíí t'ááká diné ła'da bee bił hóólne' yíila' , yiłníigo éí dinééh yéé'níłnii' .
PRED:	“ Do n't let me tell the king about this , ‘ Do n't let anyone tell anyone about it . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't let anyone know you told me this , ” the commander warned the young man .

ID:	4270
INPUT:	Ánathath kin haal'áádóó dine'é t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin tseebíí .
PRED:	The people of Anathoth
GOLD:	The people of Anathoth128

ID:	4271
INPUT:	Ła'ts'áadah jį́ aleeh góne' Ásher dine'é naat'áanii nilíinii Ákran biye' Péígiyel náá'iisnii' :
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the tribe of Asher , leader of the tribe of Asher , presented his offering .
GOLD:	On the eleventh day Pagiel son of Ocran , leader of the tribe of Asher , presented his offering .

ID:	4272
INPUT:	Áádóó Jííhu éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é bitahgóó i'iis'a' ; Béíyal yich'į' nidahałáii t'áá ałtso nidahaaskai , áko t'áadoo ła' doodaí diné t'áá ałtso neheeskai . Nít'éé' Béíyal bá kin si'ání góne' áłah dzizlį́į'go kin góne' ałtso hazhdéébįįd .
PRED:	So Jehu sent all the people of Israel to worship Baal , and all the people of Israel gathered in the temple of Baal . So they all sat down in the Temple of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	4273
INPUT:	Bitsásk'ehgi diné doo <unk> át'éii ła' bee óhólnííh bił haz'áanii bee ił ídlíinii t'áadoo baa deet'áanii ákwii néidoodzįįł ; éí k'é nídzingo índa łídílchíigo doogááł , áko bee óhólníihii bił haz'áanii aghaididoot'ááł .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone tell you the law of God 's law , which he will be taken away from his kingdom . Then he will rise again , and he will be able to rule over them .
GOLD:	“ The next to come to power will be a despicable man who is not in line for royal succession . He will slip in when least expected and take over the kingdom by flattery and intrigue .

ID:	4274
INPUT:	Nidi łééchąą'í áádóó binda'adlo'go álílee k'ehgo nidahałáii áádóó na'ageh yee tsi'nidaakaii áádóó diné nideiłtseedii áádóó e'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáii , índa t'ááłá'í nítínígo wooch'ííd ayóó'ádayó'níinii éí t'áá ałtso tł'óo'di naaldeeh , ní Jesus .
PRED:	But those who say , ‘ Do n't be deceived by sexual immorality , ' they say , ‘ Those who do evil things and do n't love others . ' But those who do n't love Jesus .
GOLD:	Outside the city are the dogs — the sorcerers , the sexually immoral , the murderers , the idol worshipers , and all who love to live a lie .

ID:	4275
INPUT:	Éí Daráíyas aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naaki náhááh góne' hastą́ą́h nídízííd binih , naadiin dį́į́'góó yoołkáałgo áhóót'įįd .
PRED:	On the third year of King Darius 's reign , during the fourth year of King Darius 's reign .
GOLD:	on September 21 of the second year of King Darius 's reign .

ID:	4276
INPUT:	Náhookǫsjí ałdó' t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin ké silá ánízah ; ííyah danii'áii naadiin áádóó bitł'ááh naaznilígíí t'ááłáhíjí biih dahasdzánígíí ałdó' naadiin ; éí béésh łitsoii bee ádaalyaa , nidi ííyah danii'áii bąąh hada'azhahígíí áádóó bita'ndaaz'áhígíí éí béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaa .
PRED:	The entrance of the north side of the north side of the north was 30 feet long . The tops of the curtains were overlaid with bronze bases .
GOLD:	He made a similar set of curtains for the north side — 150 feet of curtains held up by twenty posts set securely in bronze bases . He hung the curtains with silver hooks and rings .

ID:	4277
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé shí áádóó nihí nihita'gi bee ééhózinii át'éego shiháá'áyį́į́h jį́ ná'oodleełii hodílzingo ádeínóhsin doo .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , and you will know that I am giving you the Sabbath days of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	and keep my Sabbath days holy , for they are a sign to remind you that I am the Lord your God . '

ID:	4278
INPUT:	Yah a'atiin bíighahgóó ałdó' yah i' iildéhígi éí ałts'ą́ą́hjí bikáá' adání naaki sinil ; éí bikáa'gi didlidgo náádahaniihii áádóó ádił ni'iidzííhjí náádahaniihii índa ádił oodzíi'gi bee k'ééhodooldǫǫłgo náádahaniihii ákwii nidaatseed .
PRED:	“ If you are free , you are free from one side of the altar , both sides of the altar and the blood of the sin offering and the blood of the sin offering .
GOLD:	On each side of this entry room were two tables , where the sacrificial animals were slaughtered for the burnt offerings , sin offerings , and guilt offerings .

ID:	4279
INPUT:	Bee bił chohoo'íinii k'ídla' . Na'ashjé'ii bitł'óól k'ídla'ígi át'įįh .
PRED:	Your clothes are broken , and it is broken .
GOLD:	Their confidence hangs by a thread.They are leaning on a spider 's web .

ID:	4280
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihá nabídíłkid , háálá Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar nihik'iijeeh . Bóhólníihii t'óó bik'e'ayóigo naashnishígíí t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo Nébukadnézzar nihits'ádoonéłígíí biniyé nihíká adoolwołgo da'át'é .
PRED:	“ Then the Lord will ask you , for he will attack you from King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ Please speak to the Lord for us and ask him to help us . King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon is attacking Judah . Perhaps the Lord will be gracious and do a mighty miracle as he has done in the past . Perhaps he will force Nebuchadnezzar to withdraw his armies . ”

ID:	4281
INPUT:	Shikin haal'áádóó bich'é'éké ábi'dil'ínígíí yish'į́įgo biniinaa shijéí yineesgai .
PRED:	My heart is sick , and I am sick because of my heart .
GOLD:	My heart is breakingover the fate of all the women of Jerusalem .

ID:	4282
INPUT:	Éé' t'áá sahdii át'éego naashch'ąą'ii yii' sitį́ , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii bitsi'ké bízháán nidaakaii éé' ákót'éii yii' naaztį́ . Ámnan bá naal'a'í hoł ch'íní'áazhgo hach'ą́ą́h dá'di'níłkaal .
PRED:	She took her beautiful clothes , for she had been very old , for she had her daughters . She took her back to Amnon .
GOLD:	So the servant put her out and locked the door behind her . She was wearing a long , beautiful robe , as was the custom in those days for the king 's virgin daughters .

ID:	4283
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání , Ts'ídá t'áá háiida hoosdląądgo haa dzoozlíi'ii éí doo t'óó baa yáhásinígi ábidi'doolníił da .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ Those who do n't believe in him will never be ashamed . '
GOLD:	As the Scriptures tell us , “ Anyone who trusts in him will never be disgraced . ”

ID:	4284
INPUT:	áádóó , Bíla' yee dah daníłteehgo doo tsé bik'ą́ą́h didííltał da .
PRED:	You will not take your hand into your hand , and you will not crush them .
GOLD:	And they will hold you up with their handsso you wo n't even hurt your foot on a stone . ' ”

ID:	4285
INPUT:	Kédaayahdóó dadiyin t'áá ałtso bitahdóó háídíígíishą' hakéyah shighaideet'ą́ , áko Bóhólníihii éí Jerúsalem doo shighaididoot'áał da ?
PRED:	Who has been able to rescue me from the land of the Lord ? Who has been able to destroy my people ?
GOLD:	What god of any nation has ever been able to save its people from my power ? So what makes you think that the Lord can rescue Jerusalem from me ? ”

ID:	4286
INPUT:	Ákohgo Héíman éí aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras áyidííniid , Diné danilíinii ła' ałtso tadaoskaigo aláahgo bee nóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii t'áá át'é biyi'góó ałtso nihinéést'e' . Ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bich'į'go bibee nahaz'áanii t'áá sahdii ádaat'é , áko aláahgo naat'áanii bibee haz'áanii doo yik'eh dahół'į́į da ; éí bąą t'áá dahináago baa didoot'áłígíí aláahgo naat'áanii doo bá yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	Then King Xerxes said to King Xerxes , “ I will scatter you from the Kingdom of King Xerxes and all the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the earth . That is why the king of the kingdoms of the empire of the earth will be given to the king . ”
GOLD:	Then Haman approached King Xerxes and said , “ There is a certain race of people scattered through all the provinces of your empire who keep themselves separate from everyone else . Their laws are different from those of any other people , and they refuse to obey the laws of the king . So it is not in the king 's interest to let them live .

ID:	4287
INPUT:	Nidi baohkah yę́ę bits'ą́ą́dóó nihineest'ą' danilínígíí bik'ehgo atídanihideeshłííł , áádóó tsin bee hodíłch'ilgo yíl'áhígíí bohodideeshniłgo ałtso adidook'ą́ą́ł , áko bik'i dinaagóó yíl'áhígíí ts'ídá ałtso dadidoolił , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ But I will destroy your crops , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy the trees of the trees and the trees that will burn down the trees of the trees , and fire will burn down fire .
GOLD:	And I myself will punish you for your sinfulness , says the Lord.I will light a fire in your foreststhat will burn up everything around you . ' ”

ID:	4288
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihigaan t'óó nihąąh nidahaaznilii áádóó nihigodta' doo daniłdzil da daazlį́į'ii bidziilgo ánídaahdle' !
PRED:	Therefore , you are weak and strong arm , and you are weak as weak as weak as weak as weak as weak as you are .
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	4289
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jézriyelgi ha'ídées'į́į'ii na'alzídí bikáá'dóó sizį́įgo Jííhu yił yikahígíí haideel'į́į'go ání , Níléídę́ę́' ła' jookah . Jóram ání , Diné ła' łį́į́' bee bidááhgóó díł'áago áyididooniił , K'éésh biniyé ádaoht'į́ ?
PRED:	When Jehu saw this , he went to Jezreel and asked Jehu , “ What do you want to go out to Jezreel ? ” But Jehu asked . “ What do you want to know ? ”
GOLD:	The watchman on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu and his company approaching , so he shouted to Joram , “ I see a company of troops coming ! ” “ Send out a rider to ask if they are coming in peace , ” King Joram ordered .

ID:	4290
INPUT:	Kédaayahgi diné índa naaldlooshii doo ła' bikáá' hólǫ́ǫ da , áádóó Kaldíya dine'é baa deet'ą́ , dadohníinii ákwe'é kéyah nináádahaniih doo .
PRED:	“ Say to the people of the land , ‘ Go and buy it into the land of the Babylonians . ' ”
GOLD:	Fields will again be bought and sold in this land about which you now say , ‘ It has been ravaged by the Babylonians , a desolate land where people and animals have all disappeared . '

ID:	4291
INPUT:	Shidine'é bich'é'é éí Sádam kin haal'áagi diné kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę yiláahgo ádił asiih . Éí diné yę́ę jishgishígíí nahalingo t'áadoo hodeelnii'ígóó áho'disdįįd .
PRED:	“ The people of Sodom have sinned like Sodom , just as I destroyed the town of Sodom .
GOLD:	The guilt of my peopleis greater than that of Sodom , where utter disaster struck in a momentand no hand offered help .

ID:	4292
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá ádzíłtso t'óó hoł adahayóigo nida'ahízhdílkidgo ádajiní , Díí lá ha'át'íí át'é ? Jó , na'nitin ániidíii át'é ! Níłch'i danchxǫ́'í nidi bee óhólnííh yee yich'į' hahadziihgo bik'eh dahół'į́ .
PRED:	They all asked each other , “ What do you mean ? What is the Holy Spirit who makes us an evil spirit ? It is a new spirit that makes us an evil spirit in every trap ? ”
GOLD:	Amazement gripped the audience , and they began to discuss what had happened . “ What sort of new teaching is this ? ” they asked excitedly . “ It has such authority ! Even evil spirits obey his orders ! ”

ID:	4293
INPUT:	Ákohgo Maikéíyah ání , Hodiiyeelgo néínídzáá ládą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii doo shee haadzíi' da doo . Áádóó ání , Dine'é nohłíinii , t'áá ánółtso da'íísółts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then Micaiah replied , “ If you have seen this , you will not understand what the Lord has said , ‘ Listen ! '
GOLD:	But Micaiah replied , “ If you return safely , it will mean that the Lord has not spoken through me ! ” Then he added to those standing around , “ Everyone mark my words ! ”

ID:	4294
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii [ áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii] índa Jew dine'é yá aląąjį' naazíinii éí aláahgo náá'iiłniihii , Kéíyafas wolyéhígíí , bighangi áłah silį́į́' ,
PRED:	Then the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	At that same time the leading priests and elders were meeting at the residence of Caiaphas , the high priest ,

ID:	4295
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Ííní'į́ nánídleeh ; ne'oodlą' bee doo ánít'éhí da násínídlį́į́' .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ You have seen the faith you have seen . You have seen what you have done . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said , “ All right , receive your sight ! Your faith has healed you . ”

ID:	4296
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áádóó áádóó Jerúsalem bik'i dinaago nidahós'a'dóó índa Bénjamin kéyahdę́ę́' áádóó halgaidę́ę́' índa dził naaznildę́ę́' áádóó shádi'ááhdę́ę́' didlidgo nááhániihii índa náádahidoonihii áádóó ak'áán náádahidoonihii índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii áádóó Diyin God baa hojiniihgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ą́ąjį' nidayiijáah doo .
PRED:	The towns of Judah and Benjamin will come from the hill country of Judah and Benjamin , the hills , the hills , the hills , the hills , and the other hills , and the frankincense . They will offer sacrifices to the Lord your God and grain offerings and grain offerings .
GOLD:	And from all around Jerusalem , from the towns of Judah and Benjamin , from the western foothills and the hill country and the Negev , the people will come with their burnt offerings and sacrifices . They will bring their grain offerings , frankincense , and thanksgiving offerings to the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	4297
INPUT:	Nidi diné bahojoobá'íii doo nihił dáálįįd da . Jó , da'at'íinii ts'ídá nihide ádahósin ya' ? Jó , aa nídahat'į́įjį' ts'ídá adanihii'éésh ya' ?
PRED:	But you are the poor , and you do n't know how to help us ? Are we going to judge us ?
GOLD:	But you dishonor the poor ! Is n't it the rich who oppress you and drag you into court ?

ID:	4298
INPUT:	T'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'ésh'íinii bee hainísht'į́įgo k'ééhodideeshdlííł , áko k'ééhodiishdlaago , Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will put my fury on my anger , and I will show them my anger .
GOLD:	I will execute terrible vengeance against them to punish them for what they have done . And when I have inflicted my revenge , they will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	4299
INPUT:	Peter éí da'oodlání Jerúsalemgi áłah nádleehii ádahóót'įįdii yee yił hoolne'
PRED:	Peter Preaches in Jerusalem
GOLD:	Peter Explains His Actions

ID:	4300
INPUT:	kóníigo , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God biinéé' hazhó'ó deísółts'ą́ą'go áádóó yá'át'éehgo binááł ádaahníiłgo , áádóó bibik' eh ó'oo'níiłii índa yee nihwiiz'áanii t'áá ałtso deísółts'ą́ą'go bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo naałniih éí Ííjip dine'é bik'ijį' kóshłaaígíí doo ła' nihik'ijį' kódeeshłíił da , háálá shí , Bóhólníihii hadaałt'é ánánihoodlíiłii nishłį́ .
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from the Sovereign Lord your God , and obey all these commands and commands that I am giving you to obey all the commands that I am giving you . I am the Lord , for I am giving you a plague that I am giving you .
GOLD:	He said , “ If you will listen carefully to the voice of the Lord your God and do what is right in his sight , obeying his commands and keeping all his decrees , then I will not make you suffer any of the diseases I sent on the Egyptians ; for I am the Lord who heals you . ”

ID:	4301
INPUT:	Díí t'áá íiyisí shił bééhózin : Diyin God naanish yá'át'éehii nihiyi' yaa nídiidzáhígíí éí náásgóó nihinaalnishgo Jesus Christ nádzá bijį́įjį' ałtso ła'yidoolííł .
PRED:	And I know that I am planning to do good things in Christ Jesus Christ , who is good in Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And I am certain that God , who began the good work within you , will continue his work until it is finally finished on the day when Christ Jesus returns .

ID:	4302
INPUT:	Éí doo yá'át'éehii yaa nidaakaigo bił nidahoozhǫǫh áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bidoo yá'áshǫ' doo nahjį' nideidó'ááł át'éégóó deíkáahii t'áá íiyisí bił nidahooshǫǫh .
PRED:	They will rejoice in their evil ways , and they will be ashamed of their wickedness .
GOLD:	They take pleasure in doing wrong , and they enjoy the twisted ways of evil .

ID:	4303
INPUT:	Ándahwii'aahii áádóó bídahólníihii nihikin dah naazhjaa'góó nidahidoohnił ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígíí biyi' nihidine'é bik'ehgo ákódadoohłííł , áko ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego diné yá nidahodii'aah doo .
PRED:	“ You must teach the decrees and regulations that the Lord your God is giving you . You will judge the people of the Lord your God , just as you live .
GOLD:	“ Appoint judges and officials for yourselves from each of your tribes in all the towns the Lord your God is giving you . They must judge the people fairly .

ID:	4304
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í Jó'ab bił sikéego áyidííniid , Nílááh , Ízrel dadóone'é danilínígíí t'áá ałtso bitahgóó dínáahgo Dan kin haal'áádóó Bíyer-shííba kin shijaa'jį' diné yídííłtah ; éí dine'é ánéelą́'ígíí shił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	Then the king said to Joab , “ Go out to Beersheba , and go out to Beersheba in the south side of the army of Israel . Go to Beersheba in the north . ”
GOLD:	So the king said to Joab and the commanders of the army , “ Take a census of all the tribes of Israel — from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south — so I may know how many people there are . ”

ID:	4305
INPUT:	<unk> dzih biniyé chánah áshíínísin , áko bee nihoyíní'áanii áłahjį' shił nilį́į doo !
PRED:	I pray for you , and you will be my decrees .
GOLD:	Sustain me , and I will be rescued ; then I will meditate continually on your decrees .

ID:	4306
INPUT:	Halgaigóó béégashii hadah yikahígi át'éego Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i háádajilyį́įhgo áhoolaa , áko nízhi' ayóó ánóolningo ch'ídeidit'áah doo biniyé nidine'é ch'íiní'eezh .
PRED:	The grass is like a field , and the Spirit of the Lord has brought them out , so they will be led by the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	As with cattle going down into a peaceful valley , the Spirit of the Lord gave them rest.You led your people , Lord , and gained a magnificent reputation . ”

ID:	4307
INPUT:	índa t'áá ha'át'íhída chodayooł'į́įgo yee nidaalnishígíí t'áá át'é náádei'dii'niłgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' nidaal'a'go chodayooł'ínígíí éí na'at'ą́hí yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí yił ałch'į' áńdayiil'įįhgo nahashch'id bikágí yik'ínídeiłtih doo índa tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí yikáá' ninádeiłtsos doo .
PRED:	He will break the ropes of the sanctuary of the sanctuary , and he will break the sacred objects from the sanctuary of the sanctuary . He will break the lampstand with fine goatskin leather and cover it with fine goatskin leather .
GOLD:	They must take all the remaining furnishings of the sanctuary and wrap them in a blue cloth , cover them with fine goatskin leather , and place them on the carrying frame .

ID:	4308
INPUT:	Jéíkab be'asdzą́ą́ Réíchel biyáázhké éí Jóseph índa Bénjamin wolyé .
PRED:	The sons of Jacob 's sons were Joseph 's sons , Benjamin , Benjamin , and Benjamin .
GOLD:	The sons of Jacob 's wife Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin .

ID:	4309
INPUT:	Nít'éé' hóhooł'aahii ázhdííniidígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá áłah Jesus yikéé' dah dii'áázh .
PRED:	When Jesus heard the disciples , he followed Jesus and followed him .
GOLD:	When John 's two disciples heard this , they followed Jesus .

ID:	4310
INPUT:	Áko akéé' góne' ak'éí nilíinii Bó'az ííłní , Ádá nahíłniih , níigo bikee' haidiidlá .
PRED:	So Boaz said to Ruth , “ Sit in front of the Lord 's feet . ”
GOLD:	So the other family redeemer drew off his sandal as he said to Boaz , “ You buy the land . ”

ID:	4311
INPUT:	Mk . 10 : <unk>
PRED:	Teaching about Resurrection
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Two Blind Men

ID:	4312
INPUT:	Jó , díí nihił béédahózin : haash yit'éego Ííjip kéyahdi kééhwiit'į́į́ nít'éé' índa haash yit'éego ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó hadii'náago bik'ee'ąą ahéédahisooná .
PRED:	“ You know this , ” they said . “ I am sending you into the land of Egypt , but you are living among the nations . ”
GOLD:	“ You remember how we lived in the land of Egypt and how we traveled through the lands of enemy nations as we left .

ID:	4313
INPUT:	Éí bąą Christ bá ha'át'íhída doo bich'į' shidziilii , jó , éí saad bee shíni' nehe'aah , shité'é'į' , atíshi'dil'į́ , yéego shich'į' naho'diilná , díí t'áá ałtso baa shił hózhǫ́ǫgo í'dííníszin , háálá doo shidziil da nidi , shidziilgo át'é .
PRED:	So I am not ashamed of Christ , for I am not ashamed of all my strength . For I am deeply troubled by all my troubles .
GOLD:	That 's why I take pleasure in my weaknesses , and in the insults , hardships , persecutions , and troubles that I suffer for Christ . For when I am weak , then I am strong .

ID:	4314
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihí ałdó' hasht'e'áda'díínółzin , háálá Diné Silį́į'ii doo nidayínóhłíi da yę́ęgi hoolzhishgo doogááł .
PRED:	So do n't be afraid of the Son of Man , for the Son of Man will come .
GOLD:	You also must be ready all the time , for the Son of Man will come when least expected . ”

ID:	4315
INPUT:	Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóigo Ériyel yił da'ahóbáahii , t'áá éí hach'į' áádóó yine' naadzi'ii yich'į' nidaabaahii t'áá ałtso índa hach'į' nidahwiiłnáanii éí tł'ée'go baa na'iisgeelígíí nidahalin doo .
PRED:	A few of the nations who had lived in the valley of Debir ( that day ) , “ A few days later they will be like a few days . ”
GOLD:	All the nations fighting against Jerusalemwill vanish like a dream ! Those who are attacking her wallswill vanish like a vision in the night .

ID:	4316
INPUT:	Nihikéyahgi dé'éyóní ła' t'óó átsééd nihił kééhat'į́įgo t'áadoo bich'į' nahwiyołnání .
PRED:	“ Do n't live in your land , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Do not take advantage of foreigners who live among you in your land .

ID:	4317
INPUT:	Áko náánáłahjigo anídzoodzá ; Bétheljį' jiníyá yę́ędę́ę́' doo t'áá ákóne' t'ą́ą́' nídzídzáa da .
PRED:	When she returned to Bethel , she returned to Bethel and returned to Bethel .
GOLD:	So he left Bethel and went home another way .

ID:	4318
INPUT:	Ákódzaago Jéíkab éí t'iis áádóó tsin héízel wolyéii índa <unk> <unk> wolyéii bits'áoz'a' daditłé'ígíí néidiinilgo náhineesk'ęę'go yídayíízǫ́ǫzgo łigaigo noodǫ́ǫzgo áyiilaa .
PRED:	When Jacob had hidden the tree in a tree , he gave birth to the people of Jacob , who lived in the wilderness of Shechem .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	4319
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph bíniik'ehgo tsosts'id nááhaijį' Ííjip kéyahgi ch'iyáán t'áá át'éé áłah ádajiilaago Ííjip kin hadaas'áhígi ahandadziizyį́ ; éí t'áá hadáda'ak'ehídę́ę́' t'áá kin hadaas'áhígi ch'iyáán nooh dajishchį́ .
PRED:	In the seventh year of Joseph 's reign , Joseph gathered all the land of Egypt for seven years . He brought them to Egypt , and he sent them back to Egypt .
GOLD:	During those years , Joseph gathered all the crops grown in Egypt and stored the grain from the surrounding fields in the cities .

ID:	4320
INPUT:	Háálá ná naal'a'í bizhé'é kwíidííniid yę́ędą́ą́' ání , Ashkii bá naashtłizh doo ; t'áadoo bił naa nánísht'áázhgóó hool'áágóó shizhé'é shik'íhá'áah doo .
PRED:	For the servant said to his father , “ I 'm going to be a boy . I 'm angry with my father , and I am innocent . ”
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	4321
INPUT:	Nihiye'ké áádóó nihitsi'ké éí Júdah dine'é bich'į' nahideeshnihgo Sabíyadóó dine'é , éí dine'é nízaadi kéédahat'íinii yich'į' nináádahodiyoołnih ; jó , Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	“ I will take your sons and daughters from Judah to distant lands , ” says the Lord . “ The people of Judah have spoken to you , for the Lord has spoken to you . ”
GOLD:	I will sell your sons and daughters to the people of Judah , and they will sell them to the people of Arabia , a nation far away . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	4322
INPUT:	Nidi díí t'áá át'é t'ah doo ánééhgóó danihiidoołtsołgo atídanihił'į́į doo , kin bii' áłah nída'adleehígíí índa awáalyaajį' adanihii'éeshgo , áádóó shízhi' biniinaa aláahgo naat'áanii índa naat'áanii naazdáágóó bidááhdę́ę́' nidanihii'éesh doo .
PRED:	But if we have seen this , we will say , ‘ We will tell you what we have seen in the synagogues and the synagogues . ' ”
GOLD:	“ But before all this occurs , there will be a time of great persecution . You will be dragged into synagogues and prisons , and you will stand trial before kings and governors because you are my followers .

ID:	4323
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya dine'é t'áá íiyisí nídaasdzííd , háálá ádaaní , Dah da'ínéehgi Diyin God ga' níyáá lá . Áko ádaaní , Hatíhíláane'ee' ! Háálá t'ah doo kóhánéeh da nít'éé' .
PRED:	The Philistines were afraid of the Philistines , for they said , “ O God , do n't delay ! ” So they said , “ We have n't been afraid ! ”
GOLD:	they panicked . “ The gods have come into their camp ! ” they cried . “ This is a disaster ! We have never had to face anything like this before !

ID:	4324
INPUT:	áádóó <unk> dine'é áádóó Zémar dine'é índa Héíma dine'é éí Kéínan bá niheezhchį́ . Áádóó bik'ijį' Kéínan dine'é ałts'ádahaazná .
PRED:	These were the sons of Zebedee , the sons of Canaan , the Canaanites , the Canaanites , the Canaanites , and Canaan .
GOLD:	Arvadites , Zemarites , and Hamathites . The Canaanite clans eventually spread out ,

ID:	4325
INPUT:	Diné doo áhályáanii doo bił ahiníłt'ée da dooleeł biniyé bidoo hóshkał bik'ehgo doo bich'į' háádíídzih da .
PRED:	Do n't give a fool to a fool , for it is a fool for a fool .
GOLD:	Do n't answer the foolish arguments of fools , or you will become as foolish as they are .

ID:	4326
INPUT:	Mk . 7 : <unk>
PRED:	Jesus ' Prayer for Prayer
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Many People

ID:	4327
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God ánihijiilaii niidlį́ . Christ bee yá'át'éehgo ádeii'níił doo biniyé ánihijiilaago éí baa nideiikai dooleełii t'áá bítséedi nihá binahodziz'ą́ .
PRED:	For we belong to God , who made us right with us . We have been given to us as we did .
GOLD:	For we are God 's masterpiece . He has created us anew in Christ Jesus , so we can do the good things he planned for us long ago .

ID:	4328
INPUT:	náá'ákóne' Éízor éí Zéídak há yizhchį́ , áádóó índa Zéídak éí Éíkim há yizhchį́ , áádóó bik'ijį' Éíkim éí Iiláíyad há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	Zadok was the father of Zadok . Zadok was the father of Zadok , the father of Hezekiah .
GOLD:	Azor was the father of Zadok.Zadok was the father of Akim.Akim was the father of Eliud .

ID:	4329
INPUT:	Áko haasdzíi'go ádíshní , Bóhólníihii , háishą' ánít'į́ ? Áko shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go ání , Shí Názarethdóó Jesus atíníł'ínígíí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	Then I said , “ Who are you ? Who is my Messiah ? ” And he said , “ I am the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ Who are you , lord ? ' I asked. “ And the voice replied , ‘ I am Jesus the Nazarene , the one you are persecuting . '

ID:	4330
INPUT:	Áádóó ákwii hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' Jáshowa hadine'é bił t'ą́ą́' níjíkaigo Héízor kin haal'áii dadzisnáago éí aláahgo binanit'a'í diltłish bee dadziisxį́ , háálá Héízor kin haal'áii éí bítséédą́ą́' díí aláahgo bee ídahólníihgo bił nahaz'áanii t'áá ałtso yee bídahólnííh nít'éé' .
PRED:	About that time Joshua returned to the town of Ai and killed the king of Hazor , for he killed the king of Hazor .
GOLD:	Joshua then turned back and captured Hazor and killed its king . ( Hazor had at one time been the capital of all these kingdoms . )

ID:	4331
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , yá'ąąsh biláahgo ayóó ánít'ée le' ! Bee ayóó ánít'éii nahasdzáán t'áá náhwiiz'ą́ą́ nít'éé' biláahgo baa ha'niih le' !
PRED:	Be exalted , O God , above the highest heavens ! Let the earth be exalted .
GOLD:	Be exalted , O God , above the highest heavens.May your glory shine over all the earth .

ID:	4332
INPUT:	éí t'áá aaníí k'eelyéí t'áá ałtso ts'ídá bi'oh áníshéhígíí át'ée nidi ch'il t'áá ałtso yilááh áníłtsogo ninisééh , áko tsin sikaadii yileehgo tsídii nidahat'ahgo tsin bits'áoz'a' bąąhgóó bit'oh ádayiił'įįh .
PRED:	It is the field that the field is a field that is not planted in the field , and it is covered with its branches .
GOLD:	It is the smallest of all seeds , but it becomes the largest of garden plants ; it grows into a tree , and birds come and make nests in its branches . ”

ID:	4333
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Bee ádanoht'éii hazhó'ó nabik'ítsídaołkees .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Look at what 's happening to you !

ID:	4334
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph haadzíi'go áhodííniid , Díí ááhyiłní , <unk> tá'ígíí éí táá' yidoołkááł .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to Joseph , “ This will happen to you three days . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph told him . “ The three baskets also represent three days .

ID:	4335
INPUT:	Nííbo kin shijaa'dóó diné ashdladiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	The people of West the Jordan
GOLD:	The citizens of Nebo52

ID:	4336
INPUT:	Ádeijódlí joolnáa'ii áádóó ádaa dzódlíigo nitsíkeesii éí diné doo yá'áshóonii bee adinídíinii át'éego ádił ni'iidzíihii át'é .
PRED:	The wicked are proud and proud , and the wicked are filled with violence .
GOLD:	Haughty eyes , a proud heart , and evil actions are all sin .

ID:	4337
INPUT:	Arfáksad éí Shíílah há yizhchį́į́dóó bik'ijį' jiináago dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan táá' honínáánááhaígíí biyi' haye'ké índa hatsi'ké há niheezhchį́ .
PRED:	After the birth of Arphaxad , Shelah lived another 82 years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Shelah , Arphaxad lived another 403 years and had other sons and daughters .

ID:	4338
INPUT:	áádóó Beth-píyor áádóó Ásh<unk> gah índa Beth-jéshimath dahoolyéhígíí
PRED:	Do n't you remember what I told you about the camped at Kadesh-barnea ,
GOLD:	Beth-peor , the slopes of Pisgah , and Beth-jeshimoth .

ID:	4339
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii k'éédabidi'doolníłígíí nináá' bee t'óó yidííłtsééł .
PRED:	The wicked will see their eyes , and you will see their eyes .
GOLD:	Just open your eyes , and see how the wicked are punished .

ID:	4340
INPUT:	Hoł hóyée'ii hwee áhoot'éii éí hosh binázt'i' nahalin , nidi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii éí azdoolkǫ'góó yigááł .
PRED:	A fool leads to a fool , but a fool is like a fool .
GOLD:	A lazy person 's way is blocked with briers , but the path of the upright is an open highway .

ID:	4341
INPUT:	Áko yee nihwiiz'áanii áádóó bibee haz'áanii bik'eh dahojíł'į́ . Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Praise the Lord and obey his instructions ; praise the law of the Lord .
GOLD:	All this happened so they would follow his decreesand obey his instructions.Praise the Lord !

ID:	4342
INPUT:	,
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Burial of Jesus

ID:	4343
INPUT:	Áko Bárnabas éí Saul bí<unk> dínóotaał biniyé <unk> góó ajííyá .
PRED:	So Barnabas went to search for Saul to search for Saul .
GOLD:	Then Barnabas went on to Tarsus to look for Saul .

ID:	4344
INPUT:	Áko Líívai dine'é bizhé'é danilíinii bada'áłchíní yá aląąjį' naazíinii éí náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízer áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa índa Ízrel dine'é bizhé'é danilíinii bada'áłchíní yá aląąjį' naazíinii yaa yíkai ,
PRED:	So Joshua son of Nun , the leaders of the tribe of Levi , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of Israel came to Joshua son of Nun .
GOLD:	Then the leaders of the tribe of Levi came to consult with Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of the other tribes of Israel .

ID:	4345
INPUT:	Áádóó kót'ée doo : nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii deí'aah dooígíí taah dadeestáalgo , éí nahasdzáán t'áá át'é bee Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee Jórdan tooh áhodidoolzih , áko Jórdan tooh wódahdę́ę́' nílínígíí áhodiilzee'go doo nílį́į da dooleeł índa nihidii'áa dooleeł .
PRED:	Then the priest will pronounce the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , and the Ark of the Lord will be cut off from the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The priests will carry the Ark of the Lord , the Lord of all the earth . As soon as their feet touch the water , the flow of water will be cut off upstream , and the river will stand up like a wall . ”

ID:	4346
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahgi k'adę́ę jínéehgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ Sérai ábizhdííniid , Shoo , nidi'níl'į́įgo asdzání baa dzólníinii nílį́įgo shił bééhózin ;
PRED:	When she arrived at Egypt , she said to her , “ Look , my wife , I know that the woman is mine .
GOLD:	As he was approaching the border of Egypt , Abram said to his wife , Sarai , “ Look , you are a very beautiful woman .

ID:	4347
INPUT:	Áádóó Téímar éí halah Ámnan bighandi sitį́įgo baazhníyá . Ak'áán ákǫ́ǫ́ jiníką́ągo áadi tadzooznii' , áádóó binááł bááh nímazí ájiilaago dzist'é .
PRED:	So Amnon took Tamar to Amnon 's house and went to Amnon at the place where he had prepared .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	4348
INPUT:	Łeeh hojíígeedii t'áá hóda biih nízhdootłish áádóó tsé ahénátł'inii bighá jíłne'ígíí tł'iishda hodoołhash .
PRED:	“ When the Israelite army is divided into the wall , it will never be like a sharp sword .
GOLD:	When you dig a well , you might fall in.When you demolish an old wall , you could be bitten by a snake .

ID:	4349
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii díí saad yee Ízrel dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é yaa halne'go haadzíí' .
PRED:	The Lord gave this message to Israel :
GOLD:	This is the message the Lord gave concerning Israel and Judah .

ID:	4350
INPUT:	Líívai dine'é danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih ! Bóhólníihii dadíínóhsinii , Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Sing to the Levites , O Levites ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	O Levites , praise the Lord ! All you who fear the Lord , praise the Lord !

ID:	4351
INPUT:	Jéíkab ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii kǫ' nidahalin , áádóó Jóseph ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii éí kǫ' dah nídíno'ii nidahalin , nidi Íísa ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ehégod nidahojílingo hohodidoo'niłgo ahodi'doolk'ą́ąłgo doo ła' doodzih da , háálá Bóhólníihii yee haadzíí' .
PRED:	Jacob 's descendants will be like fire , and his descendants will be like a fire of fire . His descendants will be like a fire from the fire of Jacob 's descendants will burn like a fire , for the Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The people of Israel will be a raging fire , and Edom a field of dry stubble.The descendants of Joseph will be a flameroaring across the field , devouring everything.There will be no survivors in Edom.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	4352
INPUT:	<unk> kahdóó dah náádii'náago Hashmónah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left Punon and camped at Punon .
GOLD:	They left Mithcah and camped at Hashmonah .

ID:	4353
INPUT:	éí bąą Diné Silį́į'ii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ nidi bee bóhólnííh .
PRED:	So the Son of Man is here on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	So the Son of Man is Lord , even over the Sabbath ! ”

ID:	4354
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bik'ijį' tsííd t'óó ahayóí nidoołtį́į́ł ; tsííd t'áá dadiltłi'go índa tsékǫ' łitsooí nidoołtį́į́ł , áádóó níyol a<unk> go níyol doo ; díí bee adlání yee deidoodlį́įłgo k'éédabidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	The wicked will pour out the fire of the wicked , and they will pour out the fire on the ground . They will pour out the breath of the winds , and they will drink it .
GOLD:	He will rain down blazing coals and burning sulfur on the wicked , punishing them with scorching winds .

ID:	4355
INPUT:	David bá nidaal'a'í hazhó'ógo ałch'į' yádaałti'go David yaa ákoniizį́į'go awéé' daaztsą́ą́ lá niizį́į́' ; éí bąą David bá nidaal'a'í áyidííniid , Da' awéé'ésh daaztsą́ ? Aoo' , daaztsą́ , dahodííniid .
PRED:	But David realized that David was dead , and he was dead because he had seen the child of David . “ Yes , ” he said . “ Yes , ” he said . “ Yes , ” he said . “ Yes , ”
GOLD:	When David saw them whispering , he realized what had happened . “ Is the child dead ? ” he asked. “ Yes , ” they replied , “ he is dead . ”

ID:	4356
INPUT:	Nahachagiitsoh da'agháazhii nanise' yi'oh da'ííyą́ą'ii éí nahachagiitsoh naanááséłígíí dayííyą́ą́' áádóó nahachagiitsoh naanááséłígíí nanise' yi'oh da'ííyą́ą'ii éí ch'osh nidaa'na'ii dayííyą́ą́' . Áko ch'osh nidaa'na'ii nanise' yi'oh da'ííyą́ą'ii éí nahachagiitsoh nanise' yaa nahodikaii ałtso dayííyą́ą́' .
PRED:	The locusts locusts locusts ate locusts and locusts , locusts locusts locusts , and locusts ate the locusts . They ate the locusts and locusts . They ate the locusts and locusts .
GOLD:	After the cutting locusts finished eating the crops , the swarming locusts took what was left ! After them came the hopping locusts , and then the stripping locusts , too !

ID:	4357
INPUT:	Bijéí ak'i'diyiitįįhii ił ééhózin hát'į́ , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii doo áháyą' bił daalkan .
PRED:	Wise words bring joy to the wise , but fools are allowed to find knowledge .
GOLD:	A wise person is hungry for knowledge , while the fool feeds on trash .

ID:	4358
INPUT:	Jó , díí kin haal'áhígíí t'óó nii'nil yę́ędóó díí jį́įjį' ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí shánídahałchįįhgo t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego bee atí'ésh'íinii hayiyííłtah , áko doo nísh'į́į da doo biniyé nahjį' kódeeshłííł .
PRED:	For this day I will pour out my fury on this day , so that I will pour out my fury on them , and I will pour out my fury on them .
GOLD:	“ From the time this city was built until now , it has done nothing but anger me , so I am determined to get rid of it .

ID:	4359
INPUT:	Háálá , Ts'ídá doo azhdilée da , nínígíí ałdó' , Diné ts'ídá doo diyííłhéeł da , ní . Áko doo adílée da nidi diné síníłhį́įgo bee haz'áanii yilááh nideeltáalii sínílį́į́' .
PRED:	You say , ‘ You must not commit adultery . You must not murder . You must not kill your neighbor . You must not kill you . ' ”
GOLD:	For the same God who said , “ You must not commit adultery , ” also said , “ You must not murder. ” So if you murder someone but do not commit adultery , you have still broken the law .

ID:	4360
INPUT:	Níłch'i Diyinii binaanish
PRED:	The Spirit of God
GOLD:	The Work of the Holy Spirit

ID:	4361
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihich'į' ho'níłnii'go hó áádóó haye'ké índa hodine'é ałtso bił ádahosiildįįd .
PRED:	And we have sinned against the Lord our God and his sons and his sons .
GOLD:	But the Lord our God handed him over to us , and we crushed him , his sons , and all his people .

ID:	4362
INPUT:	Áko éí kéyahígi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' diné nihidadiijée'go t'áá haa nídahodiits'į́į́hgóó áádę́ę́' diné bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí beeldléí yikáa'gi naaztį́įgo hach'į' nidayiijáahgo yaa nídiikai .
PRED:	The seeds fell on the footpath represents the people who hear the message from the open open open open , and they took their garments .
GOLD:	and they ran throughout the whole area , carrying sick people on mats to wherever they heard he was .

ID:	4363
INPUT:	Kédorleiyómer t'áá bik'eh dahojíł'į́įgo naakits'áadah nááhai , áko táá'ts'áadah náhááh góne' bich'į' nidadzistee' .
PRED:	They fought against their enemies , and they rebelled against them .
GOLD:	For twelve years they had been subject to King Kedorlaomer , but in the thirteenth year they rebelled against him .

ID:	4364
INPUT:	áko dahayi'di ahétł'óól ádaadin , nidi t'óó kónígháníjį' hwee dahodina' , áko nít'éé' saadígíí biniinaa hach'į' nidahwii'náago , doodaii' atídaho'dil'į́įgo haa ní'diildahgo t'áá áko bits'áníjiijeeh .
PRED:	They were afraid of their roots , but they were afraid of their troubles . They were afraid of their troubles , and they were afraid of their troubles .
GOLD:	But since they do n't have deep roots , they do n't last long . They fall away as soon as they have problems or are persecuted for believing God 's word .

ID:	4365
INPUT:	Ákondi ana'í nilį́įgo éí t'áadoo baa nitsídaahkeesí , nidi ak'is nilį́įgo baa nitsídaahkeesgo hazhó'ó nidanohtin .
PRED:	But do n't worry about your brother , but teach your friend .
GOLD:	Do n't think of them as enemies , but warn them as you would a brother or sister .

ID:	4366
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí Filístiya dine'é bikéyahdi si'ą́ągo tsosts'id nídeezid .
PRED:	But the Ark of the Lord was seven months and seven months .
GOLD:	The Ark of the Lord remained in Philistine territory seven months in all .

ID:	4367
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Jó , bich'į' yoołkááł , David bidine'é ahoolchíiłii éí bits'ą́ą́dóó t'áá ákogi át'éego a<unk> a' ła' hadínóoséełgo yidootsoh ; éí aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo hóyą́ągo nant'áa doo . Kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' doo haada yit'éégóó áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éego ááníił doo .
PRED:	“ The time is coming to David , ” says the Lord . “ The king of David will rule over the land of the Ammonites , and he will rule over the land of the earth .
GOLD:	“ For the time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will raise up a righteous descendantfrom King David 's line.He will be a King who rules with wisdom.He will do what is just and right throughout the land .

ID:	4368
INPUT:	Tsídii yá nináda'a'niłii éí biloh bits'ą́ąjį' tsídii dah diit'a'ígi át'éego nihí bits'ádahineechą́ą́' . Łoh k'ínídláadgo nihí dah diijéé' !
PRED:	Like a bird that is set apart for a trap for the birds of the traps of the wicked people .
GOLD:	We escaped like a bird from a hunter 's trap.The trap is broken , and we are free !

ID:	4369
INPUT:	Díí nił bééhózin : shizhé'é David yę́ę Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bízhi' binahjį' kin bii' sohodizin ázhdoolíiłgo t'áadoo yee hadi'ní'ą́ą da , háálá hanaagóó t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' hach'į' anaa' nídahoołeełgo bąą Bóhólníihii ałtso hayaa ayííniljį' t'áadoo há bohónéesdzą́ą da .
PRED:	Do n't know what the Lord my father , David , the God of my ancestors , for he has not helped him in the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ You know that my father , David , was not able to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord his God because of the many wars waged against him by surrounding nations . He could not build until the Lord gave him victory over all his enemies .

ID:	4370
INPUT:	Tó doo danílį́į da dooleeł biniyé yidáda'diłtł'į́įhgodoo daat'íinii daat'į́ neheleeh .
PRED:	The streams of the heavens will become a flood ; the nations will be put to death .
GOLD:	They dam up the trickling streamsand bring to light the hidden treasures .

ID:	4371
INPUT:	Nich'į' dah nídiishnih ; kéyah dibáá' nilínígi át'éego shii' sizíinii dibáá' nilį́ nahalingo nídin nilį́ . Síilah .
PRED:	I am thirsty and thirsty , like thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty thirsty waves . Interlude
GOLD:	I lift my hands to you in prayer.I thirst for you as parched land thirsts for rain.Interlude

ID:	4372
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ahímeiyaz hahoyííníi'go aláahgo naat'áanii ííłní , T'áá ałtso yá'át'ééh . Áádóó ni'jį' aláahgo naat'áanii biyaajį' tsé'yaa jineeshjoolgo ábijiní , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God baa ha'niih le' ; éí diné danilíinii bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' anaa' danízin yę́ę ałtso doo ła' yidziihgóó áyiilaa .
PRED:	So Ahimaaz agreed to the king and told him , “ Let 's go down to the ground and worship the gods of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Then Ahimaaz cried out to the king , “ Everything is all right ! ” He bowed before the king with his face to the ground and said , “ Praise to the Lord your God , who has handed over the rebels who dared to stand against my lord the king . ”

ID:	4373
INPUT:	Áko Akéya hoolyéejį' tsé'naagóó deeshááł jiniizį́į'go ałk'isóó danilíinii há bił yá'ádaat'ééh , áko ídahooł'aahii bił baa hózhǫ́ǫgo baazhdoogááł biniyé bich'į' naaltsoos ádayiilaa . Áadi jiníyáago Diyin God bibee ajooba' binahjį' da'oosdląądígíí lą'ígóó hana'nitin bee bíká ajoolwod ,
PRED:	When he saw that he was coming to visit his brothers and sisters , he went to visit his disciples . He went to visit his disciples and taught them to show mercy to those who believe in him .
GOLD:	Apollos had been thinking about going to Achaia , and the brothers and sisters in Ephesus encouraged him to go . They wrote to the believers in Achaia , asking them to welcome him . When he arrived there , he proved to be of great benefit to those who , by God 's grace , had believed .

ID:	4374
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké bi'níłníihgo ábidiní , Díí didlidgo nááhániihjí bee haz'áanii át'é : didlidgo nááhániihii wolyé , háálá tł'éé' bíighah bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi dook'ą́ąłgo náhool'įįh doo ; bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi kǫ'ígíí éí t'áá diltłi'go óolzin doo .
PRED:	Aaron and his sons were told , “ This is what the Lord says : It is a burnt offering for the burnt offering . He must burn the altar on the altar of burnt offering and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron and his sons the following instructions regarding the burnt offering . The burnt offering must be left on top of the altar until the next morning , and the fire on the altar must be kept burning all night .

ID:	4375
INPUT:	T'áá nahont'inee ha'alyéehgo bee doo háháchįįh da , áádóó aa neel'į́'ígíí át'ajoo'nilgo t'áá íiyisí áháchį' néidooshǫǫł .
PRED:	They are angry with their lives , and they will be angry with anger .
GOLD:	A secret gift calms anger ; a bribe under the table pacifies fury .

ID:	4376
INPUT:	Jó , ádíní , Na'nishtinígíí ts'ídá t'áadoo bee bąąh dah haz'ání daáádóó ninááł t'áá íiyisí yá'ánísht'ééh .
PRED:	“ Teacher , ” he said , “ I 'm not good for you .
GOLD:	You claim , ‘ My beliefs are pure , 'and ‘ I am clean in the sight of God . '

ID:	4377
INPUT:	Doo yá'áshxǫ́ǫ́góó índa adilyé yee ahoolchíiłii bee ééhózinii hadeintá , nidi bee ééhózinii doo ła' bá ádoolníił da , t'áá hazhó'ó Jónah bee ééhoozinii t'éiyá , bizhdííniidgo bits'ą́ą́' dashdiiyá .
PRED:	The first time I saw a young goat , and a miraculous sign to search for a miraculous sign , but the miraculous signs he told Jonah what he had said .
GOLD:	Only an evil , adulterous generation would demand a miraculous sign , but the only sign I will give them is the sign of the prophet Jonah. ” Then Jesus left them and went away .

ID:	4378
INPUT:	Díí éí Názarait ádee haadzí'ígíí bá bee haz'áanii át'é , áádóó ats'á'ádeet'ą́ą́jí bá Bóhólníihii yich'į' néidiyoołnihígíí , índa t'áá ha'át'íhída t'áá yíneel'ánígi néidiyoołnihígíí ałdó' bá bee haz'áanii át'é ; ádee hadzoodzí'ígíí bik'ehgo ádee hadzoodzíí' ; ákót'éego Názarait nilį́įgo ats'á'ádeet'ánígíí bá bee haz'áanii yik'ehgo é'éł'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : If he has made a vow to the Lord , he must remove all its vows and make it holy . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be made holy .
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law of the Nazirites , who vow to bring these offerings to the Lord . They may also bring additional offerings if they can afford it . And they must be careful to do whatever they vowed when they set themselves apart as Nazirites . ”

ID:	4379
INPUT:	Háálá Diné Silį́į'ii éí yóó'adahaaskaígíí haidínóotaałgo áádóó yisdánéidiyoo'niłgo yiniyé níyá .
PRED:	For the Son of Man will be saved , and he will be saved .
GOLD:	For the Son of Man came to seek and save those who are lost . ”

ID:	4380
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' hadíídzihgo ábididííniił , Bóhólníihii kóní , Náádahidoołnihii shaa dahidoohjih ; diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo bił hóódlee'ii shich'į' nááhidoonihígíí naa deidiyoojih .
PRED:	“ Say to the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Take one of you , and bring them back to me . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel to bring me their sacred offerings . Accept the contributions from all whose hearts are moved to offer them .

ID:	4381
INPUT:	Háálá aye' nilíinii bizhé'é doo bił nilį́į da áádóó ach'é'é nilíinii bimá yik'ijį' nilį́ índa azháá'áád nilíinii éí yizháá'áád nilíinii yik'ijį' nilį́ ; diné éí t'áá bighandóó bi'ana'í hólǫ́ .
PRED:	For he is not a father 's father , his mother , and mother is his mother 's mother . His mother is his wife , and he is his relative .
GOLD:	For the son despises his father.The daughter defies her mother.The daughter-in-law defies her mother-in-law.Your enemies are right in your own household !

ID:	4382
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ííłní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4383
INPUT:	Díí éí Júdah dine'é bada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii ádaat'į́ ; éí tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan hastą́ądi mííldóó ba'aan ashdladi neeznádiingo ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	These are the clans of Judah . Their registered troops numbered 55555 .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Judah . Their registered troops numbered 76,500 .

ID:	4384
INPUT:	Sárah daaztsą́ągo Éíbraham éí łeeh hwii'níłígíí yá nayiisnii'
PRED:	Abraham 's Return to Abraham
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	4385
INPUT:	Alą́ąjį' naagháhígíí éí Ahólah wolyé ; bideezhí éí Ahólibah wolyé ; éí t'áá áłah shíí' silį́į́' , áko bich'é'éké índa biyáázhké niyiishchį́ . Ahólah éí Samériya ááhyiłní , áádóó Ahólibah éí Jerúsalem ááhyiłní .
PRED:	The two sons of Zilpah , the two sons of Ammon , had two sons and daughters . The sons of Samaria were born to Samaria , and Samaria . They also said , “ You are the sons of Samaria . ”
GOLD:	The older girl was named Oholah , and her sister was Oholibah . I married them , and they bore me sons and daughters . I am speaking of Samaria and Jerusalem , for Oholah is Samaria and Oholibah is Jerusalem .

ID:	4386
INPUT:	tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihii át'é ,
PRED:	and a male goat for a sin offering .
GOLD:	and a male goat for a sin offering .

ID:	4387
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Nílááh , nídídááh ; niye' náádiidzá . Áko Jesus saad yee hach'į' haadzí'ígíí dzoosdląądgo anídzoodzá .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ Go back and meet him ! Go and tell him what Jesus had said . ” So he went back to him .
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ Go back home . Your son will live ! ” And the man believed what Jesus said and started home .

ID:	4388
INPUT:	Atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii baa na'asdee'
PRED:	The Passover
GOLD:	Preparations for Passover

ID:	4389
INPUT:	Dził Záíyandóó Bóhólníihii ayóó íits'a'go ádidooniił , áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áádę́ę́' biinéé' didoots'į́į́ł , índa nida'niłkaadii bidahootsogóó hojoobá'ígo nahaz'ą́ą doo áádóó Dził Kármel aghádahaz'áágóó dahodoogą́ą́ł .
PRED:	The Lord will hear his voice from Mount Zion , saying , “ Listen to this message from Mount Carmel , and the remnant of Israel will come from Mount Carmel .
GOLD:	This is what he saw and heard : “ The Lord 's voice will roar from Zionand thunder from Jerusalem ! The lush pastures of the shepherds will dry up ; the grass on Mount Carmel will wither and die . ”

ID:	4390
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii éí Éran ak'ah hak'i yeidooziłgo hóósį́į'go áádóó diyingo bits'ąą hasti'ii jílį́įgo nijil'a' doo biniyé hazhé'é bitsásk'ehgi náá'iiłniihii jílį́įgo bee k'ééhodoodǫǫłii áńjiil'įįh doo áádóó na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo bee éé' ályaii dílzinii bee háázhdiit'įįh doo .
PRED:	Then Aaron will anoint Aaron and anoint him to anoint him as a priest . He will purify the priest 's priestly priest , and he will purify them from the priestly garments . Then he will purify them from the priestly garments and make them holy .
GOLD:	In future generations , the purification ceremony will be performed by the priest who has been anointed and ordained to serve as high priest in place of his ancestor Aaron . He will put on the holy linen garments

ID:	4391
INPUT:	Shik'éí danilíinii doo shaa daókááh át'ée daínda diné hánígo shik'is danilíinii shaa dayooznah .
PRED:	“ Oh , my dear brothers and sisters , we have forgotten me .
GOLD:	My family is gone , and my close friends have forgotten me .

ID:	4392
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' Bóhólníihii bee bi'oh hodidilyéehii hadéébįįdgo biniinaa doo yah adaokááh át'ée da .
PRED:	The priests filled the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , filled with anger . It was filled with the filled with violence .
GOLD:	The priests could not enter the Temple of the Lord because the glorious presence of the Lord filled it .

ID:	4393
INPUT:	Áko náá'áłdó' nááná ła' há nidaal'a'í áłtséédą́'ígíí t'ah bilááh ánéelą́ą'go ákǫ́ǫ́ anáádziis'a' , áko éí ałdó' t'áá ákónáádayiidlaa .
PRED:	So the next king sent another message to the king , and then he sent another message to me .
GOLD:	So the landowner sent a larger group of his servants to collect for him , but the results were the same .

ID:	4394
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bits'ą́ąjigo dashdiiyáii' , náánáła' bich'į' t'áá ákót'éego hanáádzoodzíí' , áko t'áá átséedi hach'į' hadaasdzí'ígi át'éego hach'į' hanáádaasdzíí' .
PRED:	Then one of his disciples left him and said , “ As soon as he spoke to him , he spoke to his disciples . ”
GOLD:	He walked over to some others and asked them the same thing and received the same answer .

ID:	4395
INPUT:	Nił bééhózin lą́ą , háálá íídą́ą́' ni'dizh<unk> dóó t'óó ahayóí niiską́ !
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he said , “ for he has been born . ”
GOLD:	But of course you know all this ! For you were born before it was all created , and you are so very experienced !

ID:	4396
INPUT:	Ániidíii danilíinii baa hodoonih
PRED:	Hope for a new moon
GOLD:	God 's Stubborn People

ID:	4397
INPUT:	Diné éí Jesus baa dahojilne'ígíí deiniidlą́ , nidi Diyin God t'áá bí biYe' yaa halne'jígo agháago bidziil , háálá Diyin God éí Jesus biTaa' jílį́įgo oo'íinii jílį́įgo baa hojilne' .
PRED:	So we believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God , but he is the Son of God . He is the Son of God , the Son of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Since we believe human testimony , surely we can believe the greater testimony that comes from God . And God has testified about his Son .

ID:	4398
INPUT:	Nidziil baa hashne'go hashtaał doo . T'áá aaníí , abínígo aa a'ááh nínízinii yéego baa hashne'go hashtaał doo . Háálá shich'į' nahwii'náago ninahjį' nehesdzííh nít'éé' áádóó bine' ahinishchéehii nílį́ .
PRED:	I will sing in your strength , and I will sing in your unfailing love , for I am a refuge in a place of refuge .
GOLD:	But as for me , I will sing about your power.Each morning I will sing with joy about your unfailing love.For you have been my refuge , a place of safety when I am in distress .

ID:	4399
INPUT:	Nidi náá'áłdó' Féro bijéí náánáátł'isgo bąą t'áadoo diné yéé'níłnii' da .
PRED:	But Pharaoh refused to listen to Pharaoh , so he refused to let the people go .
GOLD:	But Pharaoh again became stubborn and refused to let the people go .

ID:	4400
INPUT:	Íílim kéyahdóó dah náádii'náago Ízrel dine'é yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso honoojí Sin nahós'a'gi éí Íílim kéyah áádóó Dził Sáínai bita'gi ákwii niníná ; Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' hajíínáádóó bik'ijį' naaki nídízííd binih ashdla'áadah jį́į́ góne' dashdiiná .
PRED:	They left the land of Egypt and traveled through the wilderness of Sinai and traveled on the hill country of Sinai . They left the valley of Sinai and traveled to the valley of Sinai .
GOLD:	Then the whole community of Israel set out from Elim and journeyed into the wilderness of Sin , between Elim and Mount Sinai . They arrived there on the fifteenth day of the second month , one month after leaving the land of Egypt .

ID:	4401
INPUT:	Kin bii' nooh nída'achíhígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá ałtsoní bii' hadadeezbin le' . Nihikéyah bikáá'góó nihidibé miildóó neeznáadi miildóó yówehjį' bits'ą́ą́dóó nídahoodleeł doo .
PRED:	May all the flocks of your flocks and herds be brought to the land of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	May our barns be filledwith crops of every kind.May the flocks in our fields multiply by the thousands , even tens of thousands ,

ID:	4402
INPUT:	Áádóó diné yíl'áhígíí hágo bizhdííniidgo ábijiní , Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' áádóó díí bik'ida'doohtįįh :
PRED:	Then he called to the crowd and said , “ Listen to this message :
GOLD:	Then Jesus called to the crowd to come and hear . “ Listen , ” he said , “ and try to understand .

ID:	4403
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	4404
INPUT:	Áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' Jew dine'é bibee haz'áanii k'ízhníti'ígíí biniinaa Jew dine'é dahodiyiilyééł daniizį́į́' , nidi doo t'áá éí t'éiyá biniinaa da , nidi Diyin God shiTaa' bijiníigo Diyin God bił ahijíłt'éego ízh'dólzinígíí biniinaa t'ah aláhídi át'éego dahodiyiilyééł daniizį́į́' .
PRED:	The Sabbath day when the Jewish leaders found the Law of God , they were trying to kill him because of what he had said . But God did n't let him be put to death because of his Father .
GOLD:	So the Jewish leaders tried all the harder to find a way to kill him . For he not only broke the Sabbath , he called God his Father , thereby making himself equal with God .

ID:	4405
INPUT:	Áko Jesus yich'į' hadaasdzíi'go ádaaní , Doo nihił béédahózin da . Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Shí ałdó' bee óhólnííh bik'ehgo díidí baa naasháhígíí doo bee nihił hodeeshnih da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You do n't know what we do . I do n't know that I am going to do what I do . ”
GOLD:	So they finally replied , “ We do n't know. ” And Jesus responded , “ Then I wo n't tell you by what authority I do these things . ”

ID:	4406
INPUT:	Áko Líívai dine'é áádóó Júdah dine'é t'áá ałtso éí náá'iiłniihii Jiihóíyada hach'į' yee haadzíi'ii t'áá át'é bik'ehgo ádadziidzaa . T'ááłá'í jinítínígo hasiláo háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' dadeeshnishígíí éí nidahaashnishígíí bił yah azhdookah , háálá náá'iiłniihii Jiihóíyada doo hwéé'íłníih da .
PRED:	All the Levites and Judah did not defile Jehoiada the priest and all the people of Judah . They did not want the rest of the Sabbath days of Jehoiada the priest , for I will not be handed over to Jehoiada the priest .
GOLD:	So the Levites and all the people of Judah did everything as Jehoiada the priest ordered . The commanders took charge of the men reporting for duty that Sabbath , as well as those who were going off duty . Jehoiada the priest did not let anyone go home after their shift ended .

ID:	4407
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Ádadohníigo Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó Jerúsalem kintaa da'aztiingóó éí ákǫ́ǫ́ doo naagháhí da . Diné nidi , doo ła' naagháa da , índa doo ła' kéédahojit'į́į da , áádóó naaldlooshii nidi ádin . T'áadoo biniyéhígóó haz'ą́ . Diné índa naaldlooshii łá'í nidi ádin , dadohnínígíí ákwe'é díí náádadiits'a' doo ;
PRED:	“ Say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord says : You will live in the streets of Judah and Jerusalem , but no one will live in the streets . There is no one or wild animals or animals . ' ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord says : You have said , ‘ This is a desolate land where people and animals have all disappeared . ' Yet in the empty streets of Jerusalem and Judah 's other towns , there will be heard once more

ID:	4408
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' <unk> biye' Jedéíyah éí bighan bíighahjį' tsé néíztł'in . Náá'ákóne' Ha<unk> náíyah biye' Hátash tsé néíztł'in .
PRED:	From the family of Jedaiah son of Henadad , repaired the section of the wall from the house of Jeshua son of Zaccur .
GOLD:	Next Jedaiah son of Harumaph repaired the wall across from his own house , and next to him was Hattush son of Hashabneiah .

ID:	4409
INPUT:	Áádóó nówehjį' náás dah náádooht'áazhgo Téíbor chéch'il sikaadíjį' woh'ashgo diné tált'éego Béthel haz'ání góde Diyin God yich'į' nidahodoohłaał yiniyé yikahgo bidááh dooh'ash : ła' éí tł'ízí yázhí táa'go yoojih doo , náánáła' éí bááh táa'go yoojih doo , áádóó náánáła'ígíí éí tó abid yee wáin yoołtsos doo .
PRED:	When you go to Mount Sinai , you will go into the valley of Eshcol and worship the God of Bethel , where you will go to the valley of Eshcol and the other goat . Then you will go to the place of wine .
GOLD:	“ When you get to the oak of Tabor , you will see three men coming toward you who are on their way to worship God at Bethel . One will be bringing three young goats , another will have three loaves of bread , and the third will be carrying a wineskin full of wine .

ID:	4410
INPUT:	Aháílad biye' Béíyana éí Téíyanak kin haal'áádę́ę́' áádóó Megído kin haal'áádę́ę́' índa Beth-shíyan nahós'a' t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó éí Jézriyel kin haal'á biyeigóó <unk> nah haz'ání bíighahgóó nahós'a'ígíí índa Beth-shíyan kin haal'áádóó Éí<unk> hólah kin shijaa'jį' éí Jákniyam kin shijaa' bilááhdę́ę́' ch'iyáán nináyiijááh .
PRED:	From there the boundary went out to the village of Canaan , Megiddo , Megiddo , Megiddo , Megiddo , Megiddo , Megiddo , and all the way to the land of Canaan . This is how many years old enough to stay in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Baana son of Ahilud , in Taanach and Megiddo , all of Beth-shan near Zarethan below Jezreel , and all the territory from Beth-shan to Abel-meholah and over to Jokmeam .

ID:	4411
INPUT:	éí diné t'áá ájíłah saad ahíjít'áhígíí éí Bóhólníihii áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó ándahwii'aahii ákwii hólǫ́ǫgo yoołkáłígíí bidááhdóó nizhdoo'ash .
PRED:	The whole community must stand before the Lord and stand before the priests and judges before the Lord .
GOLD:	then both the accuser and accused must appear before the Lord by coming to the priests and judges in office at that time .

ID:	4412
INPUT:	Áko ha'al'éés góyaa dashdiiyá áádóó bizháá'áád jílíní t'áá áhodííniidígi ádziidzaa .
PRED:	So he went to his father-in-law and bowed low before his daughter-in-law .
GOLD:	So she went down to the threshing floor that night and followed the instructions of her mother-in-law .

ID:	4413
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , T'áá aaníí , t'áá aaníígóó ándishní , Diné éí tó índa Níłch'i Diyinii doo bee nááho'dizhchį́į́góó Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii doo biih jóya' át'ée da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , the Holy Spirit has never been born into the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I assure you , no one can enter the Kingdom of God without being born of water and the Spirit .

ID:	4414
INPUT:	Áko t'áá sáhí ats'ájíkaigo tsinaa'eeł bee doo naagháhígóó ajookai .
PRED:	So they left the boat and ran to the boat to the boat .
GOLD:	So they left by boat for a quiet place , where they could be alone .

ID:	4415
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí Ííjip kéyah góyaa dii'néełgo áadi kéédahwiit'į́į doo danízinígíí nahjį' kóhodeeshłííł , áko éí Ííjip kéyahdi dazhdínóonééł ; diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił áádóó dichin dahodooghą́ą́ł ; a'oh ádaat'éédóó ayóó ádaat'éejį' diltłish bee dazhdínóonééł índa dichin nidahodoołtsił ; dabi'dódziihii áádóó bik'ee t'óó ił adahayóii áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó bá yáti'ii índa t'óó bá nahat'i'ii dazhdooleeł .
PRED:	And I will send them into exile in Egypt , where they will die in Egypt . They will die in Egypt , famine , famine , famine , famine , famine , famine , famine , and disease , and disease , and disease , and disease .
GOLD:	I will take this remnant of Judah — those who were determined to come here and live in Egypt — and I will consume them . They will fall here in Egypt , killed by war and famine . All will die , from the least to the greatest . They will be an object of damnation , horror , cursing , and mockery .

ID:	4416
INPUT:	t'áá ákót'éego yádiłhił ásdįįdjį'diné noonéełii doo náádidoojah da , índa doo ch'éédabidoosiłí da .
PRED:	All the heavens will be destroyed , and the earth will disappear .
GOLD:	people are laid to rest and do not rise again.Until the heavens are no more , they will not wake upnor be roused from their sleep .

ID:	4417
INPUT:	Diné ła' kéyah bee hoodzooígíí biniyé tsé adaaz'áago ádaalyaa yę́ę hadayiinííł ; dibé naakaígíí t'áá na'níle'dii adeiniiłkaadgo t'áá bí yada'ałtso' łeh .
PRED:	“ The first of the tribe of Judah will provide their flocks and herds for their flocks .
GOLD:	Evil people steal land by moving the boundary markers.They steal livestock and put them in their own pastures .

ID:	4418
INPUT:	Diltłish deeníinii nahalingo bizaad dabi<unk> <unk> da atída'ał'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' badahojoobá'íii yisdáyiinííł .
PRED:	The sword of the wicked are like a sword ; the needy will rescue them from their mouths .
GOLD:	He rescues the poor from the cutting words of the strong , and rescues them from the clutches of the powerful .

ID:	4419
INPUT:	Shoo , kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' , índa Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nilíinii áádóó nááda'iiłniihii índa naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó kéyahdóó dine'é kéédahat'íinii bik'ijį' nahonílingo kin haal'á ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inii , béésh nitł'izii íí'áii índa béésh łitsoii bee binaa ahéé'ítł'inii nahonílingo díí jį́ áníshłééh , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ Look , ” says the king of Judah , “ I will destroy the kings of Judah and Judah . I will break down the walls of Judah and the fortified city . I will break down its walls like bronze , bronze , bronze , and bronze .
GOLD:	For see , today I have made you stronglike a fortified city that can not be captured , like an iron pillar or a bronze wall.You will stand against the whole land — the kings , officials , priests , and people of Judah .

ID:	4420
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí biniyé ákót'éego bich'į' saad honíłǫ́ . Jó , yaa naagháhígíí doo t'áá ałtso yee ádaa ch'íhwiit'aah da ?
PRED:	Why are you the one who speaks to him ? Why do n't it be silent ?
GOLD:	So why are you bringing a charge against him ? Why say he does not respond to people 's complaints ?

ID:	4421
INPUT:	Háálá wáin bee tsi'na'adáhígi át'éego ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'áanii t'áá ałtso t'óó báhádzidgo na'ageh yee tsi'naagháii bił tsi'nidziskai . Áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii hoł ahá nida'asgeh , índa jit'íinii t'óó bee nijinéego binahjį' nahasdzáán bikáá'góó diné baa nida'iiniihii da'at'į́ daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	For they have sexual relations with wine , wine , wine , and all the women of the world have committed adultery with her blood . And they are sinning against the world . And they are sinning against the world .
GOLD:	For all the nations have fallenbecause of the wine of her passionate immorality.The kings of the worldhave committed adultery with her.Because of her desires for extravagant luxury , the merchants of the world have grown rich . ”

ID:	4422
INPUT:	Yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Kóhath dine'é bíí' dooleełii bá bééhoozin . Áko náá'iiłniihii Éran joolyéii ha'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii , Líívai dine'é danilį́įgo , yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Júdah áádóó Símiyan índa Bénjamin dine'é táá'ts'áadahgo bikin hadaas'áhígíí Líívai dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	These were the clans of the tribe of Levi , the tribe of Levi ( which means “ The tribe of Levi , Benjamin , Benjamin , and Benjamin were allotted to the tribe of Benjamin . )
GOLD:	The descendants of Aaron , who were members of the Kohathite clan within the tribe of Levi , were allotted thirteen towns that were originally assigned to the tribes of Judah , Simeon , and Benjamin .

ID:	4423
INPUT:	áko ájíní , Jó'akon , yá'ąąsh ąą át'éego , Diné Silį́į'ii Diyin God binish'náájí sizį́įgo yish'į́ .
PRED:	“ Look , ” he said , “ I see the Son of Man standing in heaven .
GOLD:	And he told them , “ Look , I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand ! ”

ID:	4424
INPUT:	Bits'áoz'a' ła' biyi'dę́ę́' kǫ' hadíínóodgo bineest'ą' ałtso iidííłk'ą́ą́' , áádóó bits'áoz'a' bidziilii doo ła' ánászįįd da , áko naat'á gish doo ła' náhodoodleeł da . Díí lą́ą baa atínáhodindleeh ni , áádóó baa cha hasingo hodeeshzhiizh ni .
PRED:	Its branches have fallen down from a tree , and the branches of a piece of fire will be broken , and no one will mourn for it . I will weep for you , and no one will disappear . ”
GOLD:	A fire has burst out from its branchesand devoured its fruit.Its remaining limbs are notstrong enough to be a ruler 's scepter. “ This is a funeral song , and it will be used in a funeral . ”

ID:	4425
INPUT:	Áádóó bee nástł'ahjí aláahgo naat'áanii dah nánídaahígi dah neezdá , áádóó Jánathan yiizį' , áádóó Ábner éí Saul bíighahgi dah neezdá ; David dah nánídaah yę́ęgi éí doo naagháhí da .
PRED:	So the king 's officers stood at the place of Saul and Jonathan stood at the place where Abner had done .
GOLD:	He sat at his usual place against the wall , with Jonathan sitting opposite him and Abner beside him . But David 's place was empty .

ID:	4426
INPUT:	Áko Jesus díidí yidiizts'ą́ą'go hak'ee t'óó bił ahóóyóí , áádóó názyizgo diné bikéé' nooyéłígíí áyidííniid , Ánihidishní , Oodlą́ bee aa dzódlí kót'éii Ízrel dine'é bitahgi nidi t'ah doo ła' bik'ínísháah da .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he turned to the crowd and told them , “ I tell you the truth , I do n't know that I am living among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to the crowd that was following him , he said , “ I tell you , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel ! ”

ID:	4427
INPUT:	Saul oosdląąd
PRED:	Paul Speaks about Saul
GOLD:	Saul 's Conversion

ID:	4428
INPUT:	T'áá díí jį́ t'áá íiyisí shináháshch'íi'go saad honish'į́ ; dinish'nínígíí biláahgo shił nahoni<unk> .
PRED:	I am filled with bitter bitter anguish , and I am the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ My complaint today is still a bitter one , and I try hard not to groan aloud .

ID:	4429
INPUT:	Áko eda'alyaii bich'į' ch'iyáán náádahaaznii'ii yidą́ą́jí baa náánéinísht'į́ . Eda'alyaii éí ts'ídá t'áadoo nilíní da , nidi Diyin God t'éiyá t'ááłá'í hólǫ́ǫgo nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	“ Do n't eat the food we need to worship idols , ” they replied . “ We do n't know that we do n't know God . ”
GOLD:	So , what about eating meat that has been offered to idols ? Well , we all know that an idol is not really a god and that there is only one God .

ID:	4430
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké éí tł'aaji'éé' yiih nídaat'isgo níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' yee yah anídaakah doo , doodaii' shá nidaal'a' doo biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí si'áníjį' hodiyingo haz'ánígi yee yah anídaakah doo , áko doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí doo yee ádidahodidoolt'ih da áádóó doo dadínóonéeł da . Díí yee nihoní'áanii ahoyéel'áágóó Éran índa bits'ą́ą́dóó náás da'ahidoolchíłígíí bá át'ée doo .
PRED:	Aaron and his sons will burn their clothes in the middle of the Tabernacle . They will enter the Tabernacle and burn it in the presence of Aaron and his sons , and they will die forever . They will never die forever . ”
GOLD:	These must be worn whenever Aaron and his sons enter the Tabernacle or approach the altar in the Holy Place to perform their priestly duties . Then they will not incur guilt and die . This is a permanent law for Aaron and all his descendants after him .

ID:	4431
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph nádzáago t'áá jíík'eh baa dahizhdooníłígíí bił yah adajiizhjaa'go ni'jį' bich'į' tsé'yaa dazhneeshjool .
PRED:	When Joseph returned to Egypt , he bowed down to the ground and bowed low before the ground .
GOLD:	When Joseph came home , they gave him the gifts they had brought him , then bowed low to the ground before him .

ID:	4432
INPUT:	Jó , diné yá nihwii'aahínda ch'iyáán t'óó ahayóí yeidiyii'aah .
PRED:	He sends his disciples the food to us , and he gives us food .
GOLD:	By these mighty acts he nourishes the people , giving them food in abundance .

ID:	4433
INPUT:	áko ábizhdííniid , Ch'ínóhkááh ; jó , at'ééd doo daaztsą́ą da , t'óó ałhosh . Nidi t'óó haa daadloh .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You ca n't sleep with a little girl , but I ca n't sleep with him . ”
GOLD:	“ Get out ! ” he told them . “ The girl is n't dead ; she 's only asleep. ” But the crowd laughed at him .

ID:	4434
INPUT:	Da' ákoósh Níneveh ayóó át'é kin haal'áii doo baa a'ááh dínéesįįł da ? Jó , ákwe'é t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi mííl bilááh ánéelą́ą'go áłchíní t'ah doo ákodaniizįįhígíí nish'náajigo índa nishtł'ajigo nitsáhákees doo bił béédahózin da , áádóó naaldlooshii daałį́'ígíí lą'ída hólǫ́ .
PRED:	“ Should I go to the city of Nineveh ? ” he asked . “ There is no one for them , even though he had not been killed by touching a little animal . ”
GOLD:	But Nineveh has more than 120,000 people living in spiritual darkness , not to mention all the animals . Should n't I feel sorry for such a great city ? ”

ID:	4435
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ákwii nidzizį́įgo abínídóó ałní'ní'ą́ąjį' naaltsoos biyi'dóó Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bibee haz'áanii dajííłta' , áádóó ałní'ní'ą́ą́dóó i'íí'ą́ąjį' ádił nida'dziisí'ígíí bee ádaa ch'ídahodziist'ą́ áádóó Bóhólníihii haDiyin God bich'į' nidahodzisá .
PRED:	As they stood in the Book of the Law of the Lord , the God of the Law of God and the people of the Law of the Lord their God .
GOLD:	They remained standing in place for three hours while the Book of the Law of the Lord their God was read aloud to them . Then for three more hours they confessed their sins and worshiped the Lord their God .

ID:	4436
INPUT:	Áko Iiláíjah éí Éíhab baazhdoogááłgóó dashdiiyá ; nít'éé' Samériyagi t'áá íiyisí hodííchįįd lá .
PRED:	So Ahab returned to Samaria , and he became very angry .
GOLD:	So Elijah went to appear before Ahab.Meanwhile , the famine had become very severe in Samaria .

ID:	4437
INPUT:	Kin hadaas'áagi bąąhági ádaat'éii yaa deíkáahii
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Jesus ' Prayer of Thanksgiving

ID:	4438
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' yizhchínígíí bideezhí áyidííniid , Nihizhé'é haastih ; diné ádaat'ínígi át'éego nihá dooyehígíí nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'ááłá'í nidi doo ła' naagháa da .
PRED:	The oldest son said to his father , “ I am the father of our father , and there is no one in the earth . ”
GOLD:	One day the older daughter said to her sister , “ There are no men left anywhere in this entire area , so we ca n't get married like everyone else . And our father will soon be too old to have children .

ID:	4439
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii aa a'ááh nízinígíí áádóó t'óó bik'eda'ayóii diné bada'áłchíní yá yaa naayáhígíí yaa dahaniih laanaa !
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for his wonderful deeds ; let the wonderful things he has done for them .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	4440
INPUT:	Hódzą́ éí adziil biláahdi yá'át'ééh
PRED:	Wisdom Calls for a Hearing
GOLD:	Thoughts on Wisdom and Folly

ID:	4441
INPUT:	Jó , áadi naat'agii éí atsį' hadeintáii doo hólǫ́ǫ da , áádóó jeeshóó' doo hoo'į́į da ;
PRED:	The light will not eat the meat , and the light will grow in the sky .
GOLD:	These are treasures no bird of prey can see , no falcon 's eye observe .

ID:	4442
INPUT:	Dooládó' <unk> go hwiidoo'aał da , háálá Bóhólníihii nídoodáałjį' beiníłką́ , índa Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii í'doołdįįł baa hodoolzhish .
PRED:	Oh , that the Lord will return to you , for he will return to the Almighty and the Almighty will die .
GOLD:	The day of the Lord is near , the day when destruction comes from the Almighty.How terrible that day will be !

ID:	4443
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Éí bijį́įdi Íídam kéyahdóó hastóí dahóyáanii ts'ídá ádeeshdįįł ; Íísa bidziłdóó ak'i'diitįįhii ádeeshdįįł .
PRED:	“ On that day , ” says the Lord , “ I will destroy the wise men of Edom . I will destroy the mountains of Edom .
GOLD:	At that time not a single wise personwill be left in the whole land of Edom , ” says the Lord. “ For on the mountains of EdomI will destroy everyone who has understanding .

ID:	4444
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Kéyah nahaaznii'ígíí bee ééhózinii dá'deeljé'ígíí áádóó ła' doo dá'deeljé'ígíí t'áá áłah nídiinííł , áko nízaadgóó didoonaał biniyé hashtł'ish ásaa' biih dííniłgo ákóne' sinil doo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ The land is left in the middle of the land , which is left in the middle of the land .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Take both this sealed deed and the unsealed copy , and put them into a pottery jar to preserve them for a long time . '

ID:	4445
INPUT:	Bee nóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ayóó át'éii yaa dahalne' doo , áádóó nidziilígíí yaa yádaałti' doo ,
PRED:	You will proclaim your glory to the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies , and your lips will be disgraced .
GOLD:	They will speak of the glory of your kingdom ; they will give examples of your power .

ID:	4446
INPUT:	Dił éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bik'ísíníłtahii t'áá bíí'ohígíí áádóó ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́hígíí ła' nídidííkáałgo Éran áádóó bi'éé' bik'ídííłtah , índa haye'ké áádóó dabi'éé' ałdó' bik'ídadííłtah , áko hó índa ha'éé' dadiyin doo ; haye'ké áádóó dabi'éé' ałdó' dadiyin doo .
PRED:	“ Place the blood of the altar , the anointing oil , the anointing oil , the anointing oil , and the other sons of Aaron and his sons and his sons . Then they will wear their garments and their garments .
GOLD:	Then take some of the blood from the altar and some of the anointing oil , and sprinkle it on Aaron and his sons and on their garments . In this way , they and their garments will be set apart as holy .

ID:	4447
INPUT:	Éí bąągo bee haz'áanii ła' áshłééh : Diné danilíinii , ał'ąą dine'é danilíinii índa bizaad ał'ąą át'éego yee yádaałti'ii éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo biDiyin God bidazhdiilkaalgo bik'ijį' yádajiłti'ii nidahodii'nish doo índa dahaghan kints'iil t'éí ádeidoolííł , háálá kót'éego Diyin God yisdá'iinííł dooleełii doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	“ I am writing these things to say , ‘ I am the meaning of the law of God and other nations and language , Meshach , and Abednego , and Abednego that God will be able to save them . '
GOLD:	Therefore , I make this decree : If any people , whatever their race or nation or language , speak a word against the God of Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego , they will be torn limb from limb , and their houses will be turned into heaps of rubble . There is no other god who can rescue like this ! ”

ID:	4448
INPUT:	áádóó áhodííniid , Da'oht'į́įgo nihighangóó nídeínóhkááh ; nihilį́į́' t'óó adahayóigo áádóó béésh łigaii áádóó óola áádóó béésh łitsoii áádóó béésh nitł'izii índa éé' t'óó ahayóí nihee dahólǫ́ǫgo nihi'ana'í bindaalye'é bąąh nida'soołtseedígíí nihik'isóó bił ałts'ádadi'doohnił .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Go back to your homes , silver , gold , gold , silver , and bronze , iron , and bronze .
GOLD:	he said to them , “ Go back to your homes with the great wealth you have taken from your enemies — the vast herds of livestock , the silver , gold , bronze , and iron , and the large supply of clothing . Share the plunder with your relatives . ”

ID:	4449
INPUT:	Jesus bídahooł'aahii éí John bídahooł'aahii bilááh ánéelą́ą́' silį́į'go áádóó tó yee da'asį́įhgo Férisii danilíinii Jesus yaa dahodiizts'ą́ą́' . Éí Bóhólníihii bił bééhoozin ,
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples heard that John had been baptizing and preached the Good News . Then he heard that Jesus had heard that he had heard him .
GOLD:	Jesus knew the Pharisees had heard that he was baptizing and making more disciples than John

ID:	4450
INPUT:	Ła'da Diyin God bidááhdóó haa náhódóot'įįłí<unk> Diyin God doo hach'į' ííshjání áyósin da .
PRED:	Who is able to stand before God ? Do n't know God 's mysterious plan .
GOLD:	We do n't set the timewhen we will come before God in judgment .

ID:	4451
INPUT:	Nít'éé' , shoo , David bá nidaal'a'í éí Jó'ab yił ana'í yikéé' ííjéé' yę́ędę́ę́' nákaigo ana'í bindaalye'é t'óó ahayóí nídeizhjaa' , nidi Ábner éí Hííbran kin haal'áagi David doo yił naa'aash da , háálá yéé'níłnii'go hózhǫ́ǫgo anáádzáa ni' .
PRED:	When David 's servants returned to David , David 's servants returned from the town of Joab and took a large amount of goods . But Abner did n't let Abner go back to Hebron .
GOLD:	But just after David had sent Abner away in safety , Joab and some of David 's troops returned from a raid , bringing much plunder with them .

ID:	4452
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , aláahgo nihinanit'a'í áádóó nihinaat'áanii danilíinii índa nihizhé'é dajílíinii hoł t'óó nihaa yádahasingo nihił dahalą́ , háálá bąąhági ádeiidzaago hoł nich'į' ádił da'siilziih .
PRED:	O Lord , we have sinned against our king and our ancestors . We have sinned against our ancestors , for we have sinned against our ancestors .
GOLD:	O Lord , we and our kings , princes , and ancestors are covered with shame because we have sinned against you .

ID:	4453
INPUT:	Nizaad t'áá íiyisí niłtólí yee' ; éí bąą ná naal'a'í nizaad ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	But you are very upset , your servant , because you love your word .
GOLD:	Your promises have been thoroughly tested ; that is why I love them so much .

ID:	4454
INPUT:	Saul éí bee bił hóóne'go bá nidaal'a'í ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ anááyiis'a' , nít'éé' éí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego Diyin God yá náádahoolne' . Táadi aleeh góne' Saul éí nidaal'a'í ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ anáádziis'a' , nít'éé' éí ałdó' Diyin God yá náádahoolne' .
PRED:	When Saul heard this , he sent some of the servants to say , “ If God had done this , he sent some of the servants to come to meet God . ”
GOLD:	When Saul heard what had happened , he sent other troops , but they , too , prophesied ! The same thing happened a third time .

ID:	4455
INPUT:	Hak'igi k'os yildohgo ánáyiil'įįh nít'éé' , áádóó tł'ée'go kǫ' há bee hool'ingo ánáyiil'įįh nít'éé' .
PRED:	When the cloud lifted up a cloud , it was light , and it covered it with a fire .
GOLD:	The Lord spread a cloud above them as a coveringand gave them a great fire to light the darkness .

ID:	4456
INPUT:	Áko siláo binanit'a'í bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' náhóóne'go índa Jesus bits'íís yę́ę Jóseph yeidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	So the captain of the guard took Joseph 's body and gave it to Joseph .
GOLD:	The officer confirmed that Jesus was dead , so Pilate told Joseph he could have the body .

ID:	4457
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ání , Záíyangi kéédahoht'íinii , shidine'é nohłíinii , t'áá Ííjip dine'é ádáát'įįdígi át'éego Asíriya dine'é bigish yee atídanihiilaago áádóó bitsihał yee nihik'ijį' daazlį́į'go éí t'áadoo béédaałdzidí doo .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ Listen to me , you people of Israel , my people of Egypt , and you will lie in Egypt .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ O my people in Zion , do not be afraid of the Assyrians when they oppress you with rod and club as the Egyptians did long ago .

ID:	4458
INPUT:	Kót'éego nihił béédahózin : diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bee haz'áanii doo bá ályaa da , nidi doo yik'ehgóó ádaaníiłii índa doo ak'eh dahół'íinii bá ályaa , áádóó doo Diyin God k'ehgo ádaat'éii índa bąąhági ádaaníiłii ałdó' bá ályaa , doo bił dahodiyinii índa Diyin God yee da'ódziihii , bizhé'é índa bimá nideiłtseedii , diné nideiłtseedii bá ályaa ,
PRED:	And you know that the law is made right with God , not by obeying the law of the law . They do n't obey God 's law and obeying the law of God and the law .
GOLD:	For the law was not intended for people who do what is right . It is for people who are lawless and rebellious , who are ungodly and sinful , who consider nothing sacred and defile what is holy , who kill their father or mother or commit other murders .

ID:	4459
INPUT:	T'ah doo e'e'aahgóó , t'ah doo chaha'oh iildóóhgóó tsin bijeeh łikání halchinii mir wolyéii dził bił daní'áágóó índa tsin bijeeh łikání halchinii fránkinsens wolyéii bił dah daask'idgóó deeshááł .
PRED:	As surely as the sun was rising up , it was still long ago by the evening . It was a prostitute , a holy mountain with myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , myrrh , and fragrant incense .
GOLD:	Before the dawn breezes blowand the night shadows flee , I will hurry to the mountain of myrrhand to the hill of frankincense .

ID:	4460
INPUT:	Bee nide áhoot'éhígíí Bóhólníihii baa diní'aah , áko naa áhályą́ą doo . Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii nahjį' kóbidi'doolníłígíí ts'ídá doo yee hwiidooł'aał da .
PRED:	Give justice to the Lord , and he will give justice to those who are righteous .
GOLD:	Give your burdens to the Lord , and he will take care of you.He will not permit the godly to slip and fall .

ID:	4461
INPUT:	Doo áhályáanii t'áadoo bich'į' yáníłti'í , háálá saad bee hódzáanii bee yáníłti'ígíí yidoo'įįł .
PRED:	Do n't speak to the wise , for the words of the wise are wise .
GOLD:	Do n't waste your breath on fools , for they will despise the wisest advice .

ID:	4462
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go ashkii áłts'íísígíí áádóó bimá ałdó' bił t'áá tł'éé' Ííjipgóó ajookai .
PRED:	So the boy got up and went to Egypt . So the boy went to Egypt .
GOLD:	That night Joseph left for Egypt with the child and Mary , his mother ,

ID:	4463
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso doo ádahalyą́ą da índa doo bił éédahózin da . Óola deitsidii t'áá ałtso eda'alyaii ádeił'íinii yaa yádanízingo ádaalne' , háálá bi'eda'alyaii wooch'ííd ádaat'é índa doo nidadidzih da .
PRED:	All people do n't understand what you do . They do n't realize that they are merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely merely things .
GOLD:	The whole human race is foolish and has no knowledge ! The craftsmen are disgraced by the idols they make , for their carefully shaped works are a fraud.These idols have no breath or power .

ID:	4464
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph hazaad yik'idi' yiitįįhgo doo hoł béédahózin da , háálá ata' halne'í há ata' halne' .
PRED:	So Joseph did n't understand what he said , for he said .
GOLD:	Of course , they did n't know that Joseph understood them , for he had been speaking to them through an interpreter .

ID:	4465
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ákódaanéehgo doo t'áá k'ad yaa ákodaniizį́į' da ; jó , Diyin God bizaad bik'ehgo yót'ááh hiníláii ałk'idą́ą́' hólǫ́ , áádóó ni' táyi'dę́ę́' háá'á áádóó tó bee hasht'eelyaa
PRED:	“ But now , ” they said . “ You have rejected the word of God and the heavens and the stars .
GOLD:	They deliberately forget that God made the heavens long ago by the word of his command , and he brought the earth out from the water and surrounded it with water .

ID:	4466
INPUT:	Háísh hóyą́ągo k'os yídóołtahgo yíneel'ą́ ? Háísh wódahdi tó abid yadeidiyooziłgo yíneel'ą́ ?
PRED:	Who gives the rain to the clouds ? Who gives it to the stars ?
GOLD:	Who is wise enough to count all the clouds ? Who can tilt the water jars of heaven

ID:	4467
INPUT:	áádóó k'ad yihahígíí Bóhólníihii doogáałgo bá ashja'ósin índa nihiDiyin God k'éédidoo'nííł baa hodoolzhishígíí dishníigo baa hashne' doo biniyé shiníł'a' , áádóó daachaii t'áá ałtso bił nídahodoojǫǫł .
PRED:	And now I will praise the Lord , the God of Israel , and I will praise you with joy and joy .
GOLD:	He has sent me to tell those who mournthat the time of the Lord 's favor has come , and with it , the day of God 's anger against their enemies .

ID:	4468
INPUT:	Nidi diné iisxíinii kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdázhnííchą́'ídóó t'áá hoolzhishgi hoodzo bitis jííyáago
PRED:	But if the Son of Man returns to the city of refuge ,
GOLD:	“ But if the slayer ever leaves the limits of the city of refuge ,

ID:	4469
INPUT:	Nidi aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii éí ádahooníiłii ayóó ádaat'éii baa nijiyáhígíí , áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' áłchíní , David biYe' nilíinii baa ha'niih doo ! daaníigo dadilwoshgo dayiiłtsą́ągo doo bił dahóózhǫǫd da ,
PRED:	But when the leading priests and teachers of religious law saw the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law , they were shouting , “ Amen ! ”
GOLD:	The leading priests and the teachers of religious law saw these wonderful miracles and heard even the children in the Temple shouting , “ Praise God for the Son of David. ” But the leaders were indignant .

ID:	4470
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é áyooł'įįłii
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	The Rebellion of Israel

ID:	4471
INPUT:	Joogááłgóó bee dah hizhdidoogáałii biishdoogááł , áádóó łoh biishdoolwoł .
PRED:	A lying tongue will be a trap for a trap for a trap .
GOLD:	A trap grabs them by the heel.A snare holds them tight .

ID:	4472
INPUT:	Diné ła'da yoołkáałii ła' t'ah atisígo át'éego yidísin łeh , nidi diné ła' náánásdzį́ , éí yoołkáałii t'áá ałtso aheełt'éego yidísin łeh . Bíni'dii diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bí doo bił naaki danilį́į́ góne' yaa nitsídaakees .
PRED:	Those who say , “ If you want to die , you will be like one of you , but others will be like one of them .
GOLD:	In the same way , some think one day is more holy than another day , while others think every day is alike . You should each be fully convinced that whichever day you choose is acceptable .

ID:	4473
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí bee haz'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí yidiizts'ą́ą'go ák'ina'ooldláád .
PRED:	When the king heard what was written in the Book of the Law , he tore his clothes in despair .
GOLD:	When the king heard what was written in the Book of the Law , he tore his clothes in despair .

ID:	4474
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Ádam yíká ádííniidgo áyidííniid , Háadish naniná ?
PRED:	Then the Lord called for Sodom , “ Where are you looking for me ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	Then the Lord God called to the man , “ Where are you ? ”

ID:	4475
INPUT:	Mt . 19 : <unk>
PRED:	The Land Given to Help
GOLD:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death

ID:	4476
INPUT:	Éí bąą ayóó át'éii nílį́ , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ; jó , doo ła' nigi át'ée da , doodaii' t'áá ni t'éiyá Diyin God nílį́ ; t'áá át'é deísíníilts'ą́'ígíí bik'ehgo ni t'éiyá ayóó át'éii nílį́ .
PRED:	Therefore , O Lord , you are mighty , O Lord , for you are the God of our God , and you are his glorious ways .
GOLD:	“ How great you are , O Sovereign Lord ! There is no one like you . We have never even heard of another God like you !

ID:	4477
INPUT:	Jesus t'óó nídí'níitą́ą́' yę́ędą́ą́' tádiin daats'í binááhai , éí Jóseph biye' ( bi'dó'níigo ) , Jóseph éí Híílai biye' ,
PRED:	Jesus was about twelve years old when he returned to Joseph , he said , “ Joseph is the son of Joseph . ”
GOLD:	Jesus was about thirty years old when he began his public ministry.Jesus was known as the son of Joseph.Joseph was the son of Heli .

ID:	4478
INPUT:	Nijéí joozba'go áádóó Diyin God binááł a'ohgo ádi'nilyaago bizaad yee díí kéyah índa ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí yik'ijį' haadzíi'go dísíníts'ą́ą'go , shinááł t'áá ni a'ohgo ádi'nilyaago áádóó ni'éé' ák'inéíníldláád índa shinááł nichago biniinaa shí ałdó' nisodizin diséts'ą́ą́' , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	You have heard what you have done in the sight of God and the land you have done . You have heard what you have done for me , and you have said to me , ‘ You have heard what I have done . '
GOLD:	You were sorry and humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this city and its people . You humbled yourself and tore your clothing in despair and wept before me in repentance . And I have indeed heard you , says the Lord .

ID:	4479
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'éí bee yisdá'iildéehii bee hólǫ́ ; bee ak'ijiinídlíii éí nidine'é bee dahólǫ́ǫ le' ! Síilah .
PRED:	Let us praise the Lord , for he has made us faithful ! Interlude
GOLD:	Victory comes from you , O Lord.May you bless your people.Interlude

ID:	4480
INPUT:	Belsházar wáin dzizlįhgo hazhé'é Nébukadnézzar yę́ę Jerúsalemgi kin bii' sohodizin biyi'dóó óola łeets'aa' índa béésh łigaii łeets'aa' ch'íyiizhjaa'ii nináhidoojihgo bee hadzoodzíí' , áko aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó hakéé'dóó bídahólníihii índa hwe'asdzą́ą́ danilíinii áádóó hwe'asdzą́ą́ dajíł'ínída éí yee da'doodlį́į́ł .
PRED:	One day Nebuchadnezzar had taken an iron wine from the Temple of his father , gold , gold , gold , gold , and gold . Then he said to his wives , “ He will drink wine and drink the wine of his wives . ”
GOLD:	While Belshazzar was drinking the wine , he gave orders to bring in the gold and silver cups that his predecessor , Nebuchadnezzar , had taken from the Temple in Jerusalem . He wanted to drink from them with his nobles , his wives , and his concubines .

ID:	4481
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí naat'áanii biyaa sinilígíí yah aakaigo ata' gi dań'dítį́hígi dineezbin ; éí kódaolyé : Néíyergal-sharíízer áádóó Sám<unk> bo , <unk> kim , Rábsaris nilíinii , Néíyergal-sharíízer , éí Rábmag nilíinii áádóó ałdó' Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í naat'áanii biyaa sinilígíí náádaała' yił dineezbin .
PRED:	“ The king of Babylon came to the king of Babylon , who took the foundations of the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , and the Assyrian king of Babylon .
GOLD:	All the officers of the Babylonian army came in and sat in triumph at the Middle Gate : Nergal-sharezer of Samgar , and Nebo-sarsekim , a chief officer , and Nergal-sharezer , the king 's adviser , and all the other officers of the king of Babylon .

ID:	4482
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í t'áá ałtso éí aláahgo naat'áanii bidáń'dítį́hígi nidaakaígíí hach'į' yaa áńdaat'įįhgo Héíman deidósin łeh , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii hódéét'i'ii yee haadzíí' . Nidi Mórdiikai éí doo hach'į' yaa ánát'įįh da índa doo hodósin da .
PRED:	So the king ordered that his officials had no king to fear the king , for they did n't know what Mordecai had done to Mordecai . But Mordecai refused to do what he had done .
GOLD:	All the king 's officials would bow down before Haman to show him respect whenever he passed by , for so the king had commanded . But Mordecai refused to bow down or show him respect .

ID:	4483
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jó'ab ni'jį' nitsideelgo'go tsé'yaa neeztį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' ahééh niizį́į́' , áko Jó'ab ádííniid , Díí jį́ ná naal'a'í nishłíinii díí shił bééhoozin : ajooba' bee shich'oha'néego shąąh tsídíníkééz , bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í bíyókeedígíí yá t' áá ákót'éego áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then Joab bowed down to the ground and cried out to the king and said , “ This is what I am doing to you today . I am the king of Moab , my lord the king . ”
GOLD:	Joab bowed with his face to the ground in deep respect and said , “ At last I know that I have gained your approval , my lord the king , for you have granted me this request ! ”

ID:	4484
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ádzíłtso da'jííyą́ą'go hwiih dadzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	So they ate all ate and ate it .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted ,

ID:	4485
INPUT:	Naal'a'í jílíinii ákójít'į́įgo hananit'a'í níyáago éí hak'ihojidlí .
PRED:	God blesses those who are wise , and he blesses those who are wise .
GOLD:	If the master returns and finds that the servant has done a good job , there will be a reward .

ID:	4486
INPUT:	John Tó Yee Asį́įhii yizhchį́
PRED:	The Birth of John the Baptist
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist

ID:	4487
INPUT:	Áko Júdah dine'é éí hak'is Símiyan dine'é ádabizhdííniid , Haa'íshą' kéyah nihaa deet'ánígíí bich'į' nihił doohkahgo Kéínan dine'é bił da'ahidiigą́ą́ł . Índa nihí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego kéyah nihaa deet'ánígíí bich'į' nihił dadiibah . Áko Símiyan dine'é hodiikaigo hoł dah diikai .
PRED:	Then Judah said to Simeon , “ Let 's go and fight against us . Let us go with us , and we will fight against us . We will fight the men of Canaan . ” So the men of Simeon went to fight the land of Simeon .
GOLD:	The men of Judah said to their relatives from the tribe of Simeon , “ Join with us to fight against the Canaanites living in the territory allotted to us . Then we will help you conquer your territory. ” So the men of Simeon went with Judah .

ID:	4488
INPUT:	Asdzání ha'niyóodii Féro áyidííniid , Díí Hííbrew asdzání doo Ííjip asdzánígi ádaat'ée da , háálá éí dabiinéigo ha'niyóodii éí t'áadoo yílyeedí t'ahaa'go nida'iiłchííh .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said to Pharaoh , “ This is not a Hebrew woman , because the midwives have become Pharaoh 's slave , so that no one could ever become Pharaoh . ”
GOLD:	“ The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women , ” the midwives replied . “ They are more vigorous and have their babies so quickly that we can not get there in time . ”

ID:	4489
INPUT:	aláahgo bee níhólníihgo nił haz'áanii biyi' diné léi' diyin danilíinii biníłch'i bii' hólǫ́ . Nizhé'é bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' bee hódzáanii áádóó bee ak'idi'yiitįįhii bee éí diyin danilíinii bibee hódzáanii bii' hólónígíí bééhoozin índa aláahgo naat'áanii Nébukadnézzar nizhé'é yę́ę éí álílee k'ehgo ída'ooł'įįłii , déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii , Kaldíya dine'é danilíinii áádóó náásgóó ádahodooníiłii yaa halne'ii yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo ábi'diilyaa .
PRED:	And when you were in the Kingdom of religious law , a man who was wise in the reign of the reign of the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar , who was in the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon . He said , “ He did what he tells you . ”
GOLD:	There is a man in your kingdom who has within him the spirit of the holy gods . During Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , this man was found to have insight , understanding , and wisdom like that of the gods . Your predecessor , the king — your predecessor King Nebuchadnezzar — made him chief over all the magicians , enchanters , astrologers , and fortune-tellers of Babylon .

ID:	4490
INPUT:	Dził Záíyandi , Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'į́ danohłíinii , doo atínínáádadinohdleeh da doo ; nicha yidiizts'ą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí nihaa jiidoobaał ; t'áá yidiizts'ą'í nihich'į' ééhodoosįįł .
PRED:	Listen to Jerusalem , O Jerusalem , you people of Jerusalem , you people of Jerusalem , and weep for your mercy .
GOLD:	O people of Zion , who live in Jerusalem , you will weep no more.He will be gracious if you ask for help.He will surely respond to the sound of your cries .

ID:	4491
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ákódzaago hastą́ą́h jį́ aleeh góne' bááh naakidi ákódanéelt'e'go nídayiizláá' : ómer bee í'neel'ąąhí naakidi ookááł bíighah hódáághah , áko dah oonéłígíí bitahdóó bídahólníihii t'áá ałtso Mózes yaa yíkaigo yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	On the sixth day of the festival , two loaves of bread , two quarts with each piece of each day . So Moses went to the assembly of Moses and Aaron .
GOLD:	On the sixth day , they gathered twice as much as usual — four quarts for each person instead of two . Then all the leaders of the community came and asked Moses for an explanation .

ID:	4492
INPUT:	Áko ch'ééh hadahoneeztą́ą'go Jéísan áádóó ałk'isóó danilíinii kin haal'áagi naat'áanii yaa dayiizdzį́įzgo hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Díí diné éí t'áá ałtsogóó diné yił hadahoneeshchaadígíí t'áá éí ní'áazhgo ,
PRED:	So the apostles returned to the city of Canaan , and the leaders of the city was shouting , “ This is the message of the Jewish leaders ! ”
GOLD:	Not finding them there , they dragged out Jason and some of the other believers instead and took them before the city council . “ Paul and Silas have caused trouble all over the world , ” they shouted , “ and now they are here disturbing our city , too .

ID:	4493
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ák'ina'ooldláadgo ání , Diyin God baa'ihgo bá hadzoodzíí' . Ha'át'íishą' biniyé ła' ch'ínáádahót'aah doo ? Jó , k'ad Diyin God baa'ihgo bá hadzoodzíi'go dahosidoots'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then the high priest said , “ Why are you teachers of God ? Why have you heard this ? ” And now we have heard God 's message ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest tore his clothing to show his horror and said , “ Blasphemy ! Why do we need other witnesses ? You have all heard his blasphemy .

ID:	4494
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Queen Athaliah Rules in Judah

ID:	4495
INPUT:	óola łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo shékel wolyéii neeznáá dah hidiidloh bíighahgo éí bii' tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii hadeezbingo ,
PRED:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .
GOLD:	He also brought a gold container weighing four ounces , which was filled with incense .

ID:	4496
INPUT:	Ak'i'diitįįh bee ádinii éí doo hóshkał yaa bił hózhǫ́ , nidi diné ak'i'diitįįhii éí yigááłgóó k'íhoołdǫǫł .
PRED:	A person makes a fool to a fool , but a person with foolishness .
GOLD:	Foolishness brings joy to those with no sense ; a sensible person stays on the right path .

ID:	4497
INPUT:	David honoojíidi naagháago éí Néíbal bidibé táidigéeshgo yiyíínii' .
PRED:	David left the wilderness of Nabal 's flock and cut it into the wilderness .
GOLD:	When David heard that Nabal was shearing his sheep ,

ID:	4498
INPUT:	Dinégi át'éego ayóó'ó'ó'ní bee át'ááh <unk> nil . Ha'deestsoł biniyé hach'į' yaa ásdzaago hazáát'i'í haa diinil .
PRED:	As for us , God 's love is forgiven , so we can be afraid of him .
GOLD:	I led Israel alongwith my ropes of kindness and love.I lifted the yoke from his neck , and I myself stooped to feed him .

ID:	4499
INPUT:	Díí bąą kót'éego ha'oodzíí' , Ałhoshí nílíinii , ch'éénídzííd , dasínítsą́ą́dę́ę́' nídiidááh ! Áko Christ nik'i' diiłdíin doo .
PRED:	That is why I am saying , O God , and you will be afraid of the dead .
GOLD:	for the light makes everything visible . This is why it is said , “ Awake , O sleeper , rise up from the dead , and Christ will give you light . ”

ID:	4500
INPUT:	Doo dahonohsáanii , hódzą́ nabik'ítsáhákeesii bik'ida'doohtįįh , áádóó doo dahóyáanii danohłíinii , ak'ida'doohtįįh .
PRED:	Fools are wise , foolish , foolish , and fools are wise .
GOLD:	You simple people , use good judgment.You foolish people , show some understanding .

ID:	4501
INPUT:	Óola áádóó béésh łigaii daashíínéelą́ą'di miildi ánéelą́'ígíí biláahgo bee hosíníł'áanii bee hahídziihígíí shił yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	I am better than silver and gold , but you are better than a thousand gold .
GOLD:	Your instructions are more valuable to methan millions in gold and silver .

ID:	4502
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí Diyin God éí Ízrel dine'é dabijéí bii' baa'ihii ádaadinii yaa jooba' .
PRED:	Yes , the God of Israel is filled with the hearts of the Israelites .
GOLD:	Truly God is good to Israel , to those whose hearts are pure .

ID:	4503
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Jó , yá'ąąshdę́ę́' bááh nináłtį́įhgo nihá ádeeshłííł , áko diné ch'éédajikahgo t'áá hwíighahígo t'áá ákwíí jį́ nínádajiidlah doo , áádóó hahasíid doo , áko shibee haz'áanii daats'í bik'ehgo jookah doo , doo daats'í bik'ehgo jookah da doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Look , I will make you some bread from heaven . I will feed them , and they will be able to eat any food . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Look , I 'm going to rain down food from heaven for you . Each day the people can go out and pick up as much food as they need for that day . I will test them in this to see whether or not they will follow my instructions .

ID:	4504
INPUT:	Nídiidáahgo Dził Ábarim ní'áhígíí bighą́ą'gi Nííbo dahats'osíjį' éí Mó'ab kéyah biyi' Jériko binaashiijį' hasínáahgo Kéínan kéyah éí Ízrel dine'é bíí' dooleełgo baa diní'ánígíí dínííł'įįł .
PRED:	“ Go to the eastern border of Moab , across the land of Moab , and give it to the people of Moab . Go to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	“ Go to Moab , to the mountains east of the river , and climb Mount Nebo , which is across from Jericho . Look out across the land of Canaan , the land I am giving to the people of Israel as their own special possession .

ID:	4505
INPUT:	Doo ákwii át'éii k'izhdííláhígíí éí t'áadoo dabiniyéhíii áłah ázhdoolííł , áádóó háháchį'go nazhnit'áhígíí nidoot'ih .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked be disgraced , and he will make them pure .
GOLD:	Those who plant injustice will harvest disaster , and their reign of terror will come to an end .

ID:	4506
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniihí bíighahgi Bóhólníihii sizį́įgo yiiłtsą́ áádóó áshíłní , Kin bíyah daniitł'inígíí bílátahgi nídiiłhaałgo ch'é'étiingi naa dah sitání ditsxizgo bąą áyah daniitł'inii t'áá ájít'é hak'ijį' nidahałdaasgo ádíílííł , áko dadzidziihígíí diltłish bee nidahodeestsił . Bitahdę́ę́' ch'íjílyeed nidi , doo yóó'azhdoolwoł da áádóó bitahdę́ę́' ch'íjígháah nidi , doo yisdázhdoogáał da .
PRED:	When he saw me standing beside the altar , he said to me , “ The Lord has given me victory over the walls of the earth , and the ravines of the earth will disappear , but they will never return to the ground . ”
GOLD:	Then I saw a vision of the Lord standing beside the altar . He said , “ Strike the tops of the Temple columns , so that the foundation will shake.Bring down the roofon the heads of the people below.I will kill with the sword those who survive.No one will escape !

ID:	4507
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nihinaadeełí áádóó nihits'ą́ą́dóó nidahachíihii áádóó nihilį́į́' nidahachíihii índa nihidáda'ak'ehdóó aneest'ą' lą'í nihee nídahoodleełgo íidoolííł ; danihizhé'é yę́ę kéyah yeididoo'áałgo yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíi'ii bikáa'gi nihik'idahojidlíigo íidoolííł .
PRED:	And the Lord will give you this land , and he will give you a land to our ancestors . He will give you a land to our ancestors , and he will give you a land to our ancestors .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will give you prosperity in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you , blessing you with many children , numerous livestock , and abundant crops .

ID:	4508
INPUT:	Náhááh bii' ééhidichídígíí
PRED:	A Message about Babylon
GOLD:	Release for Debtors

ID:	4509
INPUT:	Náánáła' Íílam nááhoolyéédóó diné t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindóó ba'aan dį́į́' .
PRED:	The family of Elam1,254
GOLD:	The citizens of West Elam1,254

ID:	4510
INPUT:	Áko David nízhdii'na'go Júdah kéyahgi Béíyal kin shijaa'dóó diné hoł naakaígíí t'áá ałtso bił dashdiikai ; áádę́ę́' Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii nídazhdoo'ááł biniyé ádajit'į́ ; éí diyingo naal'a'í chérabim wolyéii ałch'į' sizínígíí bidejí hólǫ́ǫgo éí tsits'aa' t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee bi'dójí .
PRED:	So David and his men returned from the land of Judah and went to the Ark of God . They went to the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	He led them to Baalah of Judah to bring back the Ark of God , which bears the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim .

ID:	4511
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá íiyisí bąąh bíni' , nidi ádee hadzoodzí'ígíí índa haa haaskaigo bił nidzíiztánígíí biniinaa at'ééd t'óó jidínóo'ahígíí doo háni' nilį́į da .
PRED:	Then the king took a solemn oath , but he refused to drink the vow of her vow . She was not a girl who was not a virgin .
GOLD:	Then the king deeply regretted what he had said ; but because of the vows he had made in front of his guests , he could n't refuse her .

ID:	4512
INPUT:	T'óó áhodil'íní nílíinii , áłtsé nástáán ninák'ee sitánígíí hanitįįh , áko índa hazhó'ó ííní'į́įgo nik'is binák'e oolts'idígíí bá hadíí'ááł .
PRED:	“ Son of man , get rid of the log in your eye , and you will harvest the log in the log in your own eye .
GOLD:	Hypocrite ! First get rid of the log in your own eye ; then you will see well enough to deal with the speck in your friend 's eye .

ID:	4513
INPUT:	Náádahaniihii t'áadoo biniyéhí daígíí t'áadoo nidahohjáhí ; tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii áádóó hááníbąsgo nihi'áłah ná'ádleehígíí áádóó nihihá'áyį́į́h jį́ áádóó dílzingo áłah nídaahdleehígíí doo yinishdin da ; doo ákwii át'éii bił naazhóodgo baa áłah nídaahdleehgo doo shił aaníi da .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of them ! Do n't be afraid of these things , for I will make atonement for the Sabbath days of atonement cover the holy assembly of the Temple and the Lord .
GOLD:	Stop bringing me your meaningless gifts ; the incense of your offerings disgusts me ! As for your celebrations of the new moon and the Sabbathand your special days for fasting — they are all sinful and false.I want no more of your pious meetings .

ID:	4514
INPUT:	Kédaayah naaznilígíí t'áá ałtso bii'dę́ę́' áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bitahdóó nínánihidiyeeshdlahgo t'áá nihí nihikéyah biih nánihideeshnił .
PRED:	I will drive you out the land of the earth , and I will drive you out the land of the earth .
GOLD:	For I will gather you up from all the nations and bring you home again to your land .

ID:	4515
INPUT:	Shich'il na'atł'o'ii k'idoolyáhígíí ha'át'íí lá t'áá íídą́ą́' t'áá ha'át'éhígoda ánáádeeshłííł nít'éé' lá . Ch'il na'atł'o'ii yá'át'éehii bíká dínísh'į́į'ii ha'át'éegoshą' ch'il na'atł'o'ii dík'ǫ́zhígíida bąąh hazlį́į́' lá ?
PRED:	“ What did I say ? What did I do ? Why should I do it ? ” I asked . “ How could I get the grapes ? ”
GOLD:	What more could I have done for my vineyardthat I have not already done ? When I expected sweet grapes , why did my vineyard give me bitter grapes ?

ID:	4516
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , Géízadóó dajílíinii táadi , doodaii' dį́įdi bee haz'áanii k'ídajizti'go biniinaa dooshą' léi' t'áadoo atíháshłééh lá , háálá diné t'áá ałtso t'óó ninádeideez'ą́ągo yisnááh biniyé Íídam dine'é yaa deideez'ą́ .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The people of Gaza , but I will not let them go unpunished , for I am determined to destroy them . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Gaza have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They sent whole villages into exile , selling them as slaves to Edom .

ID:	4517
INPUT:	Diné t'áá aaníígóó halne'ii danohłį́įgo bíni'dii nihik'is ła' t'áá kǫ́ǫ́ awáalyaa sidáa doo . Nidi nihí t'éiyá niha'áłchíní dichin danilíinii bich'į' tł'oh naadą́ą́' nihidadoohééł .
PRED:	“ If you are a prophet among you , let anyone die in prison . But if you are hungry , you will be hungry .
GOLD:	If you really are honest men , choose one of your brothers to remain in prison . The rest of you may go home with grain for your starving families .

ID:	4518
INPUT:	Áko kin bighą́ą'di Ábsalam bá níbaal dah deisbaal áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso binááł Ábsalam hazhé'é ba'ákéí yíł'íní bił yah aníjídááh .
PRED:	So Absalom and all the men of Israel arrived at the camp at the camp at the camp .
GOLD:	So they set up a tent on the palace roof where everyone could see it , and Absalom went in and had sex with his father 's concubines .

ID:	4519
INPUT:	Nít'éé' áhodííniid , Nitsilí nádzáago , nizhé'é éí béégashii yáázh neesk'ahígíí yiyiisxį́ , háálá doo haa dayidzaagóó índa doo át'éhígóó haa nádzá .
PRED:	Then he said to his brother , “ Your father is dead , for he has killed his donkey and killed him . ”
GOLD:	‘ Your brother is back , ' he was told , ‘ and your father has killed the fattened calf . We are celebrating because of his safe return . '

ID:	4520
INPUT:	Bilą́ąjį' kǫ' ó'oołdįįł índa bikéédę́ę́' kǫ' naanídoonałígíí i'diiłk'ą́ą́h . Bidáahgi éí Ííden dá'ák'eh yę́ę honoolnin , nidi bikéédę́ę́' honoojíígóó t'áá át'é t'áá ádzaaí silį́į'ii nahalin , áádóó ts'ídá doo yisdáhóót'i' da hazlį́į́' .
PRED:	He destroyed the pillar of fire and burning sulfur from the middle of the land of Eden , the land of Eden , the land of Eden , and the land of Eden became a wilderness .
GOLD:	Fire burns in front of them , and flames follow after them.Ahead of them the land liesas beautiful as the Garden of Eden.Behind them is nothing but desolation ; not one thing escapes .

ID:	4521
INPUT:	Áádóó nihiBóhólníihii nízaadgóó ha'ólnínígíí yisdá'iildééh át'éego baa nitsídaahkees . Nihik'is Paul ayóó'ádeíníi'níinii bee hódzáanii baa deet'ánígíí ałdó' t'áá ákót'éego yee nihich'į' ak'e'ashchį́ .
PRED:	And if you love the Lord , dear friend , be saved because of your fellow believers in the province of the Lord , we are writing to you .
GOLD:	And remember , our Lord 's patience gives people time to be saved . This is what our beloved brother Paul also wrote to you with the wisdom God gave him —

ID:	4522
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii shich'į' hanáánáádzíi'go kóní ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	This is another message that came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4523
INPUT:	Diné nahagizii doo nahjį' niidó'ááł át'éégóó hináanii éí hosh índa łoh bá hólǫ́ , nidi diné hwii' sizíinii baa áhojilyáanii éí ákót'éii nízaadi bits'ą́ądi hojílǫ́ .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked fall into a trap , but a life-giving fountain is a life-giving fountain to the wicked .
GOLD:	Corrupt people walk a thorny , treacherous road ; whoever values life will avoid it .

ID:	4524
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Blesses the Children

ID:	4525
INPUT:	Áyaanída Séítan t'áá bí níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í nilíinii nidi , łahgo át'éego diyingo naal'a'í bits'ádi'nídínígi át'éego yí'ínídiil'įįh .
PRED:	Satan Satan Satan Satan Satan Satan , but his angels can not be healed by the angel of the devil .
GOLD:	But I am not surprised ! Even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light .

ID:	4526
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God haYe' nilíinii nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' jiníł'a'ígíí éí doo nihokáá' dine'é yá nihodiyoo'ááł biniyé jiníł'a' da , nidi bí bee nihokáá' dine'é yisdádoo'nił biniyé jiníł'a' .
PRED:	For the Son of God has sent his Son into the world , but he will not allow the world to save us .
GOLD:	God sent his Son into the world not to judge the world , but to save the world through him .

ID:	4527
INPUT:	Áko lą'í dabibeeldléí atiingóó há dayíłkaad , náánáła' éí atiin bąąhgóó tsin bi'iil dadíłch'ilii dayiigéeshgo atiingóó há dayíłjeeh .
PRED:	Then many disciples threw their garments on the road on the road to the road on the road to the road .
GOLD:	Many in the crowd spread their garments on the road ahead of him , and others spread leafy branches they had cut in the fields .

ID:	4528
INPUT:	Ákohgo naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso Jeremáíyah yaa yíkaigo nidayídééłkid , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii nahoneeztą́ą́' yę́ęgi át'éego bich'į' hadzoodzíí' . Áko t'áadoo yił ahił náádahoolne' da , háálá ahił hoolne'ígíí t'áadoo yi'nii' da .
PRED:	So the king sent Jeremiah to tell him what he had done , and he did n't tell him what he had said .
GOLD:	Sure enough , it was n't long before the king 's officials came to Jeremiah and asked him why the king had called for him . But Jeremiah followed the king 's instructions , and they left without finding out the truth . No one had overheard the conversation between Jeremiah and the king .

ID:	4529
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii t'áá ałtso hats'ą́ą́' dah diijée'go yóó'aheeswod .
PRED:	So the disciples got up and fled .
GOLD:	Then all his disciples deserted him and ran away .

ID:	4530
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go shił áhoodzaago diné léi' łį́į́' łichíí' léi' bił yildloshgo yiiłtsą́ , jó'akon . Bokooh góyaa mértal naazkaadígíí bitahgi łį́į́' bił sizį́ . Bikéédę́ę́' łį́į́' daalchíí' áádóó daastł'inii índa daalgaii naazį́ .
PRED:	When I saw a huge crowd , I saw a huge crowd standing among the trees , and the grapevines were decorated with olive trees .
GOLD:	In a vision during the night , I saw a man sitting on a red horse that was standing among some myrtle trees in a small valley . Behind him were riders on red , brown , and white horses .

ID:	4531
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii binahat'a' hool'áágóó hólǫ́ ; t'áá ałtso oochííłgóó ni'níchį́ bijį́įjį' bijéí biyi'dóó yee yaa nitsíkeesii hool'áágóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	The Lord is his plans forever ; his heart is a permanent law for all generations .
GOLD:	But the Lord 's plans stand firm forever ; his intentions can never be shaken .

ID:	4532
INPUT:	Áko díí bee há ha'oodzí'ígíí bik'ee Jóseph índa Mary t'óó bił ahayóí .
PRED:	This was the report of Joseph 's sister , Mary , and Joseph 's sister .
GOLD:	Jesus ' parents were amazed at what was being said about him .

ID:	4533
INPUT:	Aheełt'éii índa ał'ąą át'éii áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éego bee na'nitinii
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	More Proverbs of Solomon

ID:	4534
INPUT:	Abínígo náhást'éigi oolkiłgo tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' hoł ada'askaal .
PRED:	About that time Jesus was crucified with him .
GOLD:	It was nine o'clock in the morning when they crucified him .

ID:	4535
INPUT:	Áájí éí ats'íís t'éí hoł hólǫ́ , nidi nihí éí nihiDiyin God Bóhólníihii nihíká adoolwołgo anaa'gi nihá nidoobah . Áko diné éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Heziikáíyah saad hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí yee hada'oosníí' .
PRED:	But when we are dead , we will fight against the Lord our God , the God of Judah will fight against us . Then Hezekiah will fight against the king of Judah .
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	4536
INPUT:	Ła' diltłish aa aalgeedígíí nahalingo yáłti' , nidi diné hóyáanii bizaad éí chánah áná'oodlííł .
PRED:	Some who have heard the sword of a sword , but the words of the wise have heard their words .
GOLD:	Some people make cutting remarks , but the words of the wise bring healing .

ID:	4537
INPUT:	Kush biye'ké éí Sííba áádóó Hávilah áádóó <unk> ta áádóó Réíyamah índa <unk> tiika daolyé . Réíyamah biye'ké éí Shííba áádóó Díídan wolyé .
PRED:	The descendants of Sheba and Dedan were unable to get Ramah . The sons of Sheba and Dedan were unable to stop Ramah .
GOLD:	The descendants of Cush were Seba , Havilah , Sabtah , Raamah , and Sabteca . The descendants of Raamah were Sheba and Dedan .

ID:	4538
INPUT:	bikáá' adání áádóó bibeedí t'áá ałtso índa bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áhígíí áádóó bił chodao'íinii t'áá ałtso índa bikáá' náá'iiniihí éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bá ályaaígíida
PRED:	the table and all its utensils ; the washbasin with incense burners and all its utensils ;
GOLD:	the table and all its utensils , the lampstand and all its accessories , the incense altar ,

ID:	4539
INPUT:	Áko ałdó' t'áá ádzaagóó Diyin God baa dahwiilne'go nihéédahoozin doo nít'éé' , háálá Diyin God éí Christ néidiisá dadii'níigo dahwiilne' . Jó , daneeznánígíí t'áá aaníí doo náábi'diiljeehgóogo , Diyin God éí Christ doo néidiisáa da doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	As soon as we preach the Good News , it was not God 's way to God , for they would not be able to drink . For God would never be able to give us a new life for Christ .
GOLD:	And we apostles would all be lying about God — for we have said that God raised Christ from the grave . But that ca n't be true if there is no resurrection of the dead .

ID:	4540
INPUT:	T'áá áko hajeeyi' aní'díídláád índa hazaad doo át'éhígóó t'áá bééhózínígo hadzoodzíí' .
PRED:	Then Jesus told the people what had happened , and he told them what had happened .
GOLD:	Instantly the man could hear perfectly , and his tongue was freed so he could speak plainly !

ID:	4541
INPUT:	Nił honeezdogo t'áá íiyisí yínííł nanináa doo ; bik'ee ił nihooyeehii áádóó t'áadoo siláhígóó ádahale'ii bee adlání éí nádí Samériya bibee adlání át'é .
PRED:	But Adonijah replied , “ I will live in Samaria , so that you will live in Samaria .
GOLD:	Drunkenness and anguish will fill you , for your cup is filled to the brim with distress and desolation , the same cup your sister Samaria drank .

ID:	4542
INPUT:	Ákohgo Tahápaniizdi Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then this message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then at Tahpanhes , the Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	4543
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' halgaidę́ę́' nááda'iiłniihii tsé nídeiztł'in .
PRED:	They also brought the priests from the field and the priests .
GOLD:	The next repairs were made by the priests from the surrounding region .

ID:	4544
INPUT:	t'óó doo áháshyą́ą da nít'éé' áádóó t'áadoo le'é doo shił bééhózin da nít'éé' ; ninááł naaldlooshii nahonishłin nít'éé' .
PRED:	I could n't know what I am ; I 'm not like a wild animal .
GOLD:	I was so foolish and ignorant — I must have seemed like a senseless animal to you .

ID:	4545
INPUT:	Ákwe'é tó t'óó ahayóigo bąą tsin yíl'áhígíí t'áá ałtso yilááh níísą́ , bits'áoz'a' lą'í áádóó danineez daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	“ Go and eat the water of the river , and we ate it .
GOLD:	This great tree towered high , higher than all the other trees around it.It prospered and grew long thick branchesbecause of all the water at its roots .

ID:	4546
INPUT:	Nidi Ámrii éí Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshóonii baa nijiyá , áádóó halą́ąjį' naat'áanii danilį́į́ nít'é'ígíí éí t'áá ałtso dabiláhígo ájíít'įįd .
PRED:	But Omri did what was evil in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	But Omri did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , even more than any of the kings before him .

ID:	4547
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó dé'éyóní nishłį́ ; nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii shits'ąą nídóół'įįh yíila' !
PRED:	“ You are the ones of the earth , and you are my instructions .
GOLD:	I am only a foreigner in the land.Do n't hide your commands from me !

ID:	4548
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é danohłíinii índa Ízrel dine'é danohłíinii , ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó yóó'abí'oodzíi'ii danohłį́į́ yę́ędą́'ígi át'éego yisdánihideesh'niłgo nihits'ą́ą́dóó ak'ihojidlí hólǫ́ǫ doo . T'áadoo nihił daayé'í , nidi háni'dii danihidziilgo ída'dołnééh .
PRED:	“ O Judah and Judah , you people of Judah , are the ancient boundary of Judah . I will be afraid of you , but you will be saved .
GOLD:	Among the other nations , Judah and Israel became symbols of a cursed nation . But no longer ! Now I will rescue you and make you both a symbol and a source of blessing . So do n't be afraid . Be strong , and get on with rebuilding the Temple !

ID:	4549
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Jó , danizhé'é yę́ę bił da'íłhosh doo áádóó díí dine'é nídahididookahgo dé'éyóní kéyahgi kéédahat'íinii bidiyin dabidi'níinii bee ahída'aldahii yikéé' naa nánoojahgo ałtah nihidooldah áádóó yóó'ashididoo'ááł índa shibee aha'deet'áanii bee bił ahadadi'nisht'áanii nideidiyootih .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Look , the people of Israel will lie in the land of the land where they worship other gods . They will not commit adultery with their gods and worship other gods , and they will worship my covenant with me .
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ You are about to die and join your ancestors . After you are gone , these people will begin to worship foreign gods , the gods of the land where they are going . They will abandon me and break my covenant that I have made with them .

ID:	4550
INPUT:	Áádóó éí oonéłígíí bíighah ch'ízhníyáago hánaaí baazhníyáajį' tsosts'idi ni'jį' yaa ádziidzaa .
PRED:	So he went to the camp and bowed low before his brother .
GOLD:	Then Jacob went on ahead . As he approached his brother , he bowed to the ground seven times before him .

ID:	4551
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní , Nílááh , díí Dził Ábarim góde hasínáahgo kéyah éí Ízrel dine'é baa diní'ánígíí dínííł'įįł .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go down to the mountains of Israel , and I will see you . ”
GOLD:	One day the Lord said to Moses , “ Climb one of the mountains east of the river , and look out over the land I have given the people of Israel .

ID:	4552
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bitahgóó t'áadoo biniyéhígóó ił áhát'ínígíí índa t'áá ádzaagóó ił ch'ídahwii'aahgo yee yádaałti'ii doo t'áá náás dayíłt'éeh da doo .
PRED:	No one will ever become proud among the people of Israel , and they will ever see what they say .
GOLD:	“ There will be no more false visions and flattering predictions in Israel .

ID:	4553
INPUT:	Atsoo' nilínígíí
PRED:	A Vision of your tongue
GOLD:	Controlling the Tongue

ID:	4554
INPUT:	Nílááh , wohkah , baa nánihooshkąąh , áko nínádít'į́hígi nihił béédahodoozįįł áádóó háishą' áadi biiłtsą́ , háálá éí diné ayóogo bina'adlo'go shił hóóne' .
PRED:	“ Go to me , ” I said . “ I know that you are like those who are wise , but I am filled with integrity . ”
GOLD:	Go and check again to be sure of where he is staying and who has seen him there , for I know that he is very crafty .

ID:	4555
INPUT:	Háálá diné ayóó'ádadó'níi doo , béeso yíchą́deídéelni' doo , ádaa daha'niih doo , be'áshodahódli' doo , bizadahóchį' doo , bishchíinii doo yik'eh dahół'į́į da doo , doo ahééh danízin da doo , doo bił dahodiyin da doo ,
PRED:	For they will not love the money of food , and they will never be filled with joy . They will not obey God 's laws , and they will never obey them .
GOLD:	For people will love only themselves and their money . They will be boastful and proud , scoffing at God , disobedient to their parents , and ungrateful . They will consider nothing sacred .

ID:	4556
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ádaahníiłii , Bóhólníihii bee nihił nidahoozhǫǫh ! T'áá ákogi ádaat'éii naa dahaniihgo beełt'é .
PRED:	May the godly be filled with joy , O Lord , for we are righteous in your sight .
GOLD:	Let the godly sing for joy to the Lord ; it is fitting for the pure to praise him .

ID:	4557
INPUT:	áádóó Joána éí <unk> , Hérad bikin yaa áhályáanii be'asdzą́ą́ , áádóó <unk> na , índa sáanii náádaała' éí binaalye'é yee háká anájahígíí ałdó' hoł tádookai .
PRED:	Herod was the mother of Herod 's sister , the wife of Herod , the wife of Herod and the wife of Herod .
GOLD:	Joanna , the wife of Chuza , Herod 's business manager ; Susanna ; and many others who were contributing from their own resources to support Jesus and his disciples .

ID:	4558
INPUT:	Nihinanit'a'í binááł t'óó diné bił hólzhǫ́ t'éí biniyé ádaaht'į́įgo éí dooda , nidi Christ yá naalte' danohłį́įgo nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' Diyin God íinízinii bida'oł'į́ .
PRED:	Do n't worry about the master 's work in the Lord 's sight . Instead , you do n't know that Christ is a slave to God .
GOLD:	Try to please them all the time , not just when they are watching you . As slaves of Christ , do the will of God with all your heart .

ID:	4559
INPUT:	Áko bá bee dahool'inígíí tsosts'idgo ádadoohłííł , índa bikáá' yí'nilgo bidáahjį' haz'ánígi bee hool'in doo biniyé ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Make seven lamps for the lampstand , and make them holy .
GOLD:	Then make the seven lamps for the lampstand , and set them so they reflect their light forward .

ID:	4560
INPUT:	T'óó hodíína'go doo dashooh'į́į da doo , áádóó t'áá nááhodoo'na'go náádashooht'į́į doo [ háálá aTaa' bich'į' dé<unk> .
PRED:	When you see me , you will never see me , for you will see me .
GOLD:	“ In a little while you wo n't see me anymore . But a little while after that , you will see me again . ”

ID:	4561
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Azáíyah Jerúsalemdi náhástł'ah aań'dítį́įhgi áádóó honíts'aa' aań'dítį́įhgi índa tsé naanástł'inígi yada'ii'áago bikáá'dóó ha'alzídí ádayiilaa .
PRED:	Uzziah rebuilt the Temple of Jerusalem , and he rebuilt the wall of the Temple of the Temple . He rebuilt the wall of the Temple .
GOLD:	Uzziah built fortified towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate , at the Valley Gate , and at the angle in the wall .

ID:	4562
INPUT:	Nílááh , t'óó náádááł ; nił hózhǫ́ǫgo náádááł , áko Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í bił dahoníshǫ́ǫgo yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	“ Go and get peace , ” the Philistines said , “ and the Philistine rulers of the Philistines are well well well well . ”
GOLD:	Please do n't upset them , but go back quietly . ”

ID:	4563
INPUT:	Nidi nihokáa'gi t'óó bá nidahat'i'ii Diyin God nábiilááh , nihokáá' dine'é dahóyáanii t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł biniyé , áádóó doo dabidziilígíí ałdó' náyiilááh , éí ayóó ádaat'éii t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł biniyé .
PRED:	But those who fear God will be thrown into the world , and those who do evil will be disgraced . They will be ashamed of shame .
GOLD:	Instead , God chose things the world considers foolish in order to shame those who think they are wise . And he chose things that are powerless to shame those who are powerful .

ID:	4564
INPUT:	Áádóó Ííjip índa Kéínan kéyahgi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' hodííchįįd , índa ayóó át'éego ti'dahojoonííh , áko danihizhé'é yę́ę , dayíł<unk> dooleełii t'áá bá bídin hóyéé' nít'éé' .
PRED:	And when he was very angry , he became very angry with all the people of Canaan and Canaan , so they could n't be afraid of us .
GOLD:	“ But a famine came upon Egypt and Canaan . There was great misery , and our ancestors ran out of food .

ID:	4565
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéíkab éí Léíban baa ákozniizį́į'go t'ah nahdę́ę́' hach'į' át'éé nít'éé' yę́ę doo ákót'ée da .
PRED:	So Jacob realized that Laban had never been seen .
GOLD:	And Jacob began to notice a change in Laban 's attitude toward him .

ID:	4566
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yá naal'a'í nilíinii Éíbraham bits'ą́ą́dóó yichíiłii danohłíinii , Jéíkab bada'áłchíní nídii'nilii danohłíinii , béédaałniih !
PRED:	Remember that the Lord , the servant of Abraham , the descendants of Jacob , are children of Jacob .
GOLD:	you children of his servant Abraham , you descendants of Jacob , his chosen ones .

ID:	4567
INPUT:	Áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo yił kéédahat'íinii yinda'alo' áádóó doo t'áá aaníígóó dahalne' . Wooch'ííd t'éiyá yee yádaałti' dooleełgo nida'ádineestą́ą́' . Doo ákwii ádadoonííłgóó haa'í shį́į́ doo nida'íłkeed da .
PRED:	They trap me from every kind of trap ; they accuse me without a trap .
GOLD:	They all fool and defraud each other ; no one tells the truth.With practiced tongues they tell lies ; they wear themselves out with all their sinning .

ID:	4568
INPUT:	John tó yee asį́į́h yę́ędóó wóshdę́ę́' nihits'ą́ą́' Jesus dego abi'dooltį́ bijį́įjį' nihił tázhdidookah biniyé ła' náho'didooltééł , áko Jesus daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náábi'diilzáhígíí nihitahdóó atah baa hojilne' doo .
PRED:	Jesus left John and began to baptize you from the dead . And he was raised from the dead to be raised from the dead . Then he will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	from the time he was baptized by John until the day he was taken from us . Whoever is chosen will join us as a witness of Jesus ' resurrection . ”

ID:	4569
INPUT:	Nít'éé' áháłní , T'áá ni nizaadígíí bee naa nídéesht'įįł , bąąhági ááníiłgo naal'a'í nílíinii ! Jó , diné hashkéii nishłį́ , t'áá jíík'e sha'doolyééł t'éí nisin , índa t'áadoo k'idííláii náshgishgo nił bééhózin lá .
PRED:	Then he said , “ I 'll tell you what I am going to do . If you do n't know that I am the one who has been circumcised . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ You wicked servant ! ' the king roared . ‘ Your own words condemn you . If you knew that I 'm a hard man who takes what is n't mine and harvests crops I did n't plant ,

ID:	4570
INPUT:	Dį́į'go haz'ánígíí éí nahasdzáán bikáa'gi ádaałts'íísí yee' , nidi ts'ídá doo chohoo'į́į́góó dahóyą́ :
PRED:	These are the instructions regarding the earth , but in two rows of the earth do n't eat it .
GOLD:	There are four things on earth that are small but unusually wise :

ID:	4571
INPUT:	Hasih haz'ą́ yeidi'áahgo ák'inídiildził , nidi ádajít'éii hazhó'ó haisííd .
PRED:	He has given us victory over the mountains , but he has given us rest .
GOLD:	They may be allowed to live in security , but God is always watching them .

ID:	4572
INPUT:	nidi táłkáá' joogáałgo dahoołtsą́ągo , Ha'át'íí shį́į́ bich'į́įdii át'į́ ? daniizį́į'go hak'ee hadadeeshghaazh ,
PRED:	But when they saw the water , they cried out , “ What are they looking for ? ”
GOLD:	but when they saw him walking on the water , they cried out in terror , thinking he was a ghost .

ID:	4573
INPUT:	Áko a'ohgo ájít'éii áho'diilyaago doo ákót'éégóó haa hwiiníst'įįd . Háishą' oochíiłii bii' jiinánígíí hazhó'ó yaa hodoolnih ? Háálá nahasdzáán bits'ą́ąjį' hwii' sizíinii nídiilyá .
PRED:	And when he was humble , he will judge the world ? Who is the one who lives in the world ? For he is the one who lives from the earth .
GOLD:	He was humiliated and received no justice.Who can speak of his descendants ? For his life was taken from the earth . ”

ID:	4574
INPUT:	Ákohgo t'áá shí binshishnishii áádóó shinaanish t'áá át'é baa nisíyáhígíí nééł'į́į́' , áko nít'éé' t'áá át'é ts'ídá t'áadoo nánídlíní da , jó'akon , áádóó níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalin índa oo'á łígíí biyaagi t'áadoo bee bilááh náodle'í da .
PRED:	I saw all my hard work and hard work , and I could not see what I had done . I could not have the wind or the wind or the wind .
GOLD:	But as I looked at everything I had worked so hard to accomplish , it was all so meaningless — like chasing the wind . There was nothing really worthwhile anywhere .

ID:	4575
INPUT:	T'áadoo ał'ohgo ahaa nitsídaahkeesí
PRED:	Do n't worry about you
GOLD:	A Warning against Prejudice

ID:	4576
INPUT:	Yínííł nidaakaígíí bik'idahojidlí , háálá hada'íídóolniił .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who are clothed in trouble , for those who are clothed in trouble .
GOLD:	God blesses those who mourn , for they will be comforted .

ID:	4577
INPUT:	Áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii éí aláahgo naat'áanii índa diné t'áá át'é bidáahjį' ch'ídeizh'eezh . Áádóó éí yikáá' dah dadeesnii' .
PRED:	Then he took the male goat as a sin offering and a male goat as a sin offering .
GOLD:	The male goats for the sin offering were then brought before the king and the assembly of people , who laid their hands on them .

ID:	4578
INPUT:	t'áá háiida shitsį' jiyánígíí áádóó shidił jidlánígíí éí iiná doo ninít'i'ii hwee hólǫ́ , áko niiníłką́ądi dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' nááhodideeshłááł .
PRED:	Anyone who believes in me will eat my blood and blood will be thrown into eternal life . But if you are raised from the dead , I will heal him . ”
GOLD:	But anyone who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life , and I will raise that person at the last day .

ID:	4579
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Líívai dine'é díí kin hadaas'áii áádóó binaagóó dahootsooígíí yaa deideez'ą́ ; Bóhólníihii éí Mózes biniit'aa yee haadzíi'ii yik'eh ádaadzaa .
PRED:	These are the Levites living according to the Levites and Levites , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So the Israelites obeyed the Lord 's command to Moses and assigned these towns and pasturelands to the Levites by casting sacred lots .

ID:	4580
INPUT:	Béégashii bikágí , áádóó bitsį' , áádóó bidił índa bichaan hanááł didoodlił ,
PRED:	“ You must eat the meat of the meat , meat , and dung that is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	As Eleazar watches , the heifer must be burned — its hide , meat , blood , and dung .

ID:	4581
INPUT:	Táir dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í baa yínííł hasin
PRED:	A Message about Tyre
GOLD:	A Message for Sidon

ID:	4582
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ádzíłtso Diyin God bibee adziil ayóó át'éii bąą t'óó hoł adahayóí . Nidi t'ah nidi t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá ałtsoní yaa naayáhígíí bąą t'óó hoł adahayóigo , Jesus bídahooł'aahii áyidííniid ,
PRED:	And all who were weak in God 's power were weak in his power . But Jesus said to his disciples , “ The disciples have been healed of Jesus , ” they said .
GOLD:	Awe gripped the people as they saw this majestic display of God 's power.While everyone was marveling at everything he was doing , Jesus said to his disciples ,

ID:	4583
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel ádííniid , K'ad lą́ą , shiye' Jóseph hináá lá ; t'ah doo daastsaahdą́ą́' bich'į' deesháałgo néídeestsééł .
PRED:	“ Look , ” Jacob said , “ I will go to my son , for I will see you . ”
GOLD:	Then Jacob exclaimed , “ It must be true ! My son Joseph is alive ! I must go and see him before I die . ”

ID:	4584
INPUT:	Áko haadzíi'go ání , Ánihidishní , Azhą́ díí dadiiłheel nidi , tsé nidi hadadidoolwosh .
PRED:	Then he said , “ I tell you the truth , even though it is even greater than these stones . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ If they kept quiet , the stones along the road would burst into cheers ! ”

ID:	4585
INPUT:	Tł'oh naadą́ą́' ts'ídá ałtso neest'ánígi át'éegosą́ bibadidíínáałgo yóó'ándi'doolnííł .
PRED:	You must be cut off your grain , and you will be buried in a field .
GOLD:	You will go to the grave at a ripe old age , like a sheaf of grain harvested at the proper time !

ID:	4586
INPUT:	éí nihijéí hada'ólníigo áyóle' , áádóó yá'át'ééh ádaahníiłgo índa saad yá'ádaat'éehii bee yádaałti'go nihidahoníłdzilgo ádanihóle' .
PRED:	Be careful to get rid of your hearts , and do good things .
GOLD:	comfort you and strengthen you in every good thing you do and say .

ID:	4587
INPUT:	Áko iinéé' náázdiizts'ą́ą'go ánááhodi'ní , Diyin God ha'át'íhída hasht'eyiilaii éí t'áadoo t'áá bóhólníhígíí át'é bidiníní .
PRED:	When he heard this , he said , “ O God , he created everything he created . ”
GOLD:	But the voice spoke again : “ Do not call something unclean if God has made it clean . ”

ID:	4588
INPUT:	Néídab áádóó Abáíhu ádił asiih
PRED:	Nadab Rules in Abihu
GOLD:	The Sin of Nadab and Abihu

ID:	4589
INPUT:	Christ nilíinii ti'hooznii'go daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náádiidzáhígíí , éí t'áá ákónéehee ádzaago hazhó'ó bee bił hojilne'go bééhózingo ádajile' , áko ábijiní , Díí Jesus , bee nihił hweeshne'ígíí , éí Christ át'į́ .
PRED:	And when Christ learned that Jesus Christ was raised from the dead , he said , “ This is the way of Christ Jesus Christ , and you know that Jesus Christ is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	He explained the prophecies and proved that the Messiah must suffer and rise from the dead . He said , “ This Jesus I 'm telling you about is the Messiah . ”

ID:	4590
INPUT:	éí bikéédę́ę́' Hoshéíyah áádóó Júdah bits'ą́ą́dóó naat'áanii danilíinii ałníí'dóó yinééł yił dah diiná ,
PRED:	from the tribe of Judah , from the distant lands of Judah , from the distant lands of Judah .
GOLD:	Hoshaiah and half the leaders of Judah followed them ,

ID:	4591
INPUT:	Da' danihizhé'é yę́ęésh ákódáát'įįd , áko nihiDiyin God doo yá'át'éhígi ánihííł'įįd índa díí kin haal'áhígi doo yá'át'éhígi áyííł'įįd , áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́ doo ílį́į́góó ádaohłéhígíí bee t'ah yówehgo t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'él'íinii Ízrel dine'é bik'ijį' ádaohłééh .
PRED:	“ Do n't you say , ‘ Do n't you realize that God has done what is right in the city ? ' And if you do n't let the rest of the people of Israel 's anger .
GOLD:	“ Was n't it just this sort of thing that your ancestors did that caused our God to bring all this trouble upon us and our city ? Now you are bringing even more wrath upon Israel by permitting the Sabbath to be desecrated in this way ! ”

ID:	4592
INPUT:	Áko Ábner t'ą́ą́' nídéét'į́į'go hoołtsą́ągo áhodííniid , Niísh Éísahel ánít'į́ ? Áko ázhdííniid , Aoo' , shí ásht'į́ .
PRED:	When Abner saw him , he asked him , “ Are you the prophet ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Yes , I am . ”
GOLD:	When Abner looked back and saw him coming , he called out , “ Is that you , Asahel ? ” “ Yes , it is , ” he replied .

ID:	4593
INPUT:	Ninahjį' nihi'ana'í ni'jį' naa'adahoyii'nííł . Anaa' danihił'íinii nízhi' binahjį' bik'i nideiikai .
PRED:	Let us fight against our enemies ; let us fight against our enemies .
GOLD:	Only by your power can we push back our enemies ; only in your name can we trample our foes .

ID:	4594
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí dziłghą́ą́'dę́ę́' diné yich'į' hadanáádzáago diyingo diné ats'éidiní'ą́ , índa dabi'éé' deizgis .
PRED:	So Moses returned from the mountain , and they washed their clothes and bathe themselves in water .
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people . He consecrated them for worship , and they washed their clothes .

ID:	4595
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nibee yisdá'iildéehii bíká shił chohoo'į́ , áádóó nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bi'iishłaa .
PRED:	I have placed my hope in the Lord , for I have placed my hope in your commands .
GOLD:	I long for your rescue , Lord , so I have obeyed your commands .

ID:	4596
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' díí baa hodoolzhish : Záíyandi nidahaasdzí'ígíí áádóó Jerúsalemgi t'ah kéédahat'ínígíí diyin dabidi'níi doo , áádóó Jerúsalemgi t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Diyin God binaaltsoos biyi' házhi' daasdzohígíí ákódahodi'níi doo .
PRED:	On that day I will say , ‘ This is what I am saying , ' says : ‘ The people of Jerusalem will be called in the name of the God of Jerusalem . ' ”
GOLD:	All who remain in Zionwill be a holy people — those who survive the destruction of Jerusalemand are recorded among the living .

ID:	4597
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá háiida yíł'aadii bich'į' k'éznídzinígíí éí shich'į' k'éznídzin , índa t'áá háiida shich'į' k'éznídzinígíí éí shiníł'a'ii ałdó' bich'į' k'éznídzin .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , anyone who welcomes me also welcomes me . Anyone who welcomes me also welcomes me also welcomes a little ones who sent me .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , anyone who welcomes my messenger is welcoming me , and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming the Father who sent me . ”

ID:	4598
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ha'át'íí biniyé doo deeghánídi honílǫ́ ? Shich'į' náhodii'náahgo ha'át'íí biniyé nínádít'į́į́h ?
PRED:	O Lord , what is your enemies ? How long will you catch up ? How long will you catch up ?
GOLD:	O Lord , why do you stand so far away ? Why do you hide when I am in trouble ?

ID:	4599
INPUT:	Nit'íinii bee Bóhólníihii nił nilį́įgo baa hidí'aah ; nínáníłt'į́hígíí t'áá át'é áłtsé neest'áanii Bóhólníihii baa hidí'aah .
PRED:	Give your wealth to the Lord , the first harvest of your crops .
GOLD:	Honor the Lord with your wealthand with the best part of everything you produce .

ID:	4600
INPUT:	Deiniidláanii bína'niltin doo bééhózin da yę́ę éí ts'ídá doo naaki nilį́į́góó ayóó át'éii át'é : Diyin God éí ats'íís silį́į'go yit'íní ályaa , Níłch'i Diyinii bee ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'é ho'doo'niid , áádóó diyingo nidaal'a'ii dahoołtsą́ , ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó haa hóóne' , nihokáa'gi ho'doosdląądgo ha'oosdlíí' , yá'ąąshdi adinílííd biyi'jį' náho'diiltį́ .
PRED:	This is the way that we have not been revealed to God by faith that we are not greater than the Holy Spirit in heaven . He was made right with God , and he was made right with the Holy Spirit , who was born in heaven .
GOLD:	Without question , this is the great mystery of our faith : Christ was revealed in a human bodyand vindicated by the Spirit.He was seen by angelsand announced to the nations.He was believed in throughout the worldand taken to heaven in glory .

ID:	4601
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii a'ohgo í'diilyaago Bóhólníihii hashké niidzį́į'ii łahgo ánáyiidlaago t'áadoo ałtso áhásdįįd da , áádóó Júdah kéyahgi ałdó' yá'ádahoot'ééh nídahasdlį́į́' .
PRED:	But the king of Judah will destroy the land of the Lord , and there will be no more detestable sins .
GOLD:	Because Rehoboam humbled himself , the Lord 's anger was turned away , and he did not destroy him completely . There were still some good things in the land of Judah .

ID:	4602
INPUT:	Táir hoolyéii bich'é'é , t'áá éí agháago da'at'íinii nihich'ozhdooniił danízingo deit'íinii naa deidiyoonił .
PRED:	The Tyre will reply , “ The citizens of Tyre will cry out to you .
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	4603
INPUT:	Nahasdzáán biyi'di t'áá nahonit'inee shits'íís shá hadilnééh yę́ędą́ą́' nił bééhózingo doo nits'ąą nanil'in da nít'éé' .
PRED:	You have kept my body in the world , but you did n't know me .
GOLD:	You watched me as I was being formed in utter seclusion , as I was woven together in the dark of the womb .

ID:	4604
INPUT:	Da' asdzáníísh be'awéé' biłt'o'ii t'áá yeidiyoonah , áko biyáázh yishchíiniísh doo yaa a'ááh nízin da ? Aoo' , éí shį́į́ yaa deidiyoonah , nidi shí éí ts'ídá doo neidiyeeshnah da .
PRED:	Do n't she give birth to a baby ? Do n't it realize that I am going to do anything ? Yes , I will not forget it .
GOLD:	“ Never ! Can a mother forget her nursing child ? Can she feel no love for the child she has borne ? But even if that were possible , I would not forget you !

ID:	4605
INPUT:	T'áá nahalzhiishee ła' dine'é kééhat'į́ , éí doodaii' bee óhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ą́dóó nahjį' hahodeeshnił áádóó doo da'jílį́į́góó ádahodeeshłíiłgo atíhodeeshłííł , dishníigo baa yáshti'go ,
PRED:	I will make a nation an object of ridicule or kingdom , and I will punish them .
GOLD:	If I announce that a certain nation or kingdom is to be uprooted , torn down , and destroyed ,

ID:	4606
INPUT:	Be'ełtį́į́' yiyiiłtaazgo k'aa' bee doolkahii nishłį́įgo áshiilaa .
PRED:	He has made his bow ; he has made me his bow .
GOLD:	He has drawn his bowand made me the target for his arrows .

ID:	4607
INPUT:	Áko diné ła' ahigą́ągo biniinaa asdzání yiltsánígíí atíyiilaago áádóó bitsą́ha'íí'éelgo , nidi asdzánígíí éí t'áadoo ádzaaígóogo t'áá aaníí bik'é ninázh'doodlééł ; asdzání bahastiin áádóó ándahwii'aahii yee nihoní'ánígíí bik'ehgo ninázh'doodlééł .
PRED:	“ If a man has stolen an army , he must pay the value of a woman 's armor , but if the person 's value is sold for a loan , the owner must pay for the thief .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose two men are fighting , and in the process they accidentally strike a pregnant woman so she gives birth prematurely . If no further injury results , the man who struck the woman must pay the amount of compensation the woman 's husband demands and the judges approve .

ID:	4608
INPUT:	Nídanooskango yisdéínínil ; naa dadzólíí nít'éé' , áko t'áadoo baa yádahóósįįd da .
PRED:	But they cried out for help , and he refused to help them .
GOLD:	They cried out to you and were saved.They trusted in you and were never disgraced .

ID:	4609
INPUT:	Tíímandę́ę́' Diyin God honíle' , áádóó Dził Péíran hoolyéédę́ę́' Diyin Nilíinii níyá . SíilahYee ayóó át'éii éí yót'ááh hiníláii yik'i dah yiskaad , áádóó nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́góó bee baa ha'niih .
PRED:	And now , O God , you have known as far as the heavens and from the ends of the earth .
GOLD:	I see God moving across the deserts from Edom , the Holy One coming from Mount Paran.His brilliant splendor fills the heavens , and the earth is filled with his praise .

ID:	4610
INPUT:	Zanówah , Engánim , Tapúwah , Íínam ,
PRED:	Kedesh , Hazor , Ophrah ,
GOLD:	Zanoah , En-gannim , Tappuah , Enam ,

ID:	4611
INPUT:	Áko Jéíkab hazhé'é Áízak bíighah nizhníyáago hódeesnii'go ání , Bizhí la' éí Jéíkab bizhí ; bíla' éí Íísa bíla' .
PRED:	Jacob got up early the next morning and said , “ Jacob 's hands ! ” So Jacob said to Jacob , “ Jacob 's sister , Esau 's sister . ”
GOLD:	So Jacob went closer to his father , and Isaac touched him . “ The voice is Jacob 's , but the hands are Esau 's , ” Isaac said .

ID:	4612
INPUT:	Áádóó nihe'oodlą' bee Christ nihijéí yii' hólǫ́ǫ doo , áko ayóó'ó'ó'ní bii' nihihétł'óól dahólǫ́ǫgo índa t'áá éí atł'ááh nástł'in nahalingo danołdzil doogo nihá sodiszin ,
PRED:	And because of your faith , you will live in God 's heart , and you will be filled with a foundation of your own body .
GOLD:	Then Christ will make his home in your hearts as you trust in him . Your roots will grow down into God 's love and keep you strong .

ID:	4613
INPUT:	Háálá Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Kin áádóó kédaayah índa ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'éédadilyééhgóó éí díí kéyah bii' ninádahaniih doo .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ I will plant your vineyards and vineyards and vineyards and vineyards .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Someday people will again own property here in this land and will buy and sell houses and vineyards and fields . ' ”

ID:	4614
INPUT:	Áko Jiihó'ahaz biye' Jiihó'ash éí Házeiyel biye' Ben-héídad éí kin hadaas'á hazhé'é Jiihó'ahaz anaa' bee yílák'eedóó hayíínilígíí bílák'ee háájoo'nil . Jó'ash táadi hak'eh nídeesdlį́į'go Ízrel dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígíí nínázhdii'nil .
PRED:	Jehoahaz son of Jehoahaz began to attack the towns of Judah . When he saw that his father had defeated his army , he had defeated his army .
GOLD:	Then Jehoash son of Jehoahaz recaptured from Ben-hadad son of Hazael the towns that had been taken from Jehoash 's father , Jehoahaz . Jehoash defeated Ben-hadad on three occasions , and he recovered the Israelite towns .

ID:	4615
INPUT:	Áko Jesus áádóó dashdiiyáago Táir índa Sáídan kéyah bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' ajííyá .
PRED:	Jesus left Tyre and Sidon .
GOLD:	Then Jesus left Galilee and went north to the region of Tyre and Sidon .

ID:	4616
INPUT:	náá'iiłniihii doogáałgo yidínóoł'įįł , áko jó , naałniih kin góne' k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizh lágo éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii kin góne' hólǫ́ ; éí t'óó baa'ih .
PRED:	The priest must examine the house and examine it . If he finds that the mildew is ceremonially unclean , it is ceremonially unclean because the mildew is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	the priest must return and inspect the house again . If he finds that the mildew has spread , the walls are clearly contaminated with a serious mildew , and the house is defiled .

ID:	4617
INPUT:	Áko hííłch'į'go hasht'ehodi'nééh bijį́ , jó , éí biiskání háá'áyį́į́h jį́ dooleełgo bąą ,
PRED:	On the day of the next day , the next day of the Sabbath day , for the Sabbath day of complete rest .
GOLD:	This all happened on Friday , the day of preparation , the day before the Sabbath . As evening approached ,

ID:	4618
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Sálaman biye' Riihobówam éí Júdah dine'é yinant'á . Riihobówam éí dízdiindóó ba'aan t'ááłá'í binááhaigo hodeez'ą́ áádóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bitahdóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áhígíí éí Bóhólníihii náhodii'ánígíí bízhi' bee wójíi dooleełígi tsosts'idts'áadah nááhaijį' nant'áá nít'éé' . Bimá éí Áman dine'é ła' nilį́įgo Néíyamah wolyéé nít'éé' .
PRED:	Rehoboam son of Rehoboam began to rule over Judah for forty years . He reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . He reigned in Jerusalem eleven years to honor the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Rehoboam son of Solomon was king in Judah . He was forty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem , the city the Lord had chosen from among all the tribes of Israel as the place to honor his name . Rehoboam 's mother was Naamah , an Ammonite woman .

ID:	4619
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God éí Éíbraham yeidiní'áanii bohodoolníłígíí bich'į' hoolzhishgo , Ííjipgi Éíbraham bidine'é k'ee'ąą dínéest'ą́ągo t'óó ahayóí silį́į́' .
PRED:	But God gave Abraham this message to Abraham : “ The time of Abraham has become so many nations . ”
GOLD:	“ As the time drew near when God would fulfill his promise to Abraham , the number of our people in Egypt greatly increased .

ID:	4620
INPUT:	Hazíírathdóó dah náádii'náago Ríthmah hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left Libnah and camped at Libnah .
GOLD:	They left Hazeroth and camped at Rithmah .

ID:	4621
INPUT:	Bikáá' náá'iiniihí bá béésh łitsoii ałnáshizhoozhgo bikáá' at'eesí áyiilaa ; bikáá' náá'iiniihí bidáa'gi ahééní'áhídóó yaago a <unk> gi béésh łitsoii ałnáshizhoozhgo bikáá' at'eesí dah si'ą́ągo áyiilaa .
PRED:	He built a bronze bronze bronze grating against the altar , and he measured it into the north side of the north side of the altar .
GOLD:	Next he made a bronze grating and installed it halfway down the side of the altar , under the ledge .

ID:	4622
INPUT:	Áko Kéínan hwíídíiską́ą́dóó náhást'éidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan neeznáá honááhaigo dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	He lived another years old , and he died .
GOLD:	Kenan lived 910 years , and then he died .

ID:	4623
INPUT:	Mk . 16 : 1-8
PRED:	A Discussion about Fasting
GOLD:	Purpose of the Book

ID:	4624
INPUT:	Asdzání hahastiin hólóonii hahastiin hináago bee haz'áanii yee hótą' , nidi hahastiin hats'ą́ą́' daaztsą́ągo bee haz'áanii bits'ą́ąjį' hwéédíchi' .
PRED:	And if the husband 's husband has taken away your husband 's commandments , you will obey the law of your husband .
GOLD:	For example , when a woman marries , the law binds her to her husband as long as he is alive . But if he dies , the laws of marriage no longer apply to her .

ID:	4625
INPUT:	Hanáá' atíyiilaago bidiníná bináá' atínízhdoodlííł , índa hawoo' atíyiilaago biwoo' atínízhdoodlííł , ha'níí nít'ée'go dasidoots'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The eye of their eyes are crushed , and their eyes are crushed .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says the punishment must match the injury : ‘ An eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth . '

ID:	4626
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Ákoshą' háí ba'ahódlíigo índa hóyą́ągo aa áhályáanii nilį́ , éí binanit'a'í bighan haz'ą́ągi nidaakaígíí t'áá ałtso t'áá áajį' anáhwiilzhíishgo yaná'áltso' doo biniyé nibidi'dooltééł ?
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ Who is the one who gives wisdom to those who are wise , and those who live in their homes .
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ A faithful , sensible servant is one to whom the master can give the responsibility of managing his other household servants and feeding them .

ID:	4627
INPUT:	Háálá dóola bidił , doodaii' tł'ízí bidił éí bąąhági át'éii doo ąąh tááyógis át'ée da .
PRED:	For he must not eat the blood of goats or goats , and he does not sin .
GOLD:	For it is not possible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins .

ID:	4628
INPUT:	Náánáła' diyingo naal'a'í , éí kǫ' bee bóhólníihii nilį́įgo , bikáá' náá'iiniihí yits'ą́ą́dóó ch'íníyá , áko bee iigéshí deeníigo dah yootį́łígíí yich'į' dilwoshgo kóní , Nibee iigéshí nídiitįįhgo nahasdzáán bikáá'góó ch'il na'atł'o'ii bineest'ą' áłah ánílééh , háálá éí daneest'ą́ .
PRED:	Then another angel said to the angel , “ Lord , the one who sits on the horns of the altar , and the sickle will say , ‘ You are the sickle . ' ”
GOLD:	Then another angel , who had power to destroy with fire , came from the altar . He shouted to the angel with the sharp sickle , “ Swing your sickle now to gather the clusters of grapes from the vines of the earth , for they are ripe for judgment . ”

ID:	4629
INPUT:	nibik'ehgo iináanii índa bee aa nánít'íinii bits' ániikaigo ádił nida'iyeelzíí' áádóó ts'ídá doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádeiit'įįd da índa ts'ídá doo yá'áshónígi ádeidzaago ádił nidaniiltee' .
PRED:	We have sinned , and we have sinned . We have sinned and sinned , and we have sinned .
GOLD:	But we have sinned and done wrong . We have rebelled against you and scorned your commands and regulations .

ID:	4630
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii doo dajílį́į́góó doo shit'áahjį' dazhdookahgo shá nidazhdool'aał da , índa shidiyingo chodao'íinii éí t'áá íiyisí dadiyinígíí doo bit'áahjį' dazhdookah da , nidi t'óó bee haa yádahóósįįdii índa doo yildinígi ádajíít'įįdii bee hohodiit'i'go nidajikai doo .
PRED:	They will come to me , and they will serve me as priests and serve me . They will be able to serve me as priests , and they will never be able to shame .
GOLD:	They may not approach me to minister as priests . They may not touch any of my holy things or the holy offerings , for they must bear the shame of all the detestable sins they have committed .

ID:	4631
INPUT:	Łį́į́' bee nidaohbaahii dadohbááh ; tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí bee nidaohbaahii at'ááh wohjeeh , áko diné dahayóii Iithiyópiya dine'é áádóó Líbiya dine'é éí naagé nideich'idii áádóó Lídiya dine'é éí ałtį́į́' nídayiiłtasgo nideich'idii náás dadoobah .
PRED:	Go and prepare your horses for the chariots , and prepare the armies of the Philistines . The armies of the Philistines will run to Sisera , and the army of Ethiopia will run to the Philistines .
GOLD:	Charge , you horses and chariots ; attack , you mighty warriors of Egypt ! Come , all you allies from Ethiopia , Libya , and Lydiawho are skilled with the shield and bow !

ID:	4632
INPUT:	Áko yanáalk'idjį' jiní'áazhgo , shoo , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii hadááh yíkai , áádóó Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii hak'i hoole'go éí bitahgi Diyin God bá hojoolne' .
PRED:	As they arrived at the place of worship , they went to meet him and went to meet the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	When Saul and his servant arrived at Gibeah , they saw a group of prophets coming toward them . Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he , too , began to prophesy .

ID:	4633
INPUT:	Tó ditáanii bik'i diilkǫ'go tségi át'éego táłtł'ááh níídee' .
PRED:	It is a rock that covered the surface of a rock , like a flood .
GOLD:	The deep waters gushed over them ; they sank to the bottom like a stone .

ID:	4634
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihik'ijidlíi doo , áádóó nihaa áhályą́ą doo ;
PRED:	May the Lord bless you , and he will bless you .
GOLD:	‘ May the Lord bless youand protect you .

ID:	4635
INPUT:	éí danihizhé'é yę́ę Ííjip kéyah góyaa íínáago áádóó áadi kéédahwiit'į́įgo nízaad nihoolzhiizh , índa Ííjip dine'é éí ts'ídá doo ákwii ádanihííł'įįd da , áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę ałdó' ákódayííł'įįd ,
PRED:	But when our ancestors arrived in Egypt , the land of Egypt was still living in Egypt , and they did not return to Egypt . Instead , they did n't let our ancestors live in Egypt .
GOLD:	Our ancestors went down to Egypt , and we lived there a long time , and we and our ancestors were brutally mistreated by the Egyptians .

ID:	4636
INPUT:	Héídid , Ziibówim , Niibálat ,
PRED:	Beersheba , Hanan ,
GOLD:	Hadid , Zeboim , Neballat ,

ID:	4637
INPUT:	Haa'íshą' jį́įgo áhát'ínígíí beełt'éego hazhó'ó ádeii'níił doo , t'áadoo adlą́ baa nideiikaií , t'áadoo tó tsi'na'iiłáii deiidlání , t'áadoo ajił baa nideiikaií , t'áadoo baa'ihgo adádaniilníní , t'áadoo ahináádadiijahí , índa t'áadoo da'ahiilch'į́dí dooleeł .
PRED:	Let us be sure that we live in the day of our lives . We must not be able to be able to be able to be able to drink anything else . Do n't be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to drink .
GOLD:	Because we belong to the day , we must live decent lives for all to see . Do n't participate in the darkness of wild parties and drunkenness , or in sexual promiscuity and immoral living , or in quarreling and jealousy .

ID:	4638
INPUT:	Jó , diné t'áá bí anishłį́ nízinígíí éí doo Bóhólníihii bee lą́ ałeeh da , nidi Bóhólníihii bił ajílínígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	I am the Lord , but I am not a fool to the Lord .
GOLD:	When people commend themselves , it does n't count for much . The important thing is for the Lord to commend them .

ID:	4639
INPUT:	Díí bik'ehgo ádíílííł : náásee dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiindi ké siláago naaniigo tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan ashdladi ké siláago , índa dego éí dízdiindóó ba'aan ashdladi ké siláago ádíílííł .
PRED:	“ These are the instructions regarding the altar . Then make fifty feet long and 45 feet long and 45 feet long .
GOLD:	Make the boat 450 feet long , 75 feet wide , and 45 feet high .

ID:	4640
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nik'é niná'ídláii áádóó iishch'id biyi'di hasht'eniilaii ání , Shí Bóhólníihii t'áá ałtsoní áyiilaii áádóó yádiłhił t'áá sáhí k'íísts'ǫ́ǫdii índa nahasdzáán niiníłkaadii nishłį́ ;
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has chosen you in the womb , the Creator of all the nations of the earth . I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Creator of the earth .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer and Creator : “ I am the Lord , who made all things.I alone stretched out the heavens.Who was with mewhen I made the earth ?

ID:	4641
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshónígi ánáádáát'įįd . Áko Mó'ab kéyahdóó aláahgo naat'áanii Églan wolyéii Bóhólníihii bidziil ábiilaago Ízrel dine'é atíyiilaa , háálá Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshónígi ádajíít'įįd .
PRED:	The Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight , and the Lord had caused the Israelites to destroy the land of Moab . So the Israelites did what was evil in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Once again the Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight , and the Lord gave King Eglon of Moab control over Israel because of their evil .

ID:	4642
INPUT:	K'ad ánísht'éhígíí éí Diyin God shaa jooba'go ánísht'é , áko bibee ajooba' sheidiní'ánígíí doo t'áá ádzaaí silį́į' da , háálá daal'aadii t'áá ałtso biláahgo nisis'a' , nidi t'áá shí éí dooda , jó , Diyin God bibee ajooba' shił hólǫ́ǫgo nisis'a' .
PRED:	Now I am poor because I am poor , and God has given me victory over all the good things I have given me . I am the one who sent me , but I am the one who sent me .
GOLD:	But whatever I am now , it is all because God poured out his special favor on me — and not without results . For I have worked harder than any of the other apostles ; yet it was not I but God who was working through me by his grace .

ID:	4643
INPUT:	Áko hoł dahoolne'go ádaaní , Nimá índa nitsilíké daniidiiltsééł danízingo tł'óo'di naazį́ .
PRED:	Then they told him , “ Our mother is coming to see his mother 's brothers . ”
GOLD:	Someone told Jesus , “ Your mother and your brothers are standing outside , and they want to see you . ”

ID:	4644
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso dazdiizts'ą́'ígíí éí kót'é : Diyin God díínísin , áádóó bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bik'eh honíł'į́ , háálá díí diné t'áá ałtso bee bá haz'ą́ .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Be careful to obey all the commands I have given you .
GOLD:	That 's the whole story . Here now is my final conclusion : Fear God and obey his commands , for this is everyone 's duty .

ID:	4645
INPUT:	Nidi Peter ádahóót'įįdígíí hazhó'ó ałkéé' niinínilgo yaa aho'niilne'go ání :
PRED:	But Peter was told that Peter had done this .
GOLD:	Then Peter told them exactly what had happened .

ID:	4646
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' łahgo át'éego diné nidilt'é atiingóó yi'ashgo , bich'į' yit'íní ánáázh'diilyaa .
PRED:	After this , he said to everyone in the square and said , “ This is what happened . ”
GOLD:	Afterward he appeared in a different form to two of his followers who were walking from Jerusalem into the country .

ID:	4647
INPUT:	Áko doodlį́įłii néidiiką́ągo sodoolzingo yaa ahééh niizį́į'go ádííniid , Díí nídadoohkaah áádóó ałtah dohkaahgo daahdlą́ ,
PRED:	Then he remembered the cup of wine and prayed , “ Give thanks to the disciples , and eat this bread and eat it . ”
GOLD:	Then he took a cup of wine and gave thanks to God for it . Then he said , “ Take this and share it among yourselves .

ID:	4648
INPUT:	Shich'iyą' , éí ak'áán áádóó áliv bik'ah índa tsés'ná bitł'izh éí naa hidish'aahgo na'iis<unk> dii łikání halchin biniyé bidááhdóó nidasíníką́ ; ts'ídá ákwíindzaa , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	“ My food and olive oil , ” says the Lord , “ I have given you the olive oil and honey . I have done this before you , ” says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	Imagine it ! You set before them as a sacrifice the choice flour , olive oil , and honey I had given you , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	4649
INPUT:	Áádóó bił ałghada'désht'ą́ągo hóyée'go há haasdzíí' , áádóó ła' hataa'síłts'ingo hatsii' hadaháłdláád índa doo ákónáádazhdoo'nííłgóó Diyin God bee ádee hadadziisdzíi'go áhodííniid , Nihitsi'ké éí dabiye'ké doo baa dahidoohnił da índa dabitsi'ké éí danihiye'ké doo baa dahidoohnił da , áádóó t'áá nihí nidi doo ádá shódeidoołt'eeł da .
PRED:	When I heard this , I sent some of them back and told them , ‘ You will die and die , ' they said , ‘ You will never be able to die . ' But you will never be able to die . ' But you will never be your sons or daughters . '
GOLD:	So I confronted them and called down curses on them . I beat some of them and pulled out their hair . I made them swear in the name of God that they would not let their children intermarry with the pagan people of the land .

ID:	4650
INPUT:	Ídahooł'aahii ła' Sesaríyadę́ę́' ałdó' bił niikai , Sáíprasdóó t'áá ałk'idą́ą́' íhooł'aahii jílíinii , Néísan joolyéii , ha'ałk'ee naháatą́ą doo biniyé hoł yah iikai .
PRED:	Afterward the disciples returned from Cyprus and went out to Cyprus . Afterward they went to Cyprus , where they were afraid of Cyprus .
GOLD:	Some believers from Caesarea accompanied us , and they took us to the home of Mnason , a man originally from Cyprus and one of the early believers .

ID:	4651
INPUT:	Job t'áadoo bił bééhózinii yaa yáłti'áádóó bizaad hódzą́ bąąh ádin .
PRED:	Job 's Third Speech : A Response to the lips of a fool .
GOLD:	‘ Job speaks out of ignorance ; his words lack insight . '

ID:	4652
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii yikéé' dah didookah . Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ání nahalingo yéego áníi doo ; t'áá aaníí , yéego áníigo e'e'aahdę́ę́' Ízrel dine'é bitah dahoditłidgo ninádahidookah .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ The lion will come down like a lion , and the people of Israel will tremble in terror .
GOLD:	For someday the people will follow me.I , the Lord , will roar like a lion.And when I roar , my people will return trembling from the west .

ID:	4653
INPUT:	Nihitahdóó halne'ii ła' hazdoodzihgo áho'diilyaago éí shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii hahoyííłdzíi' doo ; hach'į' k'ídideeshchiłgo shidine'é Ízrel bits'ą́ąjį' áhodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	“ We will say to you , ‘ The Lord will destroy me , and I will destroy Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ And if a prophet is deceived into giving a message , it is because I , the Lord , have deceived that prophet . I will lift my fist against such prophets and cut them off from the community of Israel .

ID:	4654
INPUT:	Dóola yázhí índa deenásts'aa' bik'ahígíí áádóó bitsee' neesk'ahígíí áádóó bitsą́ siláí bąąh ak'ahígíí , bitsą́ áshk'azhí áádóó azid bíighahgi ak'ahígíí
PRED:	The fat of the bull and the fat around the internal organs , along with the fat around the internal organs ,
GOLD:	Then he took the fat of the bull and the ram — the fat of the broad tail and from around the internal organs — along with the kidneys and the long lobes of the livers .

ID:	4655
INPUT:	Eda'alyaii , doodaii' naashk'aazhgo eda'alyaii t'áadoo ádá ádaoł'íní , doodaii' eda'alyaii adadoohtsihda , doodaii' nihikéyahgi bich'į' yaa áńdaoht'įįh doo biniyé tsé bee e'elyaii doo adadoohtsih da ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nishłį́ .
PRED:	“ Do not worship idols idols idols or idols idols idols idols , says the Sovereign Lord . You must not bow down to idols and worship idols . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not make idols or set up carved images , or sacred pillars , or sculptured stones in your land so you may worship them . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	4656
INPUT:	áádóó Társhish kin haal'áii bitsinaa'eeł t'áá át'é áádóó nidaashch'ąą'go da'ílíinii t'áá át'é hak'idiyaa dooleeł .
PRED:	Tarshish and Tarshish will be accompanied by the ships of Tarshish .
GOLD:	He will destroy all the great trading shipsand every magnificent vessel .

ID:	4657
INPUT:	Ha'át'íida nihił yá'át'éehgo t'áadoo nihits'ą́ą́' nichǫ́'ógo ádaahłíiłii baa yáti'í .
PRED:	Do n't worry about your good deeds , and do n't worry about your lips .
GOLD:	Then you will not be criticized for doing something you believe is good .

ID:	4658
INPUT:	Áádę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezhgo kéyah yiih nihidoo'ish ; éí kéyah nihaididoo'áałgo danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' .
PRED:	And when you brought us out from your land , you will take possession of your ancestors , he swore to give you a solemn oath .
GOLD:	He brought us out of Egypt so he could give us this land he had sworn to give our ancestors .

ID:	4659
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí nahasdzáán yideelchidgo ałtso diłhį́įhgo áádóó nihokáa'gi kéédahat'íinii t'áá ałtso yínííł danilį́įgo ííł'į́ . Ííjip kéyahdi Náil tooh nílíní góyaa ayóó át'éego tooh wó'ądadziiłhaał áádóó tó yaa ná'nool'ąął nahalingo nihokáá' ákóhodoonííł .
PRED:	“ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies has put his hand over all the land of Egypt , and all the rivers of Egypt will be thrown into the Nile River .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , touches the land and it melts , and all its people mourn.The ground rises like the Nile River at floodtime , and then it sinks again .

ID:	4660
INPUT:	Zerábabel t'áá bí díí kin bii' sohodizin bitł'ááh nástł'iní áyiilaa áádóó éí ałdó' t'áá bí ts'ídá ałtso íidoolííł . Ákohgo éí t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii naa shiníł'a'go nił bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has made the foundation of the Temple of Zerubbabel , and it will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ Zerubbabel is the one who laid the foundation of this Temple , and he will complete it . Then you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent me .

ID:	4661
INPUT:	Háálá John éí t'áá aaníí tó yee asį́į́h nít'éé' , nidi kodóó t'áadoo lą'í yiłkaahí Níłch'i Diyinii bee nihidi'doolzįh .
PRED:	For John was baptize with water , but he refused to baptize you with the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	John baptized with water , but in just a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit . ”

ID:	4662
INPUT:	áko éí nizhdilt'éhígíí ats'íís t'ááłá'í jidooleeł . Áádóó bik'ijį' doo t'áá ał'ąą da , nidi ats'íís t'ááłá'í jileeh .
PRED:	The body will not be part of the body , but each part will have one body .
GOLD:	and the two are united into one . ' Since they are no longer two but one ,

ID:	4663
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman éí tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii áłah áyiilaa , áko t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan dį́įdi neeznádiingo tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó naakits'áadahdi miilgo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii , díí éí bá hasht'edahodít'éego kin hadaas'áágóó niyiiznil , áádóó Jerúsalemgi aláahgo naat'áanii binaashiigóó ła' niinínil .
PRED:	Solomon also made two chariots and chariots and charioteers , and he assigned them to the chariot commanders of the chariots and horses . He stored them in Jerusalem for twelve chariots , and he stored them in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Solomon built up a huge force of chariots and horses . He had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses . He stationed some of them in the chariot cities and some near him in Jerusalem .

ID:	4664
INPUT:	Jórdan tooh nílíní biláahdi wónaaníjí nihik'éí bił kéyah doo ła' nihíí' dooleeł da , háálá t'áá kwe'é Jórdan tooh nílíní ha'a'aahjígo nihikéyah dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	“ We will not enter the land of the Jordan River , for no one will cross the Jordan River to the Jordan River . ”
GOLD:	But we do not claim any of the land on the other side of the Jordan . We would rather live here on the east side and accept this as our grant of land . ”

ID:	4665
INPUT:	Da'ooyą́ą' nidi , doo hwiih dadohłeeł da áádóó t'áá dichin danihiiłhée doo áádóó t'áadoo le'é hasht'e'nidasooláa nidi , doo áá dasoohsįįd da doo índa hasht'e'nidasooláhígíí diltłish bee nihighadadoolyééł .
PRED:	You eat the food you eat , and you will never die . You will die , but you will die . You will die because you have been cut off from the sword .
GOLD:	You will eat but never have enough.Your hunger pangs and emptiness will remain.And though you try to save your money , it will come to nothing in the end.You will save a little , but I will give it to those who conquer you .

ID:	4666
INPUT:	Bee shaa ha'niihii ałtso shąąh néíst'įįd ; bee shéého'dílzinii shaa néidiidlá .
PRED:	He has made me holy ; he has made me holy .
GOLD:	He has stripped me of my honorand removed the crown from my head .

ID:	4667
INPUT:	Háálá shinaagóó t'óó hóyé'ígi ádaaníigo t'óó ahayóí ałjeeh nídanilniihgo diits'a' ; shindahagizgo áádóó t'áá nahont'inee shizéé' nideii'áago ahínéikah .
PRED:	For many people are amazed at me , and they hear me from their lips . They are saying , “ We are going to follow me . ”
GOLD:	I have heard the many rumors about me , and I am surrounded by terror.My enemies conspire against me , plotting to take my life .

ID:	4668
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God bidiyingo naal'a'í áhodííniid , Atsį' áádóó díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii nídiiníiłgo díí tsé'éłkáa'gi ninínííł , índa bik'ijį' atoo' yaidííził . Áádóó ákójiilaa .
PRED:	Then God said to the angel of God , “ You have broken the meat of bread and bread and bread made without yeast . ” So the angel of God was circumcised .
GOLD:	The angel of God said to him , “ Place the meat and the unleavened bread on this rock , and pour the broth over it. ” And Gideon did as he was told .

ID:	4669
INPUT:	áádóó índa ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́įhii índa tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii éí hodiyingo haz'ánígi choo'į́į dooleełígíí ádazhdoolííł ; bee nich'į' haasdzí'ígíí t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo ádajit'į́į doo .
PRED:	The anointing oil and fragrant incense ; the fragrant incense burners will be made of fragrant incense .
GOLD:	the anointing oil ; the fragrant incense for the Holy Place.The craftsmen must make everything as I have commanded you . ”

ID:	4670
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh nínízinii bik'ehgo shiinéé' shá diits'į́į́h ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , bee nihodiyíní'áanii bik'ehgo náshiiłnaah .
PRED:	Listen to my prayer , O Lord , my plea .
GOLD:	In your faithful love , O Lord , hear my cry ; let me be revived by following your regulations .

ID:	4671
INPUT:	Áádóó niye' nilíinii índa biye' náánídlíinii díí bee bił hólne' doo : Ííjip kéyahgi baa niséyáhígíí índa bee éédahózinii hatahgóó ádaashłaaígíí , áko éí bee shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nił bééhózin doo .
PRED:	Then I will remember this : I will remind you that I am the Lord , the heart of Egypt , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I 've also done it so you can tell your children and grandchildren about how I made a mockery of the Egyptians and about the signs I displayed among them — and so you will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	4672
INPUT:	Ákódzaago hwii' sizíinii hwii' haalyeedgo Benónai joolyée doo , jidííniid , háálá dadziztsą́ , nidi bizhé'é éí Bénjamin yidííniid .
PRED:	Then he breathed his last last and named him , for he said , “ Benjamin is the son of Benjamin . ”
GOLD:	Rachel was about to die , but with her last breath she named the baby Ben-oni ( which means “ son of my sorrow ” ) . The baby 's father , however , called him Benjamin ( which means “ son of my right hand ” ) .

ID:	4673
INPUT:	Haa léit'éego nidine'é dahayóii ni'jį' abi'diistł'ííd ? Doo bídazníłdzil da , háálá Bóhólníihii naa'ahwiiznil .
PRED:	How long will the people of Israel be thrown into battle ? For the Lord has given them victory .
GOLD:	Why have your warriors fallen ? They can not stand , for the Lord has knocked them down .

ID:	4674
INPUT:	Méíyakah dine'é biye' Ahásbai biye' Iilífalet ałdó' , Gáílodóó dine'é Ahíthofel biye' Iiláíyim ałdó' ,
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Zechariah son of Ahithophel , and Ahithophel son of Ahithophel .
GOLD:	Eliphelet son of Ahasbai from Maacah ; Eliam son of Ahithophel from Giloh ;

ID:	4675
INPUT:	Éí baa hoolzhiizhgo Jesus yit'íní áhodi'doolnííł , éí haa ha'niih índa t'áá hó t'éiyá t'áá ałtsoní biNanit'a'í jílį́ , áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii biNanit'a'í jílį́ , índa bídahólníihii bee Bóhólníihii jílį́ .
PRED:	About that time Jesus began to boast , “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is the King of all the kings of the earth . He is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	For , At just the right time Christ will be revealed from heaven by the blessed and only almighty God , the King of all kings and Lord of all lords .

ID:	4676
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' aláahgo naat'áanii éí yikáá'dóó nant'áii ayóó ánóolningo áívori wolyéii yee áyiilaa áádóó éí óola t'áá bízhání yik'íísti' .
PRED:	Then the king made a huge throne , decorated with gold and overlaid it with gold .
GOLD:	Then the king made a huge throne , decorated with ivory and overlaid with pure gold .

ID:	4677
INPUT:	Áádóó díí t'áá ałtso bighą́ąhjį' ayóó'áda'ahíínóhní , háálá éí t'áá ałtsoní hadaałt'éego ahíyółtą' .
PRED:	And all these things are gone , for you have defeated all these things .
GOLD:	Above all , clothe yourselves with love , which binds us all together in perfect harmony .

ID:	4678
INPUT:	Áko óola jaa' bighání'áhí jííkeedígíí éí shékel wolyéhígíí t'ááłáhídi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idi neeznádiin dah hidiidloh áádóó dah yiitą́ bida'alyaiida áádóó yoo'da índa Mídiyan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bi'éé' tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí bóóltą'go áádóó bighą́ą́'ask'idii bizéédaazt'i' nít'é'ígíida .
PRED:	He brought a gold gold container weighing four ounces , and he overlaid them with gold . He overlaid them with gold , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The weight of the gold earrings was forty-three pounds , not including the royal ornaments and pendants , the purple clothing worn by the kings of Midian , or the chains around the necks of their camels .

ID:	4679
INPUT:	Nihitaasháádą́ą́' doo shidziil da nít'éé' , índa shił yée'go shitah hoditłid nít'éé' ,
PRED:	My strength is my strength , and my strength trembled .
GOLD:	I came to you in weakness — timid and trembling .

ID:	4680
INPUT:	Bi'anada'ał'íinii t'áá bí bitsiidétáán bitsiits'iin bighá dasínísi' . Nááts'ó'oołdísiitsoh nahalingo tanihiidooghas biniyé shaatįįh náásą́ . T'áá nahont'inee badahojoobá'íii deildeełiigi át'éego bił nidahoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	Your head is like a sharp sword ; it is a sharp arrow that makes us stagger like a sharp sword .
GOLD:	With his own weapons , you destroyed the chief of thosewho rushed out like a whirlwind , thinking Israel would be easy prey .

ID:	4681
INPUT:	Ádíshnínígíí haleebee deísółts'ą́ą́' , áádóó bee nihił hashne'ígíí dadoohts'a' .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , and listen to what I say .
GOLD:	“ Listen closely to what I am about to say.Hear me out .

ID:	4682
INPUT:	Doodaii' asdzání ła' , béésh łigaii béeso neeznáá neijaahgo , nít'éé' ła' yóó'ayííłne'go , haash doonííł ? Ts'ídá bee hool'iní yididoołtłiłgo nínéidii'ą́ąjį' hazhó'ó nantáago kin góne' t'áá át'é nahodooshoh .
PRED:	“ No one of the silver , ” she asked . “ What will this happen ? ” “ It will be defiled by the Temple of God , ” the woman replied . “ It is a terrible day of smoke .
GOLD:	“ Or suppose a woman has ten silver coins and loses one . Wo n't she light a lamp and sweep the entire house and search carefully until she finds it ?

ID:	4683
INPUT:	Ła' tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí t'éí yada'ólí , índa ła' éí łį́į́' t'éí yada'ólí , nidi nihí éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bízhi' baa dadzííníidlí .
PRED:	Some of the chariot and charioteers , but we trust in the name of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Some nations boast of their chariots and horses , but we boast in the name of the Lord our God .

ID:	4684
INPUT:	Áádóó łahjį' Ízrel dine'é áádóó nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é t'ááłá'í nítínígo Júdah kéyahgi t'áá ałtso kin hadaas'áágóó bíí' daazlį́į'gi kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	The rest of the tribes of Israel and Levites settled in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	The other priests , Levites , and the rest of the Israelites lived wherever their family inheritance was located in any of the towns of Judah .

ID:	4685
INPUT:	Ákohgo Ízrel dine'é áłah nádleehii éí bidine'é doo nídanilyéesii naakits'áadahdi míilgo ákǫ́ǫ́ yida'iisnii'go yich'į' yee hadaasdzíi'go ádeidííniid , Nihílááh , Jéíbesh-gíliyadgi kéédahat'íinii , asdzání índa ba'áłchíní t'áá daabił diltłish bee nidaałtseed .
PRED:	So the men of Israel sent 200 men of Israel to join them in Jabesh-gilead . They told them , “ Go and fight the men of Jabesh-gilead , ” they told them , “ but they will be killed . ”
GOLD:	So the assembly sent 12,000 of their best warriors to Jabesh-gilead with orders to kill everyone there , including women and children .

ID:	4686
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso t'áá aaníigo yaa halne'ígíí ání , T'áá aaníí tsį́įłgo nishááh ! T'áá ákót'ée doo . Lą́'ąą Bóhólníihii Jesus nínááh !
PRED:	All this is what the Lord says : “ I am going to meet you ! ”
GOLD:	He who is the faithful witness to all these things says , “ Yes , I am coming soon ! ” Amen ! Come , Lord Jesus !

ID:	4687
INPUT:	Ákódaadzaadóó biiskání Diyin God éí níłch'i doo yá'áshóonii Saul yik'ijį' yi'níłnii' ; Saul hakin góne' hak'i nááhoodle'go t'áá ádzaagóó yájíłti'go áhoolaa , áádóó David t'áá há niná'neeh yę́ęgi át'éego há nináánás'ne' . Saul éí bitsiidétáán anáhálghą́hígíí dah yootį́į́ł ,
PRED:	So the next day God had made Saul right with the evil spirit of Saul . When Saul had done this , he was wearing a long time with a new sword ,
GOLD:	The very next day a tormenting spirit from God overwhelmed Saul , and he began to rave in his house like a madman . David was playing the harp , as he did each day . But Saul had a spear in his hand ,

ID:	4688
INPUT:	Bíká adoolwołígíí yíká dadilwosh nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo yisdábóníłí da ; Bóhólníihii yich'į' dadilwosh nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo bich'į' ééhoosįįd da .
PRED:	Let them shout for help , but no one dared to shout to the Lord , but he refused to answer them .
GOLD:	They called for help , but no one came to their rescue.They even cried to the Lord , but he refused to answer .

ID:	4689
INPUT:	Háishą' Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God wót'áahdi hólónígíí bił ahijíłt'é ?
PRED:	Who is the Lord our God in the heavens ?
GOLD:	Who can be compared with the Lord our God , who is enthroned on high ?

ID:	4690
INPUT:	Kót'éego Abímelek doo yá'áshónígi ájíít'įįdígíí Diyin God k'ééhodiidlaa ; jó , hazhé'é bits'ą́ą́' hak'is tsosts'idiingo nidzistseedgo bąą ákóhoolaa .
PRED:	So Abimelech did what was evil in the sight of God , for he had done for seven years .
GOLD:	In this way , God punished Abimelech for the evil he had done against his father by murdering his seventy brothers .

ID:	4691
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Éíbraham yich'į' haadzíí' yę́ędą́ą́' náánáła' yiláahdi át'éii biniit'aa ádee hadidoodzihígíí t'áá ádingo biniinaa t'áá bí ádee hadoodzíí' ,
PRED:	And God said to Abraham , “ If God has sworn an oath to Abraham , he has sworn an oath that he has made a solemn oath that he has made a vow to Abraham . ”
GOLD:	For example , there was God 's promise to Abraham . Since there was no one greater to swear by , God took an oath in his own name , saying :

ID:	4692
INPUT:	Haa'íshą' nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo áádóó t'áá íiyisí nihił dahózhǫ́ǫgo baa dahwii'niih doo ! Háálá Dibé Yázhí nilíinii adooyehjį' ahoolzhiizh , índa yá'dooyehii hasht'e'í'diilyaa .
PRED:	Let us be glad and joyful , for we will praise God for the Lamb of the Lamb . For the time of Heaven 's Armies has been prepared for the Lamb . ”
GOLD:	Let us be glad and rejoice , and let us give honor to him.For the time has come for the wedding feast of the Lamb , and his bride has prepared herself .

ID:	4693
INPUT:	Doo da'oodlání binááł dahonohsą́ągo dahinohnáago Christ bá ádaaht'į́įgo nihá ashja'ósinígíí ts'ídá hazhó'ó chodaoł'į́ .
PRED:	And if you do n't believe in Christ , you must be careful to live in the church .
GOLD:	Live wisely among those who are not believers , and make the most of every opportunity .

ID:	4694
INPUT:	Mary jichago áádóó Jew dine'é hoł yíkaígíí ałdó' daachago , Jesus yiyiiłtsą́ągo bii' sizíinii t'áá íiyisí bidiisnáa'go nitseeltłah ,
PRED:	Mary was deeply troubled by the Jewish leaders , and when he saw that Jesus was filled with grief .
GOLD:	When Jesus saw her weeping and saw the other people wailing with her , a deep anger welled up within him , and he was deeply troubled .

ID:	4695
INPUT:	áádóó ábididííniił , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Ásaa' ííł'íní éí tó bee naat'áhí hashtł'ish yee áyiilaii ła'da yists'ilgo doo hasht'enáólne'ígi át'éego t'áá ákót'éego díí dine'é áádóó díí kin haal'áhígíí dideeshtah índa Tófetgi yóó'áda'alne' doo , háálá łahgóó doo nááhást'ą́ą da .
PRED:	“ Say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will cut you into pieces of clay , and there will be no water in the valley . ' ”
GOLD:	Then say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : As this jar lies shattered , so I will shatter the people of Judah and Jerusalem beyond all hope of repair . They will bury the bodies here in Topheth , the garbage dump , until there is no more room for them .

ID:	4696
INPUT:	Ákohgo nihizhé'é yę́ę Éíbraham tooh wónaanídi náhodiiłtį́įgo Kéínan kéyah biyi' t'áá át'é hoł tádíí'áázh , áádóó ha'áłchíní k'ee'ąą noot'į́įłgo áshłaa . Áko <unk> zak haye' dooleełgo haa níłtį́ ,
PRED:	So Abraham took the land of Canaan to the Mediterranean Sea and settled in the land of Canaan . Then he took them into the wilderness of Canaan and gave him his son Isaac .
GOLD:	But I took your ancestor Abraham from the land beyond the Euphrates and led him into the land of Canaan . I gave him many descendants through his son Isaac .

ID:	4697
INPUT:	Wót'ááhdę́ę́' bee da'dinídíinii doo nihik'i da'diiłdííngóó ádeeshłííł , áko nihikéyahgi chahałheełgo ádeeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	I will make you light from heaven , and I will make you holy in the heavens , says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	I will darken the bright stars overheadand cover your land in darkness.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	4698
INPUT:	T'áá íiyisí nihoyíníihgoínda yáníłti'go nił nihoozhǫǫhgo áńdoolííł .
PRED:	He will make the wicked in trouble , and he will rejoice when he delights in you .
GOLD:	He will once again fill your mouth with laughterand your lips with shouts of joy .

ID:	4699
INPUT:	Jó , díí bik'eh ó'oo'níił ii díí jį́ nihich'į' bee haasdziihígíí éí doo nihá nantł'a da , doodaii' doo nihits'ą́ądi nízaadi hólǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	I am writing these commands that I am giving you today . But we do n't belong to you .
GOLD:	“ This command I am giving you today is not too difficult for you , and it is not beyond your reach .

ID:	4700
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizindóó tł'óo'di naakigo haz'ánígíí bii' yádiłhił bii' dahiníláii t'áá ałtso bikáá' nááda'iiniihí yá ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He built two altars in the Temple of the Lord in the Temple . He built the heavens for all the powers of the heavens .
GOLD:	He built these altars for all the powers of the heavens in both courtyards of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	4701
INPUT:	ShiDiyin God t'áá ákogi é'ét'é shá nílíinii , nánooshkąąhgo shich'į' ééhonísįįh ! Tsístł'asíyá yę́ędą́ą́' hááshííníłtį́ . Shaa jiiníbaahgo shisodizin diits'į́į́h .
PRED:	O God , listen to me , O God.Pay attention to my plea .
GOLD:	Answer me when I call to you , O God who declares me innocent.Free me from my troubles.Have mercy on me and hear my prayer .

ID:	4702
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel dine'é bikéyah doo bits'ą́ąjį' kónááhodeeshdlíił da ; éí danizhé'é yę́ę bee bá nihoní'ą́ ; bee haz'áanii t'áá át'é áádóó bee nihoyí'áanii índa bik'eh hoogáałii bik'ehgo Mózes binahjį' hach'į' bee haasdzíi'ii t'áá át'é hazhó'ó baa dahojíyą́ągo dahojíł'į́į́ ládą́ą́' .
PRED:	I will not defile the land of Israel by turning away from the land of Israel . I did not obey the decrees and regulations I gave them the decrees that Moses and regulations .
GOLD:	If the Israelites will be careful to obey my commands — all the laws , decrees , and regulations given through Moses — I will not send them into exile from this land that I set aside for your ancestors . ”

ID:	4703
INPUT:	Kéyah Sháínar biyi' kin hadaas'áhígíí Béíbel áádóó <unk> áádóó Ákad índa Kálneh dahoolyéegi bee hóhólníihgo hahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	The land of the land will be filled with their ears and ears to hear the Jordan River .
GOLD:	He built his kingdom in the land of Babylonia , with the cities of Babylon , Erech , Akkad , and Calneh .

ID:	4704
INPUT:	Nidi t'ą́ą́' anídoolchidgo , jó'akon , bínaaí háátłizh , áko ázhdííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' háínítłizh ! Díí íinidzaaígíí nik'ijį' nídoodleeł ; éí Píírez dzoosye' .
PRED:	But when he reached his brother 's brother , he said to his brother , “ Look , my brother is coming , ” he said , “ we are too old ! ”
GOLD:	But then he pulled back his hand , and out came his brother ! “ What ! ” the midwife exclaimed . “ How did you break out first ? ” So he was named Perez .

ID:	4705
INPUT:	doodaii' naa'ahóóhai biyęęzhii bíyííkeedgo , da' séígo'ísh yéídoołtééł ?
PRED:	“ Do you think of a man , or if you are born ? Do n't you be cut off from his arms ?
GOLD:	Or if they ask for an egg , do you give them a scorpion ? Of course not !

ID:	4706
INPUT:	Asht'e'ádílnéehgo nimá bizhé'é Biithúwel bighangóó Péídan-éíram hoolyéejį' dínááh ; áadi nimá bínaaí Léíban bitsi'ké ła' ne'asdzą́ą́ ádíílííł .
PRED:	“ Get up early spring , in the valley of Bethuel , where he said to Laban , “ Get up and marry a daughter of Bethuel . ”
GOLD:	Instead , go at once to Paddan-aram , to the house of your grandfather Bethuel , and marry one of your uncle Laban 's daughters .

ID:	4707
INPUT:	Ádaa áhólyą́ ; doo ákwii ánáánáo'nééh lágo ; jó , ach'į' nahwii'ná bitsásk'ehgi doo ákwii át'éii nidííní'ą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	Be careful to live in trouble , for you have been stubborn and stubborn .
GOLD:	Be on guard ! Turn back from evil , for God sent this sufferingto keep you from a life of evil .

ID:	4708
INPUT:	Silíshiya kéyahdi Társas kin haal'áagi shi'dizhchį́įgo Jew dine'é nishłį́ , nidi kwe'é Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi shidi'neeszą́ , danihizhé'é yę́ę bibee haz'áanii t'áá yíní át'éegi Gaméíliyel bidááhdóó nibéhéstsaadgo yínashineestą́ą́' , áko t'áá ánółtso díí jį́ ádanoht'éhígi át'éego Diyin God t'áá íiyisí bídin nishłį́įgo bá hinishná .
PRED:	It was a son of Man in the city of Damascus , a city of refuge , a city of refuge , a group of bulls , a group of sheep and goats , and a group of sheep . I did n't want you to eat this day .
GOLD:	Then Paul said , “ I am a Jew , born in Tarsus , a city in Cilicia , and I was brought up and educated here in Jerusalem under Gamaliel . As his student , I was carefully trained in our Jewish laws and customs . I became very zealous to honor God in everything I did , just like all of you today .

ID:	4709
INPUT:	Chánahgo nich'į' sodiszin ; yisdáshíłteeh , áko bee hahíínídzíi'ii bik'eh honish'į́į doo .
PRED:	Be merciful to me , O God.Pay attention to your laws .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	4710
INPUT:	Áko ts'ídá ákwii oo'áałgo Jesus , Niye' náádiidzá , hodííniidí góne' yá'át'ééh nídzísdlį́'ígíí hazhé'é yénáálnii' , áko hó áádóó haghandóó t'áá ałtso da'oosdląąd .
PRED:	When Jesus returned to his home , he remembered his son . Then he remembered his father 's home , he remembered his father 's household and his household .
GOLD:	Then the father realized that that was the very time Jesus had told him , “ Your son will live. ” And he and his entire household believed in Jesus .

ID:	4711
INPUT:	Riihobówam éí Shííkemgóó ííyá , háálá Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii adahodoolííł biniyé Shííkemgi neheeskai .
PRED:	Rehoboam also made the rest of the kings of Israel , for they went to the king of Shechem .
GOLD:	Rehoboam went to Shechem , where all Israel had gathered to make him king .

ID:	4712
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Ízrel dine'é kóbididííniił , Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ , áko Ííjip dine'é naanish yídanihiniłkadgo atídanihił'į́į́dóó ch'ínihideesh'ish , áádóó binaalte' danohłínídóó dah nihidideesh'ishgo ts'ídá bidziilgo índa ayóó át'éego baa nídéesht'įįłii bee nihik'é niná'deeshdlééł .
PRED:	“ Say to the people of Israel , ‘ I am the Lord , ' says , ‘ I will bring you out of Egypt , and I will bring you out of Egypt . I will give you your slaves , and I will give you your slaves . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , say to the people of Israel : ‘ I am the Lord . I will free you from your oppression and will rescue you from your slavery in Egypt . I will redeem you with a powerful arm and great acts of judgment .

ID:	4713
INPUT:	éí tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' t'ááłá'í nítínígo nidadool'aał biniyé yah ahekáhígíí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii yindaalnishii
PRED:	He will send fifty years old , and he will return to the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	The list included all the men between thirty and fifty years of age who were eligible for service in the Tabernacle ,

ID:	4714
INPUT:	Áko Ámalek dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Éígag t'áá hináago nízhdiiłtį́ , nidi diltłish bee diné ałtso nidadzistseed .
PRED:	He killed the king of Ammon , but he killed everyone in his sword .
GOLD:	He captured Agag , the Amalekite king , but completely destroyed everyone else .

ID:	4715
INPUT:	Diné haisíidii nílíinii , ádił asésiihgo haash nishłééh ? Ha'át'íísh biniyé shííníłt'óoh dooleełgo áshiinilaa , áko t'áá shí ádá hééł nísísdlį́į́' ?
PRED:	“ Son of man , why have I sinned ? Why have you done me ? ” I demanded .
GOLD:	If I have sinned , what have I done to you , O watcher of all humanity ? Why make me your target ? Am I a burden to you ?

ID:	4716
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá háiida ha'át'íhída yá'át'éehgo ádoolníłígíí hoł bééhózin nidi doo ájoonííłgóó éí bee ádił ni'dziilzííh .
PRED:	If you know what is right , you will be wise . But if you do n't know what is right , you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Remember , it is sin to know what you ought to do and then not do it .

ID:	4717
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné léi' níłch'i bi'iiníziinii bii' hólǫ́ǫgo doo yáłti'góó índa doo oo'į́į́góó yił haa daaskai , áádóó hadaałt'é áńjiidlaa , áko diné doo yáłti' da yę́ę yáłti' áádóó oo'į́ silį́į́' .
PRED:	A man who was possessed by a demon possessed by a man who healed him and healed him . He spoke to him , and he healed his words .
GOLD:	Then a demon-possessed man , who was blind and could n't speak , was brought to Jesus . He healed the man so that he could both speak and see .

ID:	4718
INPUT:	T'ah nááyówehgo jį́honaa'éí t'áadoo nidi jiiłtsą́ą da , áádóó t'áadoo hoł bééhooziní da . Díí ła'ígíí yiláahgo hanályį́į́h .
PRED:	When the sun saw the sun , he did n't know what he had seen the sun .
GOLD:	and he would never have seen the sun or known of its existence . Yet he would have had more peace than in growing up to be an unhappy man .

ID:	4719
INPUT:	Bee haz'áanii bínda'nołtinii índa Férisii danohłíinii , t'óó ádahodoł'íinii , doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Háálá t'ááłá'í nidi ła'da t'áá nihí nidahohłáhígi át'éego nahałá ádadoohłííł biniyé tónteel bikáá'góó índa ni' bikáá'góó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' nídadohkah , áko ła'da éigi át'éego nahałá ádaał'įįhgo naakidi nihiláahdi ánát'éego hool'áágóó ti'hoo'nííh bił haz'áanii yą́ą́h nilį́įgo ádaał'įįh .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and Pharisees , you Pharisees ! For you do n't know what you do . For if you do , do n't let anyone sit on earth and worship the earth .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you cross land and sea to make one convert , and then you turn that person into twice the child of hell you yourselves are !

ID:	4720
INPUT:	Paul éí James yaa níyá
PRED:	James and His Brothers
GOLD:	Paul Arrives at Jerusalem

ID:	4721
INPUT:	Áko Férisii danilíinii áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii ła' Jerúsalemdę́ę́' neheeskaígíí Jesus yaa áłah silį́į'go ,
PRED:	One day some Pharisees and teachers of religious law returned from Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	One day some Pharisees and teachers of religious law arrived from Jerusalem to see Jesus .

ID:	4722
INPUT:	áko éí binaagi łeets'aa' chodayooł'ínígíí t'áá át'é éí tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee naakáhí , atsį' bee haha'níłí , łeeshch'iih bee hahakaahí , bii' tá'ádígisí índa náá'iiniihgi łeets'aa' chodao'íinii t'áá át'é éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí biyi' góyaa anídei'nił índa nahashch'id bikágí bik'ínáltihgo tsin níyizii bee na'at'áhígíí éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bąąh hadaazhahí bii' nídítsih doo .
PRED:	The altar will also burn incense in the altar , and the fragrant incense burners will be made of water for the altar . Then the washbasin with the altar , the washbasin with its utensils , the altar , and the washbasin with the altar .
GOLD:	All the altar utensils — the firepans , meat forks , shovels , basins , and all the containers — must be placed on the cloth , and a covering of fine goatskin leather must be spread over them . Finally , they must put the carrying poles in place .

ID:	4723
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii biNíłch'i Diyinii bik'i hwiidooleełgo níłch'i bee hódzáanii áádóó bee ak'idi'iitįįhii , níłch'i kót'ée doo níinii áádóó bidziilii , níłch'i bee ééhózinii áádóó Bóhólníihii dílzin bił hólǫ́ǫ doo ;
PRED:	Then the Spirit of the Lord will be upon the Spirit of the Lord and knowledge and understanding . He will perform miraculous signs and signs and understanding .
GOLD:	And the Spirit of the Lord will rest on him — the Spirit of wisdom and understanding , the Spirit of counsel and might , the Spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord .

ID:	4724
INPUT:	T'ah doo naa nishááhdą́ą́' nilį́į́' áłch'į́į́dí yee' nít'éé' , áko k'ad t'óó ahayóí silį́į́' ; naa níyáádóó índa Bóhólníihii nik'ijidlíigo hodideeshzhiizh , ákohgo hahgoshą' sha'áłchíní daabí dooleełígíí nabik'ítsískees doo ? jidííniid .
PRED:	You have never been little while you were little , and now you have become a little while you have been circumcised . But what is the Lord says : “ How long will I do for you ? ”
GOLD:	You had little indeed before I came , but your wealth has increased enormously . The Lord has blessed you through everything I 've done . But now , what about me ? When can I start providing for my own family ? ”

ID:	4725
INPUT:	Nááda'iiłniihii baa hidit'aahígíí áádóó bindaanishígíí
PRED:	These are the priests and the These are the things I have done .
GOLD:	Instructions for Priestly Conduct

ID:	4726
INPUT:	Áádóó díí yiiłtsą́ągo shił ádzaaígíí nísh'į́į́ nít'éé' , shoo , naaldlooshii dį́į́' góne'ígíí ts'ídá t'óó báhádzidgo áádóó t'óó bik'e'íyée'go índa ts' ídá ayóó ábóodziilgo béésh nitł'izii ayóó ádaníłtsoii biwoo' . Éí yee aldeeł áádóó adiséí índa yidziihígíí yik'i naayá . Nidaaldlooshii bilą́ąjį'ígíí éí doo yił ahedaałt'ée da ; bidee' éí neeznáá yadaa'á .
PRED:	When I saw this , I saw the fourth beast and the fourth beast , the fourth beast , the beast , the beast , the beast , the beast , the beast , the beast , and the beast , and the beast .
GOLD:	Then in my vision that night , I saw a fourth beast — terrifying , dreadful , and very strong . It devoured and crushed its victims with huge iron teeth and trampled their remains beneath its feet . It was different from any of the other beasts , and it had ten horns .

ID:	4727
INPUT:	Shoo , nahjí kin haal'áii bich'į' nízhdoolyeedígi át'é , éí áhání índa kin áłch'į́dí sinil . Éísh doo kin áłch'į́dí da ? Háni'dii áajį' yis<unk> yeed .
PRED:	“ Look , it is a city of city , ” says the Lord. “ She is a city of refuge for a city .
GOLD:	See , there is a small village nearby . Please let me go there instead ; do n't you see how small it is ? Then my life will be saved . ”

ID:	4728
INPUT:	Éí bąą dayílá t'áá át'é ałtso doo dahiidoonaał da , áádóó diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo dabijéí tsidadooltłił ,
PRED:	Therefore , you will never be disgraced , for your heart will be disgraced .
GOLD:	Every arm is paralyzed with fear.Every heart melts ,

ID:	4729
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , T'áá háiida díí a'ohgo ádaat'éii ła' shíhooł'aahii nilínígíí bąą tó sik'azii yidoodlį́į́ł biniyé baazhníką́ągo , éí haa doolyéłígíí ts'ídá t'áá aaníí haa doolyééł .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , you will drink the water I have given you the truth of the water , and it will be better to drink .
GOLD:	And if you give even a cup of cold water to one of the least of my followers , you will surely be rewarded . ”

ID:	4730
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí ba'áłchíní t'áá hashkée neinitin
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	God 's Discipline Proves His Love

ID:	4731
INPUT:	áádóó shí ałdó' t'óó hodíína'go aadi deesháłígíí Bóhólníihii bee baa dzííníshłí .
PRED:	I trust in you , but trust in the Lord .
GOLD:	And I have confidence from the Lord that I myself will come to see you soon .

ID:	4732
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mídiyan hoolyéedi Mózes áyidííniid , Ííjip kéyahgóó nihéénídááh , háálá diné nida'niiłhį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę ałtso daneezná .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ The man of Egypt has gone to meet you , for he has killed all the men of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Before Moses left Midian , the Lord said to him , “ Return to Egypt , for all those who wanted to kill you have died . ”

ID:	4733
INPUT:	Náás áhodooníiłii yaa dahalne'ii dajílíinii t'áadoo biniyéhígóó dahojilne' , índa Diyin God bizaad hwii' ádaadin , áko éí t'áá hó ákónídahodidoolnííł .
PRED:	He will give justice to the false prophets , and he will never succeed in their own languages . He will never be able to tell them everything they say .
GOLD:	God 's prophets are all windbagswho do n't really speak for him.Let their predictions of disaster fall on themselves ! ' ”

ID:	4734
INPUT:	Háálá Christ daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náábi'diilzáago ts'ídá doo danáádootsaał dago nihił béédahózin , áko aniné éí náásgóó doo hwee ádínááhólníih da .
PRED:	For Christ has been raised from the dead , and he will die with you . Then he will never die .
GOLD:	We are sure of this because Christ was raised from the dead , and he will never die again . Death no longer has any power over him .

ID:	4735
INPUT:	Dooládó' honoojíidi t'áá ahą́ą́h hach'į' nidaalteeh da nít'éé' áádóó halgaidi háni' nídayiił'aah nít'éé' !
PRED:	Oh , how many of them have fallen into the wilderness !
GOLD:	Oh , how often they rebelled against him in the wildernessand grieved his heart in that dry wasteland .

ID:	4736
INPUT:	Ákoshą' Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í dabidohnínígíí haa deeshłííł ? hałníigo Páílat hach'į' hanáánáádzíí' .
PRED:	“ Are you the King of the Jews ? ” Pilate demanded .
GOLD:	Pilate asked them , “ Then what should I do with this man you call the king of the Jews ? ”

ID:	4737
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá háiida bikáá' náá'iiniihí bee ádee hadziidziihígíí , éí t'áadoo át'éhí da , nidi t'áá háiida bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi nehelyéhígíí bee ádee hadziidziihígíí , éí bá nijitłizh , dadohní .
PRED:	“ If you swear by the altar , you do n't even say it , ‘ Those who do not say , ‘ We do n't even know it . ' ”
GOLD:	And you say that to swear ‘ by the altar ' is not binding , but to swear ‘ by the gifts on the altar ' is binding .

ID:	4738
INPUT:	nidi nihibąąhági ádaat'éii éí nihí áádóó nihiDiyin God yił ałts'ánihinínil , índa ádił nida'iyohsíhígíí biniinaa nihits'ąą nídeest'į́į'go doo nihididoots'į́įł da .
PRED:	But if you refuse to forgive your sins , you will not listen to the sins of your God and forgive them .
GOLD:	It 's your sins that have cut you off from God.Because of your sins , he has turned awayand will not listen anymore .

ID:	4739
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya dine'é bidziilgo naaldeehdą́ą́' Sámson éí Ízrel dine'é bá nihozhdiyii'aahgo naadiin nááhai .
PRED:	When the Philistines attacked Samson , he reigned in charge of Israel for forty years .
GOLD:	Samson judged Israel for twenty years during the period when the Philistines dominated the land .

ID:	4740
INPUT:	Bisiláo dah deínéehii t'áá bizááká hodílzingo bidziilgo bił haz'áanii deidoołchǫǫł áádóó t'áá áłahíjį' didlidgo nááhániihii nahgóó adeidiyoołtł'ił . Áko doo yildingóó ni'iiłchǫǫhii deidoosįįł .
PRED:	They will cut off their weapons , and they will cut off their weapons . They will be cut off from their burnt offerings .
GOLD:	“ His army will take over the Temple fortress , pollute the sanctuary , put a stop to the daily sacrifices , and set up the sacrilegious object that causes desecration .

ID:	4741
INPUT:	T'áá bí t'éí naa níyáago t'áá bí t'éí dah nídidoodááł , nidi be'asdzą́ą́ hólǫ́ǫgo yił naa ní'áazhgo éí be'asdzą́ą́ yił dah nídidoot'ash .
PRED:	So he went to his wife and told her , “ but he will marry her . But if she is willing to marry her . ”
GOLD:	If he was single when he became your slave , he shall leave single . But if he was married before he became a slave , then his wife must be freed with him .

ID:	4742
INPUT:	Atis'adeesdzá bééhániihgo néit'aahdóó tsosts'idi damį́įgo ná'ádleeh biiłkáhí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' hodílzingo áłah náhdleehgo nályééh , éí t'áá nihí ádeinohsingo nááhániihii át'éego ałdó' bich'į' náádahołniih doo ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihik'ijisdli'ígi át'éego ádeínóhsin .
PRED:	On the first day you must present the Passover festival to the Lord your God . You must present a special gift to the Lord your God as a special gift to you .
GOLD:	Then celebrate the Festival of Harvest to honor the Lord your God . Bring him a voluntary offering in proportion to the blessings you have received from him .

ID:	4743
INPUT:	Ła' kin haal'áagi kéédahat'į́į dooleełgi ch'ééh hadeintáago honoojíidi doo naagháhídi tádadookai .
PRED:	Some people who live in the wilderness in the wilderness , while they were in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Some wandered in the wilderness , lost and homeless .

ID:	4744
INPUT:	Nimá bahastiin índa ba'áłchíní doo yił ni'íłdįįhii éí bich'é'é nílį́ ; nádí áádóó nideezhí badahastiin índa bada'áłchíní doo yił nida'íłdįįhii éí t'áá ła' bił háíníjéé' ; nimá Het dine'é nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; nizhé'é éí Ámor dine'é nilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ You are the husband of your mother and your mother , your mother , and you are the Hittite . You are the Hittite with the orphans and the Hittite .
GOLD:	For your mother loathed her husband and her children , and so do you . And you are exactly like your sisters , for they despised their husbands and their children . Truly your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite .

ID:	4745
INPUT:	éí yoołkáałdi yisdááyáii naa doolwołgo hane' neidoo'ááł .
PRED:	In that day , the Lord will answer you .
GOLD:	And on that day a survivor from Jerusalem will come to you in Babylon and tell you what has happened .

ID:	4746
INPUT:	Haa'íyee' t'áá ákwii áhát'į́ nidadidiit'ááł , índa nihitahgóó yá'át'éehii hólónígíí nihił béédahózin doo .
PRED:	Let us be our sins , and we will know what we have done .
GOLD:	So let us discern for ourselves what is right ; let us learn together what is good .

ID:	4747
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Gíliyad kéyahgóó Rúben dine'é áádóó Géed dine'é índa Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí bich'į' náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízar biye' Fíniyas adeis'a' ,
PRED:	So the tribe of Reuben sent the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	First , however , they sent a delegation led by Phinehas son of Eleazar , the priest , to talk with the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4748
INPUT:	Diyin God , t'áá ałk'idą́ą́' hoo'áałii shididoots'į́įłgo atíhodoolííł . Síilah . Háálá doo łahgo ádajinéhígíí bąą Diyin God doo dazhdísin da .
PRED:	And God has heard me , for he will change my decrees . For he will never ignore God 's laws .
GOLD:	God , who has ruled forever , will hear me and humble them.InterludeFor my enemies refuse to change their ways ; they do not fear God .

ID:	4749
INPUT:	Lk . 3 : <unk>
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Many People

ID:	4750
INPUT:	Asdzání áádóó áłchíní t'áadoo wólta'í dinéhígíí t'áá bízhánígo ashdladi mííl daats'í da'ííyą́ą́' lá .
PRED:	So the woman did n't eat anything from the town .
GOLD:	About 5,000 men were fed that day , in addition to all the women and children !

ID:	4751
INPUT:	Nidi Sádam dine'é t'áá íiyisí doo yá'ádaash<unk> da ; Bóhólníihii yich'į' t'áá íiyisí ádił da'ílzííh .
PRED:	But Sodom did n't say to the Lord , “ I am filled with violence . ”
GOLD:	But the people of this area were extremely wicked and constantly sinned against the Lord .

ID:	4752
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God béédahodzísingo éí hoł danilį́į doo nít'éé' , nidi doo hoł danilį́į da , doo nidi t'áá k'ad hach'į' ahééh daniizį́į' da . Áko t'áadoo biniyéhígóó t'áá ádzaagóó nitsídaakees daazlį́į́' , áádóó doo ádahalyą́ą́góó bíni' bił daatł'éé' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	But God knew what he was saying , but he refused to give thanks to him . But now they did n't know that they were afraid of them , and they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	Yes , they knew God , but they would n't worship him as God or even give him thanks . And they began to think up foolish ideas of what God was like . As a result , their minds became dark and confused .

ID:	4753
INPUT:	Ákohgo Saul éí habee na'abaahí David bee hazhdiilaa áádóó béésh łitsoii ch'ah bik'izhdíí'ą́ índa béésh éé' bee na'abaahii biih jííłtį́ .
PRED:	So Saul took David 's armor and placed it in his robe , and he put his armor armor in his clothing .
GOLD:	Then Saul gave David his own armor — a bronze helmet and a coat of mail .

ID:	4754
INPUT:	Áádóó kǫ' bii' ti'dahojooníihgo hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áágóó łid hahagháah doo . Índa naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii áádóó be'elyaii bich'į' nidahojiłáii , áádóó t'áá háiida éí bízhi' bee hóda'diidlidii , ts'ídá t'áadoo háádajilyį́hí i'ii'aah áádóó niyiiłkaah .
PRED:	The fire of the sky will be thrown into the sky , and the fire of the earth will be destroyed , and those who fear him will be cursed .
GOLD:	The smoke of their torment will rise forever and ever , and they will have no relief day or night , for they have worshiped the beast and his statue and have accepted the mark of his name . ”

ID:	4755
INPUT:	Áko Biinéíyah éí Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzindi jiníyáago Jó'ab ábijiní , Aláahgo naat'áanii kóní , Wóshdę́ę́' ch'ínínááh . Áko ání , Dooda , t'áá kwe'é yee' dadeestsaał . Áádóó Biinéíyah éí aláahgo naat'áanii díí saadígíí yił náhoolne'go ání , Jó'ab kóníigo shich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	Then Benaiah went out to the tent of the Lord and said to Joab , “ Go out and tell me what the king says : I will die ! ” So Joab told the king , “ No , I will die ! ”
GOLD:	Benaiah went to the sacred tent of the Lord and said to Joab , “ The king orders you to come out ! ” But Joab answered , “ No , I will die here. ” So Benaiah returned to the king and told him what Joab had said .

ID:	4756
INPUT:	Éí ádadoodįįł , nidi ni t'éí honílǫ́ ; éí t'áá ałtso éé' nahalingo hadadootih . Éé' nahalingo ałnáá<unk> nił , áko łahgo át'éego ádadoolnííł ,
PRED:	You will perish , but you will perish , and you will be dressed like a robe of clothing .
GOLD:	They will perish , but you remain forever ; they will wear out like old clothing.You will change them like a garmentand discard them .

ID:	4757
INPUT:	Ákohgo hwe'azis dadziz<unk> go diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo habéeso bik'ída'deesdizígíí hweda'azis biyi' naastsooz lá . Áko hó áádóó hazhé'é éí habéeso bik'ída'deesdizígíí dadziiłtsą́ągo t'óó nídadzisdzííd .
PRED:	So he tore his clothes and tore his money on his sack . When he saw that his money was taken away , they were afraid of their ancestors .
GOLD:	As they emptied out their sacks , there in each man 's sack was the bag of money he had paid for the grain ! The brothers and their father were terrified when they saw the bags of money .

ID:	4758
INPUT:	Siláo aa ádahalyáanii átséhígíí índa náá'ákéé' góne'ígíí bíighah ch'ínáájít'áazhgo , kintahjį' ch'é'étiingo béésh dáádílkałígíí baazhní'áázh . Nít'éé' t'áá bíni'ídi há ąą ádzaa , áko ch'ízhní'áazhgo ła' kin bita'atiin góne' ajíí'áazhgo , t'áá áko diyingo naal'a'í hats'ą́ą́' dah diiyá .
PRED:	So the soldiers went out to the entrance of the gateway and went out to the gates of the Temple . Then they went out to the door of the Temple and went to the Temple .
GOLD:	They passed the first and second guard posts and came to the iron gate leading to the city , and this opened for them all by itself . So they passed through and started walking down the street , and then the angel suddenly left him .

ID:	4759
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , T'áá ádzaagóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii t'óó ádahodil'íinii shízhi' binahjį' dabiyooch'íidgo dahalne' . Éí doo dahóół'aad da áádóó t'áadoo hach'į' haasdzíi' da índa t'áadoo nidi hach'į' yéíłti' da . T'áadoo bił ádaadzaii áádóó t'áadoo yídadínéeshyęęzhii , índa t'áadoo nídoodleełii áádóó na'adlo' yaa nitsídaazkéezii yee nihił dahalne' .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ I will tell you the prophets what I have done . I have told you what I say , ‘ Do n't tell you what I am saying , or I will never tell you what I have done . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ These prophets are telling lies in my name . I did not send them or tell them to speak . I did not give them any messages . They prophesy of visions and revelations they have never seen or heard . They speak foolishness made up in their own lying hearts .

ID:	4760
INPUT:	Áádóó dé'éyóní ła' nihitahgi kééhat'į́įgo , doodaii' náás da'ahíínółchíihii nihitahgi łahdę́ę́' nilíinii éí didlidgo náá'iiniih ádeeshłííł nízingo łikání halchingo Bóhólníihii bich'į' nááda'ayołniihígi át'éego bí ałdó' ákódaat'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ As you live among you , I will bring you a special gift to the Lord , a pleasing aroma to you , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	And if any foreigners visit you or live among you and want to present a special gift as a pleasing aroma to the Lord , they must follow these same procedures .

ID:	4761
INPUT:	Dooládó' kin haal'áago baa shił hózhónígíí éí t'áadoo bik'i honoodzood da .
PRED:	Oh , that I am not a city of refuge , for the desert is a wasteland .
GOLD:	That famous city , a city of joy , will be forsaken !

ID:	4762
INPUT:	Diné ła' hadá'í , doodaii' hazhé'é yázhí be'asdzą́ą́ bił jineezhtéezhgo éí hadá'í , doodaii' hazhé'é yázhí t'áá łichí'ígo ájiilaago át'é ; ádił adzisiihígíí bee hohodiit'i'go niji'aash doo , índa ha'áłchíní doo hodooleełgóó áhodi'doolníiłgo jidínóonééł .
PRED:	“ If a man who has sexual relations with his father or his wife or his wife or his sister , then they will die , and they will die for their own children , and they will die .
GOLD:	“ If a man has sex with his uncle 's wife , he has violated his uncle . Both the man and woman will be punished for their sin , and they will die childless .

ID:	4763
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá aaníinii nihił béédahoozindóó bik'ijį' t'áá ákódeii'néehgo ádił ninááda'ayiilzíihgo , ádił nida'ayeelzí'ígíí biniyé nááhidoonihii doo ła' nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For we know that we have sinned , and we will never again again again . We will never again die . ”
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we deliberately continue sinning after we have received knowledge of the truth , there is no longer any sacrifice that will cover these sins .

ID:	4764
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Kúshai dine'é nilíinii áyidííniid , Da' diné ániid naagháii Ábsalam t'áadoósh ádzaaí da ? Áko Kúshai dine'é hanáánáádzíi'go ádííniid , Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bi'ana'í danilíinii áádóó diné t'áá ałtso adadidoonih biniyé bik'ijį' danilínígíí éí diné ániid naagháii ábi'diilyaa yę́ęgi ádabi'dólne' .
PRED:	The king said to the king , “ Do n't you realize that Absalom has been killed ? ” The king replied , “ The Lord has given you victory over all the people . ”
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” And the Ethiopian replied , “ May all of your enemies , my lord the king , both now and in the future , share the fate of that young man ! ”

ID:	4765
INPUT:	áádóó tágí jį́į́ góne' tsinaa'eeł bee bina'anish nidi t'áá bí hadadayiistł'ííd .
PRED:	On the first day of the boat , the flesh of the harvest was put to death .
GOLD:	The following day they even took some of the ship 's gear and threw it overboard .

ID:	4766
INPUT:	Jesus hach'į' hanáánáádzíi'go áhodííniid , Ízrel dine'é nanítin , da' ákoósh díí doo bik'i'diitįįh da ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you understand what the people of Israel say ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ You are a respected Jewish teacher , and yet you do n't understand these things ?

ID:	4767
INPUT:	Aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah éí naaltsoos ííł'íní Shéífan ííłní , Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' bee haz'áanii naaltsoos bee si'ánígíí bik'íníyá . Áko Hilkáíyah éí naaltsoos Shéífan yeiní'ą́ągo yiyííłta' .
PRED:	Then Hilkiah said to Hilkiah , “ Hilkiah , Hilkiah , the court secretary , and read it to the Lord 's instructions . ” So Shaphan read the scroll .
GOLD:	Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the court secretary , “ I have found the Book of the Law in the Lord 's Temple ! ” Then Hilkiah gave the scroll to Shaphan , and he read it .

ID:	4768
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , nikéyah baa jiiníba' nít'éé' ; Jéíkab bíí' nilíinii daasnáanii bá shónéisíníłt'e' .
PRED:	O Lord , have mercy on the land of Jacob ; he has given the land of Jacob .
GOLD:	Lord , you poured out blessings on your land ! You restored the fortunes of Israel .

ID:	4769
INPUT:	Níyáajį' Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii diné bich'į' yíníłta' , áádóó bee bich'į' yáníłti' índa bee na'nítingo ádíínílzin .
PRED:	Then you will teach the words of the Scriptures , and you will teach them what you say .
GOLD:	Until I get there , focus on reading the Scriptures to the church , encouraging the believers , and teaching them .

ID:	4770
INPUT:	Áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso bik'ésti'ii , dadine'é t'áá ałtso dabinii' bik'ésti'ii éí díí dził si'ą́ągi nahjį' kwíidoolííł .
PRED:	He will sprinkle all the nations into the hills , and he will pour out the mountains on the hills .
GOLD:	There he will remove the cloud of gloom , the shadow of death that hangs over the earth .

ID:	4771
INPUT:	Tsin neheeshjíí' neelkáalii t'ááłá'ígo biyaadóó naaznilígíí naaki bąąh ha'íí'áago ádadoohłííł ; kót'éego níbaal bii' hodílzinii bá tsin neheeshjíí' t'áá ałtso ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ Make two frames of the Tabernacle — two bases — two bases — two bases —
GOLD:	with two pegs under each frame . Make all the frames identical .

ID:	4772
INPUT:	Áko díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh k'adę́ę baa hoolzhíísh , éí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii yolyé .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	The Festival of Unleavened Bread , which is also called Passover , was approaching .

ID:	4773
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nik'ehgo áhoot'éii bínashiníłtin ; shi'ana'í biniinaa k'íhoneezláágóó shiyííłááł .
PRED:	O Lord , teach me your ways ; teach me your enemies .
GOLD:	Teach me how to live , O Lord.Lead me along the right path , for my enemies are waiting for me .

ID:	4774
INPUT:	Áko Éíbram hwe'asdzą́ą́ Sérai doo ałchíi da ; éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' asdzání ła' Héígar wolyéego há naal'a'í nilį́ .
PRED:	So Abram 's wife , Sarai 's wife , was a woman from Egypt . ( This is the daughter of Abram . )
GOLD:	Now Sarai , Abram 's wife , had not been able to bear children for him . But she had an Egyptian servant named Hagar .

ID:	4775
INPUT:	Béésh łitsoii bitsásk'ehgi óola deeshjih , áádóó béésh <unk> izii bitsásk'ehgi béésh łigaii deeshjih , índa béésh łitsoii éí tsin bitsásk'ehgi áádóó béésh nitł'izii tsé bitsásk'ehgi deeshjih ; asht'ehodít'é áádóó t'áá ákogi át'éii ninanit'a'ígo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will bring gold from acacia wood , silver , bronze , and overlay them with silver and bronze . I will bring them to the top of silver , silver , and bronze .
GOLD:	I will exchange your bronze for gold , your iron for silver , your wood for bronze , and your stones for iron.I will make peace your leaderand righteousness your ruler .

ID:	4776
INPUT:	Áadi índída Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yisdádookah , t'áá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ánínígi át'éego : Yisdá'iiníiłii Záiyandę́ę́' doogááł , doo dahozdísin nít'éé' yę́ę Jéíkab bits'ą́ą́dóó da'ahílchíihii yits'éidoonił .
PRED:	And everyone in Israel will be saved , and everyone in Israel will know that the Scriptures say , ‘ We will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will come from Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	And so all Israel will be saved . As the Scriptures say , “ The one who rescues will come from Jerusalem , and he will turn Israel away from ungodliness .

ID:	4777
INPUT:	Áko hastiin sání , kin yee bóhólníihii nilíinii , diné yich'į' ch'íníyáago áyidííniid , Dooda , shik' isóó danohłíinii , t'áadoo doo yá'áshónígi ádaaht'íní . Díí diné shighan góne' yah ííyáhígíí t'áadoo doo aa nínígi ádaoł'íní .
PRED:	Then the husband said to the husband , “ O man , do n't go out to the house where I am saying , ‘ This is what I am saying . '
GOLD:	The old man stepped outside to talk to them . “ No , my brothers , do n't do such an evil thing . For this man is a guest in my house , and such a thing would be shameful .

ID:	4778
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bikéyah biyi' éí Éínak dine'é t'áadoo ła' yidzíi' da , t'áá hazhó'ó Géíza kin haal'áagi áádóó Gath kin haal'áagi índa Áshdad kin haal'áagi t'éiyá ła' t'áá daadzíí' .
PRED:	But the people of Israel did not say , “ We 've told the people of Gaza , Gaza , Gaza , Gaza , and Gath .
GOLD:	None of the descendants of Anak were left in all the land of Israel , though some still remained in Gaza , Gath , and Ashdod .

ID:	4779
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é éí David yaa ayadahooliih
PRED:	David Speaks about the Philistines
GOLD:	The Philistines Reject David

ID:	4780
INPUT:	Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' ! K'éé'dídléehii léi' álástsii' k'iididoolééłgóó ch'íníyá .
PRED:	“ Listen to what you eat and eat the seed of the field .
GOLD:	“ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seed .

ID:	4781
INPUT:	Áko Gáliliidę́ę́' asdzání hoł yíkaígíí akéé' yíkaigo tséní'ootséél deinééł'į́į́' , áádóó hats'íís niiltínígíí ts'ídá át'éegi bił béédahoozin ,
PRED:	When the women returned to Galilee , they saw that she had seen his body and had seen his body .
GOLD:	As his body was taken away , the women from Galilee followed and saw the tomb where his body was placed .

ID:	4782
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Jórdan tooh nílíní ha' naa ninoonáago Kéínan kéyah biih doohnéełgo
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : Go and occupy the Jordan River .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan ,

ID:	4783
INPUT:	Féro bitsi' éí David bikin haal'áádę́ę́' níyáago Sálaman kin há áyiilaii biih jíínáádóó bik'ijį' índa Míllo hoolyéii áyiilaa .
PRED:	So David returned from the city of King David 's daughter , and he built the sacred pillars .
GOLD:	Solomon moved his wife , Pharaoh 's daughter , from the City of David to the new palace he had built for her . Then he constructed the supporting terraces .

ID:	4784
INPUT:	áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii át'éego dóola yázhí áádóó deenásts'aa' índa dibé yázhí ánéelt'e'ígíí áádóó áda'ał'ínígíí bik'ehgo bił náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	Each of these offerings of bulls , rams , rams , and lambs must be accompanied by its prescribed grain offering .
GOLD:	Each of these offerings of bulls , rams , and lambs must be accompanied by its prescribed grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	4785
INPUT:	Háálá ádííniid , Aa a'ááh hasin hool'áágóó hasht'edoolnííł ; yót'áahdi hiníláii daniłdzilígi át'éego na'ahódlíii hasht'edíílííł .
PRED:	For he said , “ I will show your unfailing love forever .
GOLD:	Your unfailing love will last forever.Your faithfulness is as enduring as the heavens .

ID:	4786
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é ha'át'íidashą' dadidooniił ? Doo yá'át'ééhgóó honahaz'ą́ągo dziłghą́ą'di nahodoołtsiłgo nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' áhodoołdįįł biniyé ch'íhoní'eezh lá . T'óó báhádzidgo hashké ninidzį́'ígíí bits'ą́ąjį' ánání'nééh , áádóó nidine'é doo yá'át'éehii bee bich'į' nitsíníkeesígíí łahgo át'éego bąąh tsíńdíkees .
PRED:	“ What do you say to the people of Egypt ? They will say , ‘ You will destroy the mountains of Egypt , but you will be destroyed by your fury . '
GOLD:	Why let the Egyptians say , ‘ Their God rescued them with the evil intention of slaughtering them in the mountains and wiping them from the face of the earth ' ? Turn away from your fierce anger . Change your mind about this terrible disaster you have threatened against your people !

ID:	4787
INPUT:	Áádóó łóód bee bąąh dah haz'áanii éí bi'éé' bik'i nehees<unk> doo áádóó bitsiits'iin nidi doo bik'é'ésti' da doo , índa bidaa' bik'é'ésti'go , Doo shi'díídee' da , doo shi'díídee' da , níigo háádílwosh doo .
PRED:	“ If you are open , you will be covered with a veil , and you will not be covered with a veil , and you will not be covered with a covering .
GOLD:	“ Those who suffer from a serious skin disease must tear their clothing and leave their hair uncombed . They must cover their mouth and call out , ‘ Unclean ! Unclean ! '

ID:	4788
INPUT:	Shoo , shoo , náhookǫsjí kéyahígíí bits'ą́ąjį' yóó'ohjeeh , ní Bóhólníihii . Jó , t'áá dį́į́'dę́ę́' hanáyołígi át'éego tanihinííłkaad , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Look , this is what the Lord says : “ The north wind is coming from the north , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Come away ! Flee from Babylon in the land of the north , for I have scattered you to the four winds .

ID:	4789
INPUT:	Łeeh hwii'nííłgóó sélį́į'go t'áásh shił chohoo'į́įgoákǫ́ǫ́ hanáshyį́įh doo .
PRED:	I am in Thessalonica , and there is no rest .
GOLD:	No , my hope will go down with me to the grave.We will rest together in the dust ! ”

ID:	4790
INPUT:	Áko ádííniid , Nihił dahózhǫ́ ; t'áadoo nídaałdzidí ; nihiDiyin God índa nihizhé'é biDiyin God éí béeso nihe'azis yiih yiyíínil ; shí nihibéeso nídiinil nít'éé' . Áko Símiyan haa néiníłtį́ .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid ! ” they said . “ Do n't be afraid of God 's money , and he put his money into his sack . ” So he put his money in Simeon 's sack .
GOLD:	“ Relax . Do n't be afraid , ” the household manager told them . “ Your God , the God of your father , must have put this treasure into your sacks . I know I received your payment. ” Then he released Simeon and brought him out to them .

ID:	4791
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasin áádóó áká i'doolwoł bíká sohodizin
PRED:	His unfailing love and merciful
GOLD:	's Enemies

ID:	4792
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóidiísh nániidookąął ? <unk> nidilchíigoósh nich'į' yáłti' doo ?
PRED:	Have you ever heard your words ? Will you speak to you ?
GOLD:	Will it beg you for mercyor implore you for pity ?

ID:	4793
INPUT:	Daráíyas aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo naaki náhááh góne' hastą́ą́h nídízííd binih ts'ídá átsé hayííłkání góne' Hágeiyai éí Diyin God yá halne'ii jílį́įgo Bóhólníihii bizaad baa hojilne'go Shiyáltiyel biye' Zerábabel éí Júdah kéyahgi naat'áanii nilíinii índa Jásedek biye' Jéshuwa alą́ąjį' náá'iiłniihii bił hojoolne' .
PRED:	On the third year of King Darius 's reign , during the first year of King Darius 's reign , sent this message to the Lord :
GOLD:	On August 29 of the second year of King Darius 's reign , the Lord gave a message through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , governor of Judah , and to Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the high priest .

ID:	4794
INPUT:	Bił kééhót'íinii bikéyah bikáa'gi tsé adeiztsih yę́ę doo łahgo anáádahidoohtsih da ; éí náshiinídą́'ídi danihizhé'é yę́ę kéyah bee bééhózin doo biniyé tsé yee dahodeezo nít'éé' . Jó , Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nilíinii kéyah nihíí' dooleełgo nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	“ You must not defile your neighbor in the land of your ancestors . You will be handed over to the land the Lord your God gave you . You will occupy the land the land you gave you . ”
GOLD:	“ When you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you as your special possession , you must never steal anyone 's land by moving the boundary markers your ancestors set up to mark their property .

ID:	4795
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine' é t'áá ałtso shináshzhiizh , nidi Bóhólníihii bízhi' baa jííníshłíigo áhodeeshdįįł !
PRED:	I will destroy all the nations , but I will destroy my name .
GOLD:	Though hostile nations surrounded me , I destroyed them all with the authority of the Lord .

ID:	4796
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God biYe' t'ááłá'í bá yizhchínígíí bee dahinii'náa doo biniyé nihokáá' dine'é yitahjį' yiníł'a' . Díí bee Diyin God ayóó'ánihó'nínígíí nihił béédahoozin .
PRED:	For God has sent us to live among us , and we know that we are the Son of God 's Son .
GOLD:	God showed how much he loved us by sending his one and only Son into the world so that we might have eternal life through him .

ID:	4797
INPUT:	Ni'níłdįįd bijį́įjį' bahastiin yaa jooba' , áádóó yich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ááníił da dooleełígíí éí dooda .
PRED:	For the day of death will come to the grave , and it will never be able to die .
GOLD:	She brings him good , not harm , all the days of her life .

ID:	4798
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Ízrel dine'é shízhi' bee dabi'dójíigo ádeidoolííł , áádóó bik'ijishdlíi doo .
PRED:	I will bless the people of Israel , and I will bless them in the name of my name .
GOLD:	Whenever Aaron and his sons bless the people of Israel in my name , I myself will bless them . ”

ID:	4799
INPUT:	Tónteel Łichíí' wolyéego siyínígíí yideeztehgo nááltsei . Áádóó halgaigóó hojoo'ish nahalingo <unk> k'eh ha'naa nihoní'eezh .
PRED:	When the Red Sea heard the noise of the Red Sea , he led them out of the Red Sea .
GOLD:	He commanded the Red Sea to dry up.He led Israel across the sea as if it were a desert .

ID:	4800
INPUT:	Bee ída'diiljeehí naaltsoos bee bidáda'deeshjée'ii hastą́ą́h góne'ígíí ąą yidinízǫ́ǫzgo déé'į́į́' , nít'éé' ayóó át'éego ni' nahaasnáá' , áádóó jį́honaa'éí éí aghaashzhiin yistł'ónígíí nahalingo łizhin silį́į́' , áádóó tł'éhonaa'éí dił nahalingo łichíí' silį́į́' ,
PRED:	When the Lamb broke the fourth seal , I saw the fourth seal of their eyes , they looked like smoke and their eyes , and their eyes were white and dark .
GOLD:	I watched as the Lamb broke the sixth seal , and there was a great earthquake . The sun became as dark as black cloth , and the moon became as red as blood .

ID:	4801
INPUT:	Díí kósdzaaígíí bee Bóhólníihii éí ná naal'a'í yaa jooba' le' , jó , shinanit'a'í bidiyin Ríman yich'į' nahodoołaał biniyé bikin góne' shigaan yótą'go bił yah anásht'ashgo áádóó Ríman bikin góne' yaa ánásht'įįhgo díí kósdzaaígíí Bóhólníihii ná naal'a'í yá yóó'anéididoo'ááł .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the Lord 's servant , for I am planning to worship the Lord my God . I will carry out my arm in the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , just as I did .
GOLD:	However , may the Lord pardon me in this one thing : When my master the king goes into the temple of the god Rimmon to worship there and leans on my arm , may the Lord pardon me when I bow , too . ”

ID:	4802
INPUT:	Jó , kin t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo diné ła' ádayiilaa , nidi Diyin God éí t'áá ałtsoní áyiilaa .
PRED:	For God created everyone in a house , but God created everyone else .
GOLD:	For every house has a builder , but the one who built everything is God .

ID:	4803
INPUT:	Nahachagiitsoh bee atí'ályaaígíí
PRED:	A Plague of locusts
GOLD:	A Plague of Locusts

ID:	4804
INPUT:	Áko hach'ą́ą́h dáázhdeel'áago doo hach'į' ajókááh át'éégóó biniinaa Jesus éí kin biyi' góne' sidáagi bighą́ą́'dę́ę́' ąą dazdeeznilgo diné bitah doo nahwii'náa daígíí bik'i antéhí t'áá bee Jesus bidáahjį' hadah adahodzizlo' .
PRED:	Those who pursue the teaching of Jesus sat down on the roof of the house of Jesus , teaching the sick man in the house of Jesus .
GOLD:	They could n't bring him to Jesus because of the crowd , so they dug a hole through the roof above his head . Then they lowered the man on his mat , right down in front of Jesus .

ID:	4805
INPUT:	Ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí bá tł'óół ałk'ésgizígi át'éego óola t'áá bízhání da'ahólzha'ígíí ałk'ésgizgo ádayiilaa ;
PRED:	He made the chestpiece for the ephod and attached them to the ephod of pure gold .
GOLD:	To attach the chestpiece to the ephod , they made braided cords of pure gold thread .

ID:	4806
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá abíní bik'eh diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'áá da'jiyánígíí bik'ehgo nínádajiidlah , áko náhoniigahgo bi'oh nínáda'jiidlahígíí éí nídadiłhįh .
PRED:	As they walked up to the ground , they covered the night and covered it with water . As they walk , they covered the surface of the morning .
GOLD:	After this the people gathered the food morning by morning , each family according to its need . And as the sun became hot , the flakes they had not picked up melted and disappeared .

ID:	4807
INPUT:	Diné aláahgo bídahólníihii éí díí : Péírash , Péíhath-mó'ab , Íílam , Zátu , Béínai ,
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Jeshua , leader of the family of Moab ,
GOLD:	The following leaders : Parosh , Pahath-moab , Elam , Zattu , Bani ,

ID:	4808
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , yá'át'éehii nich'į' yit'íní ályaa , áko Bóhólníihii éí haa nít'ée doo , nó'ní : Éí t'áá ákogi ááníił doo áádóó ajooba' ayóó'ííní'níi doo índa a' ohgo ánít'éego niDiyin God bił yí'ash doo .
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” the man said , “ and you will know what the Lord says : You will have no mercy on you , and you will have no mercy .
GOLD:	No , O people , the Lord has told you what is good , and this is what he requires of you : to do what is right , to love mercy , and to walk humbly with your God .

ID:	4809
INPUT:	Naat'áanii nich'į' báhóóchįįdgo doo dah didíínáał da , háálá ayóó át'é bąąhági áhóót'įįd nidi , doo íits'a'ígóó dzizdáhígíí bee k'éédahodoodǫǫł .
PRED:	He was angry with anger , for he was not angry with the people of Israel , because he refused to listen to you . He will purify you from the great sin of the Lord .
GOLD:	If your boss is angry at you , do n't quit ! A quiet spirit can overcome even great mistakes .

ID:	4810
INPUT:	Éran áádóó biye'ké índa Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bich'į' handziihgo kóbidiní , Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó ła' , doodaii' dé'éyóní éí Ízrel kéyahgi kéédahat'íinii ła' náádi'yoołnihgo éí yee ádee haadzíi'ii t'áá át'é índa t'áá bí íinízingo nááyiiłniihii t'áá át'é éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náádayiiłnihgo
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron and all the tribes of Israel : If any foreigners living among the tribes of Israel or foreigners living in the land of Israel , they must offer sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living among you. “ If you present a gift as a burnt offering to the Lord , whether it is to fulfill a vow or is a voluntary offering ,

ID:	4811
INPUT:	Bénjamin dine'é nilíinii bidine'é náás ahoolchíiłii éí ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíłígíí dabizhé'é yę́ę yada'áłchíní danilį́įgo éí dabi'déélta'ii dabízhi' bik'ehgo diné naadiindóó yówehgo béédááhaii t'áá ałtso ana<unk> į́ yídaneel'áanii
PRED:	These were the clans of Benjamin 's clans , who was older in the tribe of Benjamin , who was older , who was older and older .
GOLD:	Benjamin35,400

ID:	4812
INPUT:	Éí hoolzhishdi díí dine'é índa Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'íinii bee bich'į' ha'doodzih , Doo bee ąąh doolch'ih da índa chin doo ąąh dooldah da biniyé honoojítahgi wódahgo nahaz'ánígóó shidine'é bitsi' bich'į' t'áá íiyisí hadoh bił dooyoł .
PRED:	“ In that day the people of Jerusalem will say , ‘ The people of Jerusalem will say , ‘ This is what the destruction of the people of Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	The time is coming when the Lord will sayto the people of Jerusalem , “ My dear people , a burning wind is blowing in from the desert , and it 's not a gentle breeze useful for winnowing grain .

ID:	4813
INPUT:	áko Áman dine'é ábidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God bizaad deísółts'ą́ą́' , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shikin bii' sohodizin doo ílį́į́góó áál'įįd yę́ędą́ą́' , índa Ízrel dine'é bikéyahgi doo yiila'í yę́ędą́ą́' , áádóó Júdah dine'é yisnááhgóó abi'doojaa' yę́ędą́ą́' , Ts'íigo lą́ą , dadooniidígíí biniinaa ,
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from the Sovereign Lord : This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Judah will be taken away from Judah . ' ”
GOLD:	Give the Ammonites this message from the Sovereign Lord : Hear the word of the Sovereign Lord ! Because you cheered when my Temple was defiled , mocked Israel in her desolation , and laughed at Judah as she went away into exile ,

ID:	4814
INPUT:	Áádóó Féro biyoostsah haidiit'ą́ągo Jóseph bíla' yąąh niiní'ą́ , índa áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí daalgaii dits'idgo ádaalyaii éé' yee hahodiilaa , índa óola da'ahól<unk> go yoo'ígíí hazénéíst'i' ,
PRED:	Then Pharaoh took his hand and placed it in his hand , and he put the linen linen garments for Joseph . He overlaid them with gold , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh removed his signet ring from his hand and placed it on Joseph 's finger . He dressed him in fine linen clothing and hung a gold chain around his neck .

ID:	4815
INPUT:	Áádóó i'íí'ą́ągo tsinaa'eeł tá'ałníí'góó yi'oł , nidi hó t'éí t'áá sáhí t'áá áadi nijighá .
PRED:	At that evening he was divided by the ship , where he stayed there .
GOLD:	Late that night , the disciples were in their boat in the middle of the lake , and Jesus was alone on land .

ID:	4816
INPUT:	Áko Béílam éí Béílak ííłní , Didlidgo nááhíłniihígíí bíighahgi sínízį́ ; shí níláhgóó deeshááł , Bóhólníihii daats'í shaa hodooleeł ; t'áá shił ííshją́ą́ áyiilaaígíí bee nił náhodeeshnih . Áko yílk'id góde haayá .
PRED:	Balaam said to Balak , “ Sit in front of the burnt offering , and I will go to the ground in front of the Lord . I will show you what I am going to do . ”
GOLD:	Then Balaam said to Balak , “ Stand here by your burnt offerings , and I will go to see if the Lord will respond to me . Then I will tell you whatever he reveals to me. ” So Balaam went alone to the top of a bare hill ,

ID:	4817
INPUT:	Ata'naníbaalídóó tł'óó' bich'ijígo bikáá' adání nidadooh'ááł , índa bee hool'iní éí níbaal bii' hodílzinii bii' bikáá' adání si'ánígíí binaashiijí shádi'ááhjígo nidadooh'ááł ; bikáá' adání éí náhookǫsjí si'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ Make the entrance of the north , ” says the entrance of the Tabernacle . “ Make the south side of the north and the south side of the north .
GOLD:	Place the table outside the inner curtain on the north side of the Tabernacle , and place the lampstand across the room on the south side .

ID:	4818
INPUT:	Doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájooníiłii háni'dii doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájooníił da doo , áádóó haa'ihii háni'dii haa'ih doo , áádóó ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'éii háni'dii ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájooníił doo , índa jidiyinii éí háni'dii jidiyin doo .
PRED:	Let the righteous be innocent , for the righteous will never deny justice , justice , justice , justice , justice , and justice will never be punished .
GOLD:	Let the one who is doing harm continue to do harm ; let the one who is vile continue to be vile ; let the one who is righteous continue to live righteously ; let the one who is holy continue to be holy . ”

ID:	4819
INPUT:	Índa tsék'ih na'azólii áádóó na'ashǫ́'iiłbáhí łahgo aní'doolníiłii , na'ashǫ́'iiłbáhítsoh , na'ashǫ́'iiłbáhí łitsoii , na'ashǫ́'ii dootł'izhii táyi' dahólóonii .
PRED:	He will destroy the dragon and the dragon and the dragon — the dragon — the dragon — the dragon — the great serpent .
GOLD:	the gecko , the monitor lizard , the common lizard , the sand lizard , and the chameleon .

ID:	4820
INPUT:	T'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'éł'íinii t'áá ałtso nahjį' nidííní'ą́ ; t'áá íiyisí náhóóchįįdígíí bits'ą́ąjį' ánéinidzaa .
PRED:	You have broken the anger of your anger ; you have turned away from your fierce anger .
GOLD:	You held back your fury.You kept back your blazing anger .

ID:	4821
INPUT:	Azhą́ diné doo hóyáanii nidi , doo yáłti'góó hóyą́ągo baa nitsáhákees , doo yádíłtihgóó diné ak'i'diitą́ą́ lá bidi'niih .
PRED:	Though the wise are foolish , the words of a person who leaves a person 's heart is defiled .
GOLD:	Even fools are thought wise when they keep silent ; with their mouths shut , they seem intelligent .

ID:	4822
INPUT:	Áko Kapérniyamgi jíkai , áádóó t'áá áko háá'áyį́į́h jį́ azlį́į'go kin bii' áłah ná'ádleehí biyi' góne' yah ajííyáago naz'neeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then Jesus went to Capernaum , and he taught them in the synagogue in the synagogues and taught them in the synagogue .
GOLD:	Jesus and his companions went to the town of Capernaum . When the Sabbath day came , he went into the synagogue and began to teach .

ID:	4823
INPUT:	Hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh góne' naat'áanii éí diné áłah nádleehígíí awáalyaaí t'ááłá'ígo t'áá deinízinígíí yá ch'ééyiiłt'e' łeh .
PRED:	When the crowd gathered at the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the prisoners who were in prison .
GOLD:	Now it was the governor 's custom each year during the Passover celebration to release one prisoner to the crowd — anyone they wanted .

ID:	4824
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Éran ábididííniił , Ííjip haz'ą́ągi tó dadeezlínígíí áádóó tooh danílínígíí áádóó be'ak'id dah naazyínígíí índa tó naazyínígíí dił dadooleeł biniyé bikáá'góó nigish bił dah didiilnííh , áko Ííjip kéyahgi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' dił hólǫ́ǫ doo ; azhą́ tsin łeets'aa' índa tsé łeets'aa' tó dabiyi'ígíí t'áá át'é dił dadooleeł .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Tell Aaron , ‘ This is what the Lord says to Moses and Aaron and the rivers of Egypt , the water of the Nile , and the water of Egypt will be filled with water and water . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses : “ Tell Aaron , ‘ Take your staff and raise your hand over the waters of Egypt — all its rivers , canals , ponds , and all the reservoirs . Turn all the water to blood . Everywhere in Egypt the water will turn to blood , even the water stored in wooden bowls and stone pots . ' ”

ID:	4825
INPUT:	Nidi ts'ídá átséedi Sháíloh kin haal'áadi shá haz'ą́ągo shízhi' bee ho'dójíigo áshłaa yę́ęgóó dínááh , áko áadi shidine'é doo yá'áshónígi ádaat'ínígíí biniinaa atéshłaaígíí níníł'į́ .
PRED:	But when I arrived at Shiloh , I will bring my name to the city where I am going to live in the presence of my name .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Go now to the place at Shiloh where I once put the Tabernacle that bore my name . See what I did there because of all the wickedness of my people , the Israelites .

ID:	4826
INPUT:	Jéíkab dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó bóhólníih dooleełii hahodooleeł ; kin haal'áagi dadzidziihígíí áhodi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	The descendants of Jacob will be destroyed ; the city of Jacob will be destroyed .
GOLD:	A ruler will rise in Jacobwho will destroy the survivors of Ir . ”

ID:	4827
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí hóyée'go á hada'iidziihii áádóó bił ałtaa hół'aahii índa aditeh nihik'ijį' kwíidoolííł ; éí bíndadoołnishígíí t'áá át'é baa nídoohkaigo hóyée'go bá hada'iidziih doo ; ałtso ádoohdįįłjį' índa t'áadoo hodina'í ałtso ásoohdįįdjį' nihik'ijį' kwíidoolííł , háálá Bóhólníihii éí doo yá'ádaashóonii baa nidaahkaigo t'óó yóó'adashisidoo'ą́ .
PRED:	“ The Lord will afflict you with an object of cursing and curse you . You will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed . You will destroy all the evil things you have destroyed .
GOLD:	“ The Lord himself will send on you curses , confusion , and frustration in everything you do , until at last you are completely destroyed for doing evil and abandoning me .

ID:	4828
INPUT:	Diné naalnishii bich'į' nahalyéii doo t'óó bee baa hojoosba'ii át'éego yaa nitsíkees da , nidi yik'é naalnishii át'é .
PRED:	It is not good to those who are rich , but he does n't care for us .
GOLD:	When people work , their wages are not a gift , but something they have earned .

ID:	4829
INPUT:	Éí t'áadoo bik'ee nił yé'í , háálá Bóhólníihii niDiyin God ná naabaah doo .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , for the Lord your God is with you .
GOLD:	Do not be afraid of the nations there , for the Lord your God will fight for you . '

ID:	4830
INPUT:	Diyin God yee nihaa joozba'ii bits'ą́ąjį' kódaahne' lágo
PRED:	Do n't forget God 's Good News
GOLD:	A Call to Listen to God

ID:	4831
INPUT:	Áádóó Sámuel ání , Da' Bóhólníihii éí didlidgo náádahaniihii áádóó náádahidoonihii Bóhólníihii bizaad bik'eh hól'ínígíísh biláahgo ayóó át'éego yaa bił hózhǫ́ ? Jó , ak'eh hól'ínígíí éí nááhániihii biláahgo yá'át'ééh , índa adzíists'ą́ą'go éí deenásts'aa' bik'ah nááhániihii biláahgo yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	Then Samuel said , “ Will the burnt offering be given to the Lord ? Is it better to hear the good gifts of the Lord ? Is it better to hear the fat of the good gifts of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	But Samuel replied , “ What is more pleasing to the Lord : your burnt offerings and sacrificesor your obedience to his voice ? Listen ! Obedience is better than sacrifice , and submission is better than offering the fat of rams .

ID:	4832
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii bidine'é daadziihígíí bá naat'á ch'ah ayóó át'éii áádóó ayóó ánóolninii nilį́į doo ;
PRED:	In that day the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be his glorious crown , and his glory will be honored .
GOLD:	Then at last the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill himself be Israel 's glorious crown.He will be the pride and joyof the remnant of his people .

ID:	4833
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Héshban kin haal'áii binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił , áádóó Aró'er kin haal'áii binaagóó kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił , índa Árnan tooh nílíní bibąąhgóó kin hadaas'áhígóó t'áá át'é kéédahat'į́įgo táadi neeznádiin nááhai . Ha'át'éegoshą' t'áadoo bighanídasidooht'ą́ą da ?
PRED:	The territory of Israel extended from Heshbon and the towns of Heshbon , the town of Heshbon , the town of Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Gorge ( which means “ Why are you living in the middle of the Arnon River ? ” )
GOLD:	“ Israel has been living here for 300 years , inhabiting Heshbon and its surrounding settlements , all the way to Aroer and its settlements , and in all the towns along the Arnon River . Why have you made no effort to recover it before now ?

ID:	4834
INPUT:	Yee nida'ach'ąąhii yee eda'alyaii ádayiilaago t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee ádaa dahas'nihgo doo daaldinii índa dajoodláii ádá ádayiilaa ; éí bąą t'óó baa'ihgo baa nitsídadzikeesgo áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of their idol ? Do n't be afraid of those who do what is right , for they are looking for themselves .
GOLD:	They were proud of their beautiful jewelryand used it to make detestable idols and vile images.Therefore , I will make all their wealthdisgusting to them .

ID:	4835
INPUT:	Ákódzaadóó bik'ijį' nihi'ana'í t'áá ałtso díí yaa dahodiizts'ą́ą'go áádóó ał'ąą dine'é nihinaagóó kéédahat'ínígíí díí dayiiłtsą́ągo bąąh nidahazkaadgo yik'ee nitsidaaskai , háálá nihiDiyin God éí ła'yiyiilaago yaa ákódaniizį́į́' .
PRED:	When you heard this , the people of the world saw that they were afraid of their enemies , they saw that they were afraid of their enemies .
GOLD:	When our enemies and the surrounding nations heard about it , they were frightened and humiliated . They realized this work had been done with the help of our God .

ID:	4836
INPUT:	Áko hoł nooyéłígíí ádadííniid , Díí Jesus , Diyin God yá halne'ii , Gáliliidi Názareth hoolyéédóó át'į́ .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ This is what happened , ” they said . “ He is from Galilee . ”
GOLD:	And the crowds replied , “ It 's Jesus , the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee . ”

ID:	4837
INPUT:	Da'oodlání baa ádahojilyáanii t'ááłá'í hwe'asdzą́ą doo , ha'áłchíní índa haghan haz'ą́ągi yá'át'éehgo dah da'jí'éesh doo .
PRED:	It is the church in the church , and everyone will live in his home .
GOLD:	A deacon must be faithful to his wife , and he must manage his children and household well .

ID:	4838
INPUT:	Kót'éego Jóseph ba'áłchíní éí Manáseh dine'é áádóó Íífreiyim dine'é kéyah bíí' dooleełii nídahodii'ą́ .
PRED:	So Manasseh gave Manasseh the land of Ephraim , Ephraim , Ephraim , and Manasseh .
GOLD:	This was the homeland allocated to the families of Joseph 's sons , Manasseh and Ephraim .

ID:	4839
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí ayaadi éé' nineezígíí Éran biih jííłtį́įgo sis bee áká bijiszas áádóó éé' agod ta'jį' nineel'ánígíí biih náájííłtį́ ; éí bikáa'gi íífad wolyéii éí ajéíts'iin bąąh nináltsosígíí yąąh niiníłtsoozgo íífad biniyé sis naashch'ąą'go yistł'ónígíí yee ye'aztł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	So Moses took Aaron 's robe in the middle of the robe and placed it in the middle of the ephod . He put it on the ephod and placed it on the chestpiece .
GOLD:	He put the official tunic on Aaron and tied the sash around his waist . He dressed him in the robe , placed the ephod on him , and attached the ephod securely with its decorative sash .

ID:	4840
INPUT:	Kédaayah béeso bik'é a<unk> níiłgo nináádahaniih doo . Da'oo'íinii binááł kéyah nidahaniihgo bee bééhózinii éí hanáádadilne'go dánááda'diljeeh doo . Bénjamin bikéyahgi , Jerúsalem kin haal'á bik'i dinaago nahós'a'gi ákwe'é ákót'ée doo . Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó dayílk'idgóó kin hadaas'áhígóó ákódaat'ée doo . Honíteelgi kin hadaas'áágóó áádóó shádi'áahjigo kin hadaas'áágóó ałdó' , háálá yisnááh dajílíinii nahjį' kódeeshłíiłgo daahwíí' yę́ę hwíí' nídadoodleełgo ádeeshłííł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will praise you in the land , and I will praise you in the land of Benjamin . I will bring them back to the towns of Benjamin , the towns of Benjamin , and I will bring them into the hill country of Judah . I will bring them back to the towns of Judah .
GOLD:	Yes , fields will once again be bought and sold — deeds signed and sealed and witnessed — in the land of Benjamin and here in Jerusalem , in the towns of Judah and in the hill country , in the foothills of Judah and in the Negev , too . For someday I will restore prosperity to them . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	4841
INPUT:	Shí Paul , Diyin God yá naal'a'í índa Jesus Christ yá yil'aadii nishłį́ . Diyin God náyiizláa'ii bida'oodlą' yee aa dadzólíii náás yit'ih doogo índa Diyin God k'ehgo iiná bik'ehgo t'áá aaníinii yaa ákodahiniizįįh doo biniyé shi'dool'aad .
PRED:	This letter is from Paul and apostle of Christ Jesus Christ . I am the one who believes in God 's faith and faith in Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ . I have been sent to proclaim faith to those God has chosen and to teach them to know the truth that shows them how to live godly lives .

ID:	4842
INPUT:	Áko Aizéíyah kóníigo haa hoolne'ígíí t'áá aaníí silį́į́' : T'áá aaníí dadoohts'a' dooleeł nidi , ts'ídá doo bik'idadi'doohtį́įł da , áádóó t'áá aaníí daah'į́į dooleeł nidi , ts'ídá doo deidoołtséeł da .
PRED:	Then Isaiah said , “ This is what the Scriptures say : You will see the truth , but you will never see the truth .
GOLD:	This fulfills the prophecy of Isaiah that says , ‘ When you hear what I say , you will not understand.When you see what I do , you will not comprehend .

ID:	4843
INPUT:	Nidi diné yich'į' doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįdígíí doo hináágóó áádóó bik'éí doo hólǫ́ǫ́góó t'áadoo yich'į' niná'ódlé łígóó éí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áát'įįdígíí niná'doodléełgo Bóhólníihii bá náá'iiłniihii baa didoot'áałgo deenásts'aa' bee á k'ééhoodǫǫłii óóltą'go há k'ééhozhdoołdǫǫłii nááhizhdoołnih .
PRED:	But if the people do n't have enough to go to their relatives , do n't let them go to the Lord 's relatives , making them right with the guilt offering , making them right with the Lord , making them right with them right with the ram .
GOLD:	But if the person who was wronged is dead , and there are no near relatives to whom restitution can be made , the payment belongs to the Lord and must be given to the priest . Those who are guilty must also bring a ram as a sacrifice , and they will be purified and made right with the Lord .

ID:	4844
INPUT:	Áádóó ádidooniił , Háájíshą' hadiyin dabidi'níinii índa hatsé bada'jólí nít'é'ígíí ?
PRED:	And they will say , “ Where is the first of God ? ”
GOLD:	Then he will ask , ‘ Where are their gods , the rocks they fled to for refuge ?

ID:	4845
INPUT:	T'áadoo naaki nilíní aláahgo át'éii éí a'ohgo át'éii yik'ijidlíigo bééhózin .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of the king , for he knows what is right .
GOLD:	And without question , the person who has the power to give a blessing is greater than the one who is blessed .

ID:	4846
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii ádííniid , Ha'át'íí ił ílį́į́ shį́į́ , doodaii' ha'át'íí ádił ídlį́į́ shį́į́ Mórdiikai bá baa na'asdee' ? Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii bá nidaal'a'í ádabidííniid , t'áadoo há baa na'asdee'í da .
PRED:	The king asked the king , “ What do you want to marry a great feast ? ” So Mordecai replied , “ We have no king to marry a banquet for our master . ”
GOLD:	“ What reward or recognition did we ever give Mordecai for this ? ” the king asked.His attendants replied , “ Nothing has been done for him . ”

ID:	4847
INPUT:	Díí kin haal'áagi t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nidajikaii éí diltłish bee nidahodi'dootsił , áádóó dichin índa naałniih nidahodoołtsił , nidi díí kin haal'áádóó nahgóó ch'ízhníyáii éí Kaldíya dine'é bisiláo honáshzhiizhii dahwiidoołtsołgo éí jiináa doo , áádóó binaalte' jílį́į doo .
PRED:	The people of the city will be killed , famine , disease , famine , famine , disease , and disease will be destroyed . But the Babylonians will be killed , but the Babylonians will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Everyone who stays in Jerusalem will die from war , famine , or disease , but those who go out and surrender to the Babylonians will live . Their reward will be life !

ID:	4848
INPUT:	díí doo bizhdeelchíid da , díí doo jiilįh da , éí doo nízhdiilée da ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you eat this servant ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ Do n't handle ! Do n't taste ! Do n't touch ! ” ?

ID:	4849
INPUT:	Ákohgo doo haa nááhodeeshnih da , índa házhi' binahjį' doo nááhodeeshnih da , dííniidgo hazaad éí shijéí bii'di hólǫ́ǫgo shits'in bii'di kǫ' nahalingo bidá'deelkaal , áádóó ch'ééh bił t'ą́ą́' sétį́įgo bąąh niníyá . Áko Diyin God bizaad doo bee yáshti' da dooleeł nisingo ch'ééh ááł'įįd .
PRED:	Then I will tell them , and I will tell you what I am saying , but I will not be able to tell you what I am saying , but I will not be able to talk to you .
GOLD:	But if I say I 'll never mention the Lordor speak in his name , his word burns in my heart like a fire.It 's like a fire in my bones ! I am worn out trying to hold it in ! I ca n't do it !

ID:	4850
INPUT:	T'áá nił naash'aashgo naadiin nááhai ; nidibé dabi'ádígíí índa tł'ízí dabi'ádígíí t'áadoo bitsą́ hada'iiz'éel da , índa nideenásts'aa' t'áadoo ła' yishghal da .
PRED:	I saw two sheep and goats , goats , and no one can count the basket of goats , and no one can count the basket .
GOLD:	“ For twenty years I have been with you , caring for your flocks . In all that time your sheep and goats never miscarried . In all those years I never used a single ram of yours for food .

ID:	4851
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Bóhólníihii náyookąąhgo kóní , Díí dinéshą' daa deeshłííł ? K'adę́ę tsé yee shił nidadzíłne' .
PRED:	Then Moses cried out to the Lord , “ This is what the Lord says : How long will I put my hope ? ”
GOLD:	Then Moses cried out to the Lord , “ What should I do with these people ? They are ready to stone me ! ”

ID:	4852
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , Diyin God doo nihá nihodiyoo'aał daígíí biniyé t'áadoo ałch'į' saad dahonoł'íní . Jó'akon , ánihwii'aahii ch'é'étiindę́ę́' sizį́ !
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't be afraid of God . Do n't be afraid of what I am saying .
GOLD:	Do n't grumble about each other , brothers and sisters , or you will be judged . For look — the Judge is standing at the door !

ID:	4853
INPUT:	Háishą' biyooch'íidii nilį́ ? Jesus éí doo Christ át'į́į da , jinínígíí lą́ą . ATaa' índa biYe' doo ádízhdéélt'i'góó hadziidziihígíí éí lá Christ bi'ana'í jílį́ .
PRED:	“ Who is the Messiah ? Who is the Son of Jesus , and the Son of Jesus Christ is the Son of Christ .
GOLD:	And who is a liar ? Anyone who says that Jesus is not the Christ . Anyone who denies the Father and the Son is an antichrist .

ID:	4854
INPUT:	Áko , Nídayínóhkááh , bizhdííniidgo tsinaa'eeł biih jííyá , áádóó Mágdala nahós'a'jį' tsé'naa nida'dzis'éél .
PRED:	Then Jesus told them , “ Go back into the boat and explored the land of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus sent the people home , and he got into a boat and crossed over to the region of Magadan .

ID:	4855
INPUT:	David yę́ę biye' aláahgo naat'áanii nilíinii Jerúsalemgi halne'í nilį́įgo díí saad yee hahaasdzíí' .
PRED:	This message came to David son of David in Jerusalem :
GOLD:	These are the words of the Teacher , King David 's son , who ruled in Jerusalem .

ID:	4856
INPUT:	Jóseph daaztsą́
PRED:	The Resurrection of Joseph
GOLD:	The Death of Joseph

ID:	4857
INPUT:	Dį́į́' náhááh góne' éí nídízííd Zif yiziłígíí binih Bóhólníihii bikin bitł'ááh nástł'iní ályaa ,
PRED:	On the fourth year of Ziph , another message came to the Lord :
GOLD:	The foundation of the Lord 's Temple was laid in midspring , in the month of Ziv , during the fourth year of Solomon 's reign .

ID:	4858
INPUT:	Háálá t'ááłá'í jinítínígo ha'át'íhída hwee hólónígíí biláahgo ła' haa náádoolyééł , áko lą'í hwee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł , nidi ha'át'íhída hwee ádinígíí éí t'áá hwee hólónígíí nidi haghadoolyééł .
PRED:	Anyone who believes will have a gift will be given , and those who have a gift will be given to others will be given .
GOLD:	To those who use well what they are given , even more will be given , and they will have an abundance . But from those who do nothing , even what little they have will be taken away .

ID:	4859
INPUT:	Ádił oodzíí' k'ééhodoodǫǫłjí yoołkáłígíí
PRED:	Judgment on the Sabbath
GOLD:	The Day of Atonement

ID:	4860
INPUT:	Áko biiskání , Agrípa índa Bernáísii , ayóó át'éego baa dzólníigo ní'áazhgo aa hwiinít'į́į́ góne' siláo aląąjį' bindanit'a'í índa kin haal'áádóó diné alááh dahideezíinii yił yah aakai . Índa Féstas bizaad k'ehgo , Paul yił yah adaaskai .
PRED:	The next day King Agrippa went to Agrippa and told him , “ Go to the city of Susa , and the elders of the city . Go to meet Festus and the elders of the city . ”
GOLD:	So the next day Agrippa and Bernice arrived at the auditorium with great pomp , accompanied by military officers and prominent men of the city . Festus ordered that Paul be brought in .

ID:	4861
INPUT:	Ákohgo náá'iiłniihii Éran dine'é éí Hííbran kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił yaa deideez'ą́ ; éí kin haal'áii bii'jį' yisdá'niichéehii iisxíinii bá át'é , áádóó Líbnah kin haal'áii binaagóó dahootsooígíí t'áá bił yaa deideez'ą́ .
PRED:	These were the priests who lived in Hebron and gave it to the tribe of Aaron , who lived in the town of Libnah .
GOLD:	The following towns with their pasturelands were given to the descendants of Aaron the priest : Hebron ( a city of refuge for those who accidentally killed someone ) , Libnah ,

ID:	4862
INPUT:	Éí bąą bit'áahgi honishłónígíí bik'ee shił yéé' ; baa nitsískeesgo t'áá íiyisí binásdzid .
PRED:	I am afraid of all who fear me , and I am afraid of you .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so terrified in his presence.When I think of it , terror grips me .

ID:	4863
INPUT:	Lk . 5 : <unk>
PRED:	Jesus Calms the Storm
GOLD:	Jesus Heals the Blind

ID:	4864
INPUT:	Áádóó abínígo Béílam nídii'na'go bitélii yik'i dah aznil áádóó Mó'ab dine'é bindanit'a'í yił dah diikai .
PRED:	So Balaam left Balaam and took his donkey to the king of Moab and sent his troops to Moab .
GOLD:	So the next morning Balaam got up , saddled his donkey , and started off with the Moabite officials .

ID:	4865
INPUT:	Áádóó Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí éí yóó'adahineezhchą́'ígíí behétł'óól łeeh dadínóoséełgo áádóó dego dadínóoséełgo bineest'ą' dahodooleeł .
PRED:	“ The people of Judah have taken away , and the roots of Judah will grow up , and your roots will grow into the tree .
GOLD:	And you who are left in Judah , who have escaped the ravages of the siege , will put roots down in your own soiland will grow up and flourish .

ID:	4866
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' ahééh hwiindzin
PRED:	Greetings from God
GOLD:	God Offers Comfort to All

ID:	4867
INPUT:	Dániel , Gíniithan , Bérak ,
PRED:	Daniel , Malluch ,
GOLD:	Daniel , Ginnethon , Baruch ,

ID:	4868
INPUT:	Nidine'é Ízrel nich'į' nida'iisíi'go biniinaa bi'ana'í bik'eh dadeesdlį́į'go áádóó nízhi' dayózhíigo nich'į' ninákaigo índa díí kin biyi' nída'ookąąhgo sodadilzingo
PRED:	“ Because of the sins of Israel , the people of Israel have abandoned their enemies and pray to their enemies ,
GOLD:	“ If your people Israel are defeated by their enemies because they have sinned against you , and if they turn to you and acknowledge your name and pray to you here in this Temple ,

ID:	4869
INPUT:	Dabitsoo' éí k'aa' na'ałtseedii yee da'diłt'ohígíí nidahalin ; atsoo' biyooch'íidgo yáłti' . Ła' yił kééhat'íinii k'é yiłníigo yich'į' yáłti' łeh , nidi t'áá biyi'ídi éí yaa nahaadáago áníi łeh .
PRED:	A tongue tongue tongue is like a sharp arrow that lies in a mouth . A wise person speaks to a fool , but a fool speaks to a fool .
GOLD:	For their tongues shoot lies like poisoned arrows.They speak friendly words to their neighborswhile scheming in their heart to kill them .

ID:	4870
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kintaa da'aztiingóó díí saad baa nahólne'go kódíní , Díí bee aha'deet'áanii saad deísínółts'ą́ą'go bida'oł'į́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ This is what the Lord says : Listen to this city of Judah and Jerusalem : ‘ This is what the terms of your covenant . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	4871
INPUT:	Éí bąą Mó'ab dine'é baa yínííł nishłį́įgo t'áá aaníí Mó'ab dine'é t'áá ałtso yéego baa yishcha doo ; <unk> kin haal'áádóó diné baa yínííł nishłį́įgo dish'níi doo .
PRED:	Therefore , I will weep for Moab , and I will weep for all the people of Moab .
GOLD:	So now I wail for Moab ; yes , I will mourn for Moab.My heart is broken for the men of Kir-hareseth .

ID:	4872
INPUT:	Kaldíya dine'é díí kin haal'áhígíí yik'ijį' anadeił'į́įgo áajį' dah didoojahgo yidahodidooniłgo deididoołił . Yee shá dahodoołchįįłgo kin bighą́ą́'góó diyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' yanáadzi'go nááhániihii yadayiinilii áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii Béíyal yich'į' náádayiiłniihii éí t'áá bił ałtso deididoołił .
PRED:	The Babylonians will burn up the land of the Babylonians , and they will burn up their burnt offerings and burn sacrifices to the gods of Baal . They will burn up their burnt offerings and burn sacrifices to Baal .
GOLD:	The Babylonians outside the walls will come in and set fire to the city . They will burn down all these houses where the people provoked my anger by burning incense to Baal on the rooftops and by pouring out liquid offerings to other gods .

ID:	4873
INPUT:	Dooládó' Diyin God nich'į' <unk> ti' laanaa nisin , áádóó nik'ijį' hadoodzihgo
PRED:	Oh , God has sent me to ask you , and he will answer you .
GOLD:	If only God would speak ; if only he would tell you what he thinks !

ID:	4874
INPUT:	Shi'ana'í danilíinii biláahgo nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii honisą́ągo áshósin , háálá hool'áágóó shił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	I am the king of my enemies , for he is the one who lives forever .
GOLD:	Your commands make me wiser than my enemies , for they are my constant guide .

ID:	4875
INPUT:	Áádóó Jóseph bits'in Ízrel dine'é danilíinii Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' deizhjaa'ígíí ałdó' Shííkem kin haal'áagi yóó'ádayiilaa ; éí Shííkem bizhé'é Héímor wolyéii biye'ké éí kéyah haz'ą́ągi béésh łigaii neeznádiin bíighahgo Jéíkab nahwiisnii' yę́ęgi yóó'ádahoolaa ; éí kéyah Jóseph ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	So Joseph took the bones of the tribe of Joseph and buried Joseph in the land of Shechem . He also took care of the Amorites in the land of Shechem , who lived in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	The bones of Joseph , which the Israelites had brought along with them when they left Egypt , were buried at Shechem , in the plot of land Jacob had bought from the sons of Hamor for 100 pieces of silver . This land was located in the territory allotted to the descendants of Joseph .

ID:	4876
INPUT:	Áko hajííghalgo ájíní , Diné éí tsin naazkaadii nidahalingo tádazhdikáahgo yish'į́ .
PRED:	Jesus looked at them and said , “ My heart is like a tree of wood . ”
GOLD:	The man looked around . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I see people , but I ca n't see them very clearly . They look like trees walking around . ”

ID:	4877
INPUT:	Sálaman bá nidaal'a'í bada'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii : Sótai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Sófiireth ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii , Piiráída ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ,
PRED:	These are the clans of the family of Solomon : The descendants of exile , exile ,
GOLD:	The descendants of these servants of King Solomon returned from exile : Sotai , Hassophereth , Peruda ,

ID:	4878
INPUT:	Nihí nihich'į'go yit'íní ályaa , áko Bóhólníihii Diyin God nilį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł . Jó , doo ła' Diyin God nááhódlǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	But you will be revealed to the Lord your God , and you will know that there is no other God .
GOLD:	“ He showed you these things so you would know that the Lord is God and there is no other .

ID:	4879
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , nízhi' bee yisdáshíłteeh , áádóó nibee adziilii binahjį' t'áá ákogi át'é , shidiní .
PRED:	Save me , O God , and rescue me from your power .
GOLD:	Come with great power , O God , and rescue me ! Defend me with your might .

ID:	4880
INPUT:	áádóó t'áákáajį' ch'ího'deeltį́įgo , Féro bitsi' náhodiiłtį́įgo t'áá bí biyáázh jílį́ nahalingo honeesą́ .
PRED:	He took his daughter to Pharaoh 's daughter , and he became Pharaoh 's daughter .
GOLD:	When they had to abandon him , Pharaoh 's daughter adopted him and raised him as her own son .

ID:	4881
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' Bénjamin dine'é nináhaaskaigo Jéíbesh-gíliyadóó ch'ikéí ninádajiizh'eezhígíí baa dadziiznil , nidi doo ałtso bininíłna' da .
PRED:	When the men of Benjamin heard that the young men of Benjamin had taken the young men of Benjamin , they refused to eat .
GOLD:	Then the men of Benjamin returned to their homes , and the 400 women of Jabesh-gilead who had been spared were given to them as wives . But there were not enough women for all of them .

ID:	4882
INPUT:	Sáíman Peter áhodííniid , Bóhólníihii , háísh ałdó' bich'į' dah náádidiikah ? Ni t'éí saad binahjį' iiná doo ninít'i'ii hodooleełii nee hólǫ́ ,
PRED:	Simon Peter replied , “ Who is able to go to the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter replied , “ Lord , to whom would we go ? You have the words that give eternal life .

ID:	4883
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é kóbidohní , Ni' bikáá'góó naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso díí kódaat'éhígíí t'éí daohsą́ą dooleeł :
PRED:	“ Say to the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the animals you eat . '
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ Of all the land animals , these are the ones you may use for food .

ID:	4884
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá áníiltso t'ááłá'í nihiTaa' . Diyin God ts'ídá t'ááłá'ígíí ánihiilaa . Áko haash yit'éego nihí t'ááłá'í niitínígo nihik'isóó binda'siidlo'go bee danihizhé'é yę́ę bibee aha'deet'áanii <unk> <unk> ?
PRED:	And we all have given us our Father , and we are all children of our ancestors . And we do n't know what we are saying to our ancestors .
GOLD:	Are we not all children of the same Father ? Are we not all created by the same God ? Then why do we betray each other , violating the covenant of our ancestors ?

ID:	4885
INPUT:	Gad naa'anííkaadii éí tsídii wót'áahdi nidaat'a'ii t'áá ałtso yii'góó dabaghan doo , áádóó halgaigóó naaldlooshii t'áá ałtso éí gad bits'áoz'a' yik'i naaldeeh doo .
PRED:	He will provide the cedars of Lebanon , and all the cedars of the field will be planted in the field .
GOLD:	“ The birds roost on its fallen trunk , and the wild animals lie among its branches .

ID:	4886
INPUT:	Dooládó' Diyin God bich'į' nihaa ahééh daniidzin da ! T'áá íiyisí ił hózhóonii bee nihiDiyin God binááł nihaa nihił dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	Oh , thank God ! Let us be filled with joy and joy .
GOLD:	How we thank God for you ! Because of you we have great joy as we enter God 's presence .

ID:	4887
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii doo haada yit'ée da
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Tsadhe

ID:	4888
INPUT:	Kót'éego dibé yázhí índa ak'áán áádóó áliv ak'ah t'áá áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániih doo biniyé t'áá ákwíí bíní hasht'éédayiil'įįhgo ahool'áa doo .
PRED:	“ These are the grain offering and olive oil for the burnt offering and olive oil .
GOLD:	The lamb , the grain offering , and the olive oil must be given as a daily sacrifice every morning without fail .

ID:	4889
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes ííłní ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4890
INPUT:	Azhą́ diltłish baa ajił<unk> nidi , doo baa ii<unk> da , índa tsiidétáán áádóó k'aa'da índa k'aabéésh tsin bighą́ą́h dí'áii doo ła' baa ii<unk> da .
PRED:	Even if you have not forgotten the sword , you will not crush the sword , and the ssssssssssah .
GOLD:	No sword can stop it , no spear , dart , or javelin .

ID:	4891
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus éí be'ek'id bąąhgóó anáádzoodzáago , áadi diné t'áá yíl'áá nít'éé' haa áłah silį́į'go nazneeztą́ą́' .
PRED:	Jesus returned to the Sea of the lake , and he taught them to teach them what he had done .
GOLD:	Then Jesus went out to the lakeshore again and taught the crowds that were coming to him .

ID:	4892
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , t'áá ałk'idą́ą́' nibik'eh hoogáałii bénáshniihgo bee ha'ííníshní .
PRED:	I will remember your decrees , O Lord , and I will remember your regulations .
GOLD:	I meditate on your age-old regulations ; O Lord , they comfort me .

ID:	4893
INPUT:	Áádóó diné naaljį́į́d nilį́įgo náábi'diilzáhígíí Peter índa John yąąh dah sitį́įgo , diné t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí t'óó bił daahaadago , kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi Sálaman bichaha'oh hoolyéejį' ahaneheezhjée'go haa áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	As Jesus was walking along the road , he saw Peter and John standing beside the Temple . As they were waiting for the people , he went up to the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	They all rushed out in amazement to Solomon 's Colonnade , where the man was holding tightly to Peter and John .

ID:	4894
INPUT:	Ákóhodoo'niidígíí shił hóó<unk> go nihitahdóó diné naakits'áadah yilt'éego ał'ąą dine'é nohłínígíí nihik'eh nítį́įgo nídiinil .
PRED:	And when you were telling me what I told you , you were twelve men from each tribe .
GOLD:	“ This seemed like a good idea to me , so I chose twelve scouts , one from each of your tribes .

ID:	4895
INPUT:	Áko ch'ał t'ááłáhíjį' yáádaa'áago ádayiilaa áádóó kéyah t'áá íiyisí <unk> xon silį́į́' .
PRED:	The frogs made the frogs to enter the land , and the land was filled with violence .
GOLD:	The Egyptians piled them into great heaps , and a terrible stench filled the land .

ID:	4896
INPUT:	Dabinááł shidiltłish bee naaná'eeshxałgo nik'eh hodeesdlį́į́' bijį́ t'áá ádzíłtso t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'áadoo bita' hoo'aahí hatah dahoditłid doo , índa dadine'é t'óó ahayóí nik'ee t'óó bił adahayóigo áádóó aláahgo binanit'a'í danilíinii niniinaa t'óó báhádzidgo nídadool<unk> ł .
PRED:	I have heard the sword of my sword , and I will destroy all the people of my people . The king 's anger will be filled with terror , and the kings of the earth will be filled with fear .
GOLD:	Yes , I will shock many lands , and their kings will be terrified at your fate . They will shudder in fear for their lives as I brandish my sword before them on the day of your fall .

ID:	4897
INPUT:	Léíkish kin haal'áadi kéédahoht'íinii , nihitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí éí łį́į́' dilwo'ii bighą́ą́h dadohnííł ; Záíyan bich'é'é ádił ni'iidzííh bee deezt'i'ii nilį́ , háálá Ízrel dine'é bee haz'áanii dayiizti'ii nits'ą́ą́dóó bee bééhoozin .
PRED:	“ Go to Lachish , ” Laban replied , “ for the chariot is a prostitute . For the sins of the tribe of Israel is a sin . ”
GOLD:	Harness your chariot horses and flee , you people of Lachish.You were the first city in Judahto follow Israel in her rebellion , and you led Jerusalem into sin .

ID:	4898
INPUT:	nidi díí bee bich'į' haasdzíí' : ádíshníinii bik'eh dahonoł'į́ , áko nihiDiyin God nishłį́į doo áádóó nihí éí shidine'é danohłį́į doo . Áko nihá yá'át'éeh dooleeł biniyé bee nihich'į' hahasdziihígíí éí t'áá ałtso bik'eh dahinohná .
PRED:	But I told you , ‘ I am giving you this command : I will be your God , and you will be your own people . '
GOLD:	This is what I told them : ‘ Obey me , and I will be your God , and you will be my people . Do everything as I say , and all will be well ! '

ID:	4899
INPUT:	Ákohgo Nébukadnézzar t'áá íiyisí bił hazhchxihgo éí Shéídrak áádóó Mííshak índa Abédniigo nídoot'ishgo yee haadzíí' áádóó éí diné nídeizh'eezhgo aláahgo naat'áanii bidááhdóó nideizh'eezh .
PRED:	Then Nebuchadnezzar said to Herod , “ Shadrach , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , and Abednego , Meshach , and Abednego to be put to meet the king .
GOLD:	Then Nebuchadnezzar flew into a rage and ordered that Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego be brought before him . When they were brought in ,

ID:	4900
INPUT:	Ayóó íits'a'go nahałtingo tónteel ałch'į' ádaaní áádóó ałkéé' deílk'oołígíí shik'i ch'é<unk> k'ooł nít'éé' .
PRED:	The waves of the Red Sea , and the waves of the sea was heard .
GOLD:	I hear the tumult of the raging seasas your waves and surging tides sweep over me .

ID:	4901
INPUT:	Nidi nik'is nilíinii yisnááh silį́į'go doo baa ts'ííd nínízin da doo nít'éé' ; Júdah dine'é danilíinii atídabi'diilyaa góne' doo baa nił nihoozhǫǫh da doo nít'éé' ; yínííł bił beiníłką́ągo doo ádaa hó'niihgóó hadíídzih da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But when your friend 's relatives heard about Judah , you would n't be afraid of Judah 's relatives , Judah would n't be happy to tell them what he had done .
GOLD:	“ You should not have gloatedwhen they exiled your relatives to distant lands.You should not have rejoicedwhen the people of Judah suffered such misfortune.You should not have spoken arrogantlyin that terrible time of trouble .

ID:	4902
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánáádí'ní , Yówehdi naniná , Séítan ! Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání : Bóhólníihii niDiyin God bich'į' nahółáa doo , áádóó t'áá bí t'éiyá bá nanil'a' doo .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ This is what the Scriptures say : The Scriptures say , ‘ You will worship the Lord your God and serve him . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Get out of here , Satan , ” Jesus told him . “ For the Scriptures say , ‘ You must worship the your Godand serve only him . ' ”

ID:	4903
INPUT:	Nidi t'ááká bee ba'dóó'ááł lágo , háálá dízdiindóó ba'aan yilt'éego , Paul t'áadoo dasiilyéhí ts'ídá doo nááda'diidį́įł da , doo nidi nááda'diidlį́įł da daaníigo , ádee hadadeesdzíi'go hondahaz'ą́ , áko k'ad lą́ didííniiłígíí yiba' hasht'e'ádadólzin .
PRED:	But do n't let them eat or drink it . Do n't eat it or drink or drink it . Instead , I will never eat it again . ”
GOLD:	But do n't do it ! There are more than forty men hiding along the way ready to ambush him . They have vowed not to eat or drink anything until they have killed him . They are ready now , just waiting for your consent . ”

ID:	4904
INPUT:	Háálá diné ła' ałjiłnii bí<unk> nigo'go hahojoobá'í áhodoolííł , áádóó asdzání adiléii iiná ílíinii deeshchxǫǫł nízingo haintá .
PRED:	For the poor will fall into the dust , and I will destroy the women who live in the desert .
GOLD:	For a prostitute will bring you to poverty , but sleeping with another man 's wife will cost you your life .

ID:	4905
INPUT:	Wót'ááhdę́ę́' shits'in bii'jį' kǫ' yi'níłnii'go shik'eh deesdlį́į́' ; shidááhgóó biih dideeshtałii neineesdizgo t'ą́ą́' kónáshiidlaa ; shinaagi doo naagháhígóó áshiilaago shá bíighah doo shidziilgóó i'ii'aah .
PRED:	I will turn my bones into heaven , and I will scatter my bones on the heights of my bones .
GOLD:	“ He has sent fire from heaven that burns in my bones.He has placed a trap in my path and turned me back.He has left me devastated , racked with sickness all day long .

ID:	4906
INPUT:	Bé<unk> yakandóó dah náádii'náago Hor-hagídgad hoolyéegi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left Jotbathah and camped at Jotbathah .
GOLD:	They left Bene-jaakan and camped at Hor-haggidgad .

ID:	4907
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bééda'alyaago dabiká'ígíí bidááhdóó Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó aląąjį' naazíinii tsosts'idiin yilt'éhígíí ákwii naazį́ . Shéífan biye' Jeiyazanáíyah ákwii atah sizį́ . T'áá ałtso łeets'aa' biyi'dóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchingo nááhániihii dah deíjááh , áko éí dabilid dego ada'iijooł .
PRED:	So the leaders of Israel stood in front of the sacred pillars and sat down in front of the elders of Israel . Then Micaiah son of Shaphan stood up in front of the altar , and there was a pleasing aroma to the priests .
GOLD:	Seventy leaders of Israel were standing there with Jaazaniah son of Shaphan in the center . Each of them held an incense burner , from which a cloud of incense rose above their heads .

ID:	4908
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ałtso nihił danilį́į le' . Christ bee ałk'isóó danidlíinii ayóó'ádeínóh'ní . Diyin God dadíínóhsin . Aláahgo naat'áanii nihił danilį́į le' .
PRED:	And may all of you , dear brothers and sisters , be your love .
GOLD:	Respect everyone , and love the family of believers . Fear God , and respect the king .

ID:	4909
INPUT:	Áko éí bee ha'deet'ą́ągo , ałk'i hoo'nilgo ha'az'áii hááda'aldáhígíí bikáá' Paul dah dziizį'go diné bich'į' dashdidiilnii' , áko t'áá íiyisí hodiiyeelgo , Hííbrew k'ehjí bich'į' ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní :
PRED:	So Paul threw his hand on the roof of the roof , and he bowed down to the ground and bowed low before him . As he was speaking to the Hebrew , he said ,
GOLD:	The commander agreed , so Paul stood on the stairs and motioned to the people to be quiet . Soon a deep silence enveloped the crowd , and he addressed them in their own language , Aramaic .

ID:	4910
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bits'ą́ądi doo nádiinághánídi bee yisdá'iildéehii hólǫ́ , háálá bee nihoyíní'áanii doo hádaat'į́į da .
PRED:	Rescue the wicked from the wicked , but your instructions are safe .
GOLD:	The wicked are far from rescue , for they do not bother with your decrees .

ID:	4911
INPUT:	T'áá nida'iisdįįdjį' anoonééł ił hółyée'ii dabótą'ígíí bigháázhdoo'niłgo doo bidahodiit'i'góó ánídazhdoodlííł biniyé diné dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	Those who are punished will die , and those who are punished for destruction will be punished .
GOLD:	Only in this way could he set free all who have lived their lives as slaves to the fear of dying .

ID:	4912
INPUT:	Áko ánáábizhdoo'niid , Éí bąą bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii t'ááłá'í nítínígo yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii yíhooł'aahii silį́į'ii , éí diné léi' kin bee bóhólníhígíí binaalye'é da'ílíinii bitahdóó ádaaniidíii índa t'áá da'ałk'idą́'ígíí ch'íyiiníiłii nahalin .
PRED:	Then he said , “ The Kingdom of Heaven is going to destroy the Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdom of Heaven . ”
GOLD:	Then he added , “ Every teacher of religious law who becomes a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like a homeowner who brings from his storeroom new gems of truth as well as old . ”

ID:	4913
INPUT:	Diyin God ba'áłchíní
PRED:	The Family of God
GOLD:	Love One Another

ID:	4914
INPUT:	Haadzihgo yót'áahdi t'óó ahayóí tó yileeh , áádóó nahasdzáán nidahonees'ą́ą́dę́ę́' siil dah dadi'yiijoołgo ádeile' ; nahałtingo atsiniltł'ish anídahata'go ííł'į́ áádóó biyódí hólǫ́ǫ́dę́ę́' níyolgo ííł'į́ .
PRED:	Let the earth say , “ Let the earth fall into the earth , and the lightning flashes of lightning flashes from lightning . He sends the lightning and lightning . ”
GOLD:	When he speaks in the thunder , the heavens roar with rain.He causes the clouds to rise over the earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	4915
INPUT:	Díí Diyin God biYe' , Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii baa hane' . Éí David ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii bits'ą́ą́dóó diné dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	This is the message of the Lord Jesus Christ , the Son of David , the Son of David .
GOLD:	The Good News is about his Son . In his earthly life he was born into King David 's family line ,

ID:	4916
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí t'áá nahont'ingo doo ákogi ádaat'éii haBóhólníihii Diyin God binááł baa nijikaigo t'áá kéédahojit'į́į́góó t'áá át'é éí ya'ii'áago bikáá'dóó ha'alzídídóó kin hadaas'áii ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'inígóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as the people of Israel had lived in the towns of the Lord their God .
GOLD:	The people of Israel had also secretly done many things that were not pleasing to the Lord their God . They built pagan shrines for themselves in all their towns , from the smallest outpost to the largest walled city .

ID:	4917
INPUT:	Háálá doo t'áá shíniik'eh hahásdzíi' da , nidi aTaa' shiníł'a'ii éí bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bee hahideesdzihígíí índa bee yáshti' dooígíí sheidiní'ą́ .
PRED:	For I have refused to obey my Father , but I have given me the commands of my Father .
GOLD:	I do n't speak on my own authority . The Father who sent me has commanded me what to say and how to say it .

ID:	4918
INPUT:	Héízargi éí mą'ii dabi<unk> doo áádóó hool'áágóó doo naagháhí da doo . Diné doo ła' ákwe'é índa ba'áłchíní doo ła' ákwii kééhat'į́į da doo .
PRED:	I will live forever , and there will be no place to live there . No one will live there .
GOLD:	“ Hazor will be inhabited by jackals , and it will be desolate forever.No one will live there ; no one will inhabit it . ”

ID:	4919
INPUT:	Doo handziihgóó éí t'óó shííníłts'ą́ą́' ; hazhó'ó dííníłhéelgo hódzą́ bínandínéeshtįįł .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , and I will teach you what is right .
GOLD:	But if not , then listen to me.Keep silent and I will teach you wisdom ! ”

ID:	4920
INPUT:	Áádóó kódadidoohniiłgo , Tsosts'id náhááh góne' ha'át'íishą' deiidą́ą dooleeł ? Jó , doo k'ééda'didiilyéeł da lá , doodaii' nídaneest'áanii doo dadiigish da lá .
PRED:	“ How long will you eat the seventh year of your reign ? ” they asked . “ We will not eat meat or eat it . ”
GOLD:	But you might ask , ‘ What will we eat during the seventh year , since we are not allowed to plant or harvest crops that year ? '

ID:	4921
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá íiyisí baa shił nihoozhǫǫh doo ; shii' sizíinii éí shiDiyin God bił hóshǫ́ǫ doo , háálá iiyehii éí nizhóníii ádéíyíístł'inígi át'éego áádóó bá'iigehii nitł'iz yee hadiidzaa nahalingo yisdá'iildééh éé' yee hashidiilaa índa t'áá ákogi át'éii éé' shik'íísti' .
PRED:	I will rejoice in the Lord 's presence , for God has made me pure and faithful to me , for he has made me pure and faithful to God .
GOLD:	I am overwhelmed with joy in the Lord my God ! For he has dressed me with the clothing of salvationand draped me in a robe of righteousness.I am like a bridegroom dressed for his weddingor a bride with her jewels .

ID:	4922
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahgi doo naagháhí da doo ; t'ááníí' t'éí hadaasgai doo , áadi índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo bił béédahodoozįįł . Náil tooh nílínígíí áshłaa , áádóó éí shí , dííníniidígíí bąą
PRED:	The land of Egypt will be no longer , and the land of Egypt will know that I am the Lord . I am the Nile , and you will know that I am the Nile .
GOLD:	The land of Egypt will become a desolate wasteland , and the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord. “ Because you said , ‘ The Nile River is mine ; I made it , '

ID:	4923
INPUT:	Áko Romegi Diyin God ayóó'ánihó'níinii t'áá ánółtso Diyin God bidiyį́į́' dadoohłeełgo nihíká áhodoo'niidii nihich'į' ak'e'ashchí . Diyin God nihiTaa' áádóó Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ bibee ajooba' áádóó bibee ach'į' hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į'ii yee nihik'ijidlíi doo .
PRED:	So Paul was in Rome at Rome at Rome , and you are in chains of the Lord Jesus Christ . You are writing to you in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ , the God of our Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	I am writing to all of you in Rome who are loved by God and are called to be his own holy people.May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	4924
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'íhída bibid yee nidaa'na'ii áádóó bijáád dį́į'go yee nidaajeehii , doodaii' t'áá ha'átíhída bijáád t'óó adahayóigo łeeshtahgóó nidaajeehii éí doo yidą́ą da ; jó , éí baa'ihii ádaat'é .
PRED:	All four animals that scurry along the ground , small animals that scurry along the ground , and all the animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	This includes all animals that slither along on their bellies , as well as those with four legs and those with many feet . All such animals that scurry along the ground are detestable , and you must never eat them .

ID:	4925
INPUT:	T'áadoo ahináádadoołtłi'í áádóó t'áadoo saad bee hada'ahiyołdlaadí , háálá ákódaaht'į́įgo ałtso ahididołtah , éí bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your enemies ; do n't let them be afraid of your enemies .
GOLD:	But if you are always biting and devouring one another , watch out ! Beware of destroying one another .

ID:	4926
INPUT:	Dóor agháhóó'áadi kin haal'áhígóó kéédahat'íinii aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í , Gílgal dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í t'ááłá'í ,
PRED:	The kings of the tribe of Asher , in Gilgal ,
GOLD:	The king of Dor in the town of Naphoth-dorThe king of Goyim in Gilgal

ID:	4927
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá bí t'éiyá nihí índa danihizhé'é yę́ę Ííjip kéyahdóó naalte' dajílį́įgo haz'ą́ą́dóó hoł ch'ínihiní'eezh , áádóó éí bee ééhózinii ayóó ádaat'éii nihinááł áyiilaa , áádóó t'áá ałtsogóó tádadii'nánígóó índa diné t'áá ałtso bitahgóó ch'ídahii'ná yę́ędą́ą́' Bí nihaa áhályą́ą́ nít'éé' ,
PRED:	For the Lord your God chose us out of the land of Egypt and his ancestors through the land of Egypt . He brought them out of Egypt , along with all the miraculous signs and wonders .
GOLD:	For the Lord our God is the one who rescued us and our ancestors from slavery in the land of Egypt . He performed mighty miracles before our very eyes . As we traveled through the wilderness among our enemies , he preserved us .

ID:	4928
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh bee naalnishí yinaalnishii bá bíná'ayiideeł ?
PRED:	Why are your servant ?
GOLD:	What do people really get for all their hard work ?

ID:	4929
INPUT:	Daniel éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá nanit'a'í nilíinii Áriyak ábizhdííniid , Ha'át'íísh biniinaa aláahgo naat'áanii yee nihoní'áanii dah yííyił ? Ákohgo Áriyak éí Daniel hazhó'ó yił hoolne' .
PRED:	Daniel replied to the king , “ Why are you afraid of the king ? ” So Daniel replied , “ I 'll tell you the meaning of the wise . ”
GOLD:	He asked Arioch , “ Why has the king issued such a harsh decree ? ” So Arioch told him all that had happened .

ID:	4930
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii jidósin jileehdóó hoł ni'ééhwiizįįhgo hahalzhish , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii hódzą́ índa na'nitin ąąh dayiiłkóóh .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord , but those who fear him will be put to a fool .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord is the foundation of true knowledge , but fools despise wisdom and discipline .

ID:	4931
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus t'áá hó hakéyahgóó dah nízhdiidzá , áádóó hódahooł'aahii hakéé' dah diikai .
PRED:	So Jesus left his disciples and followed him .
GOLD:	Jesus left that part of the country and returned with his disciples to Nazareth , his hometown .

ID:	4932
INPUT:	Éí bąą shí Paul , nihí doo Jew dine'é danohłíinii nihá Christ Jesus baa hashne'go biniinaa awáalyaaí nishłį́ .
PRED:	That is why Paul , dear brothers and sisters , I am writing to you in prison .
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I , Paul , a prisoner of Christ Jesus for the benefit of you Gentiles . . .

ID:	4933
INPUT:	Áko Tíírah bíídíiską́ą́dóó naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' binááhaigo Héírangi daaztsą́ .
PRED:	But Terah lived 82 years old , and he died .
GOLD:	Terah lived for 205 years and died while still in Haran .

ID:	4934
INPUT:	Nidi Diyin God t'áá ałtsoní áyiilaadą́ą́' biką'ii índa bi'áadii áyiilaa .
PRED:	But God created everything , just as he created , and he created everything he created .
GOLD:	But ‘ God made them male and female ' from the beginning of creation .

ID:	4935
INPUT:	Áko diné éí Lat áyidííniid , Da' ni<unk> ła' kwe'é kénáádahat'į́ ? Naadaaní índa niye'kéda áádóó nitsi'kéda índa díí kin haal'áhígi nik'éída díí haz'ánídóó ałtso nahgóó hani'éésh ,
PRED:	“ Are you the people of Lot ? ” Lot asked . “ Are you the sons of Lot and daughters of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the angels questioned Lot . “ Do you have any other relatives here in the city ? ” they asked . “ Get them out of this place — your sons-in-law , sons , daughters , or anyone else .

ID:	4936
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí t'áá bí áyiilaa yę́ę doo yiníł'į́į da dooleeł , índa asdzání bida'alyaii , doodaii' eda'alyaii t'áá bí áyiilaa yę́ę doo bił nilį́į da dooleeł .
PRED:	He made them pagan shrines , and he has made them pagan shrines and Asherah poles . He will not worship idols and worship idols .
GOLD:	They will no longer look to their idols for helpor worship what their own hands have made.They will never again bow down to their Asherah polesor worship at the pagan shrines they have built .

ID:	4937
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí doo bąąh bíni'góó t'áadoo łahgo át'éego yąąh tsíndeezkéézgóó kin hadaas'áágóó atíyiilaa yę́ęgi át'éego éí diné ákóbi'dólne' . Áko háni'dii abínígo diwosh háá'áhígíí áádóó ałné'é'áahgo anaa' bik'ee diwosh háá'á ,
PRED:	And the Lord did not let them be afraid of his people , for he had compassion on his own towns . He will shout for battle , and he will shout for battle .
GOLD:	Let him be destroyed like the cities of oldthat the Lord overthrew without mercy.Terrify him all day long with battle shouts ,

ID:	4938
INPUT:	K'é yijoołáii bitahgi kééhasht'į́įgo t'áá íiyisí nízaadgóó ahoolzhiizh .
PRED:	I have been rich among the poor , and there is no more time .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	4939
INPUT:	T'áá áko , t'ah yájíłti'go Júdas , naakits'áadahígíí ła' nilíinii níyá , áádóó aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii áádóó diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii bits'ą́ą́dóó , diné t'óó ahayóí diltłish índa tsihał dayíjáahgo yił haa níná .
PRED:	As Jesus was speaking , Judas , one of the twelve disciples , Judas , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	And immediately , even as Jesus said this , Judas , one of the twelve disciples , arrived with a crowd of men armed with swords and clubs . They had been sent by the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders .

ID:	4940
INPUT:	Áko Síriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Ríízin áádóó Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Remaláíyah éí Jerúsalemgi anaa' hodoołeeł yiniyé bisiláo yił nínáago Éíhaz yizénáshzhiizh , nidi doo bik'eh dazhdódle' át'ée da .
PRED:	King Ahaz of Aram and King Pekah of Israel went to Jerusalem to fight against King Ahaz of Israel . He did not fight against King Ahaz of Judah .
GOLD:	Then King Rezin of Aram and King Pekah of Israel came up to attack Jerusalem . They besieged Ahaz but could not conquer him .

ID:	4941
INPUT:	Nidajilnishgo yá'át'ééh
PRED:	Be good and good to others .
GOLD:	An Exhortation to Proper Living

ID:	4942
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes ání , Díí bee nihił béédahózin doo ; naanish t'áá át'é ááshłíił doo biniyé Bóhólníihii shiníł'a' áádóó doo t'áá shí shíniik'eh ááshníił da .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ You know what I am doing . I do n't want to do what I do . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And Moses said , “ This is how you will know that the Lord has sent me to do all these things that I have done — for I have not done them on my own .

ID:	4943
INPUT:	Kót'éego aláahgo naat'áanii Heziikáíyah bá nidaal'a'í Aizéíyah yaa yíkai .
PRED:	So King Hezekiah sent this message to Isaiah :
GOLD:	After King Hezekiah 's officials delivered the king 's message to Isaiah ,

ID:	4944
INPUT:	Nich'į' t'áá íiyisí t'óó baa'ihígi ádeiit'įįd ; nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó bee nihodiyíní'áanii índa nibee nihodiit'aahii Mózes bich'į' bee hahíínídzíi'ii doo bik'eh dahoniil'į́į da nít'éé' .
PRED:	We did not obey our commands and regulations . We refused to obey the commands of Moses and regulations .
GOLD:	We have sinned terribly by not obeying the commands , decrees , and regulations that you gave us through your servant Moses .

ID:	4945
INPUT:	Bich'ą́ąhgi k'os diłhiłgo biniinaa doo ahoyoot'į́į da , áádóó yá'ąąsh yii'góó tádíghááh .
PRED:	The clouds are all around , and the clouds are covered with smoke .
GOLD:	For thick clouds swirl about him , and he can not see us.He is way up there , walking on the vault of heaven . '

ID:	4946
INPUT:	Áko ábizhdííniid , T'áá shǫǫdí , da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , baa neiséyeelígíí bee nihił hodeesh'nih :
PRED:	“ Please listen to me , ” he said . “ I will tell you what I am saying . ”
GOLD:	“ Listen to this dream , ” he said .

ID:	4947
INPUT:	Ákohgo Saul łahgo ízh'diilyaago éé' ła' bee hazdiidzaa ; diné nidilt'éego bił dashdiikaigo tł'ée'go asdzání baa jíkai . Áko ázhdííniid , Shá na'ídídííłkił nisin ; t'áá yízhi'ígíí shá bił hadíí'ash .
PRED:	As Saul was leaving his clothing , he went to the night and told him , “ I want you to ask you what you have done . ” So he told him , “ I want you to ask you . ”
GOLD:	So Saul disguised himself by wearing ordinary clothing instead of his royal robes . Then he went to the woman 's home at night , accompanied by two of his men. “ I have to talk to a man who has died , ” he said . “ Will you call up his spirit for me ? ”

ID:	4948
INPUT:	Áko diné nidilt'é ní'ázhígíí áháłní , Yisdánihíínínilígi át'éego nihí ałdó' yisdánihidii'nił ; nihinaanish nilíinii t'áadoo baa hwíínílne'góogo ákót'é . Áko ákót'ée doo : Bóhólníihii éí kéyah nihaidiní'ą́ągo naa dajiiniiba' doo , índa t'áá aaníí nich'į' ákódaniit'ée doo .
PRED:	Then the men said to each other , “ We will be saved , and we will be saved . We will tell you what the Lord has done to us , and we will do to us . ”
GOLD:	“ We offer our own lives as a guarantee for your safety , ” the men agreed . “ If you do n't betray us , we will keep our promise and be kind to you when the Lord gives us the land . ”

ID:	4949
INPUT:	nidi tł'ée'go kin haal'á ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'in góyaa ts'iizis bii' dzizdáago ídahooł'aahii hadah adahazlo' .
PRED:	But when they arrived at night , the disciples picked up a basket .
GOLD:	So during the night , some of the other believers lowered him in a large basket through an opening in the city wall .

ID:	4950
INPUT:	Sáídan dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa hane'
PRED:	A Message for Edom
GOLD:	Restoration for Israel

ID:	4951
INPUT:	Náhodi'niltsxisgo hak'i nidzisk'ą́ągo é'éł'ínígíí áádóó náhodi'niltsxisgo ayi' góne' baa ahiłch'iihígíí éí doo yá'áshóonii ałtso nahjį' kwííł'į́ .
PRED:	You have broken them in the heat , and I have broken them in the heat of my misery .
GOLD:	Physical punishment cleanses away evil ; such discipline purifies the heart .

ID:	4952
INPUT:	Áádóó Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Asíriya kéyahgóó Ízrel dine'é ayiizh'eezhgo Héílah kin haal'áadi áádóó Gózan kéyahgi Héíbar tooh nílíní bibąąhgóó índa Míídiya dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígóó niyiizh'eezh .
PRED:	Then the king of Assyria led the people of Assyria to Egypt , just as he had settled in the hill country of Egypt . He also led them to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	At that time the king of Assyria exiled the Israelites to Assyria and placed them in colonies in Halah , along the banks of the Habor River in Gozan , and in the cities of the Medes .

ID:	4953
INPUT:	Da' doósh Jesus Christ bá yil'aadii nishłį́į da ? Da' doósh t'áá aaníí doo shohodiit'i' da ? Da' doósh t'áá aaníí Jesus Christ nihiBóhólníihii yiiłtsą́ą da ? Da' doósh nihí Bóhólníihii bee shinaanish danohłį́į da ?
PRED:	“ Did n't I be the Messiah ? ” Jesus asked . “ No , I am the Lord Jesus Christ , not one of you ? ”
GOLD:	Am I not as free as anyone else ? Am I not an apostle ? Have n't I seen Jesus our Lord with my own eyes ? Is n't it because of my work that you belong to the Lord ?

ID:	4954
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí shighan góne' doo yah adeesháał da índa shitsásk'eh doo biih deesh'nah da ,
PRED:	I will not go into the house of my house , and I will lie in my place .
GOLD:	“ I will not go home ; I will not let myself rest .

ID:	4955
INPUT:	Ts'ídá doo adidííléeł da .
PRED:	“ You must not commit adultery .
GOLD:	“ You must not commit adultery .

ID:	4956
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman éí dabizhé' é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh , áádóó hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi yóó'áho'diilyaago haye' Riihobówam hatsásk'ehgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Solomon died , he was buried in the City of David , and his son David became the next king .
GOLD:	When he died , he was buried in the City of David , named for his father . Then his son Rehoboam became the next king .

ID:	4957
INPUT:	1Kgs . 22 : <unk>
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The Death of Ahab

ID:	4958
INPUT:	Jesus ábidííniid , Ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ánísht'ée doo nínízingo , nílááh nídídáahgo nee hólónígíí t'áá ałtso naa nahóniihgo , bee shóisíníłt'e'ígíí badahojoobá'íígíí bitaa díínih , áko yá'ąąshdi naalye'é ílíinii nee hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł , ákohgo índa dah diináahgo shikéé' yínááł .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Be sure that I am righteous , and do what you have done to you . Go and buy everything you have done . Go and get up to heaven and show you what you have done . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told him , “ If you want to be perfect , go and sell all your possessions and give the money to the poor , and you will have treasure in heaven . Then come , follow me . ”

ID:	4959
INPUT:	Shik'ééhodootah biniyé hadeesdzih ; hadeesdzihgo énáhodeesįįł .
PRED:	I will answer them , and I will answer them .
GOLD:	I must speak to find relief , so let me give my answers .

ID:	4960
INPUT:	Ayóó'óósh'níinii bíí' nishłį́ áádóó laanaa shó'níigo shich'į' nitsíkees .
PRED:	My lover has given me his inheritance , and I love you .
GOLD:	I am my lover 's , and he claims me as his own .

ID:	4961
INPUT:	éí bąą Sháílohdi atídahooshłaa yę́ęgi át'éego díí kin shízhi' bee wójíigo si'ánígíí baa dadzíínóhłíigo índa nihí áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę kwe'é haz'ą́ baa diní'ánígíí t'áá bił atínihideeshłííł .
PRED:	Therefore , I will punish you in Shiloh , and you will worship my name in the name of your ancestors in the name of your ancestors .
GOLD:	So just as I destroyed Shiloh , I will now destroy this Temple that bears my name , this Temple that you trust in for help , this place that I gave to you and your ancestors .

ID:	4962
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bikin bii' sohodizin biniyé yá'át'éehii ná hásht'į́į doo .
PRED:	I will live in the Temple of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	For the sake of the house of the Lord our God , I will seek what is best for you , O Jerusalem .

ID:	4963
INPUT:	Ézra náá'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yína'niłtinii , t'áá éí Bóhólníihii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii áádóó bibee nahaz'áanii Ízrel dine'é baa deet'áanii yíhooł'ą́ą'ii nilį́įgo aláahgo naat'áanii Artazérksiiz díí naaltsoos hainíłtsoozígíí át'é .
PRED:	Ezra the priest gave this letter to Ezra the Law of the Law of the Lord . This letter was given to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	King Artaxerxes had given a copy of the following letter to Ezra , the priest and scribe who studied and taught the commands and decrees of the Lord to Israel :

ID:	4964
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago bíyoołkááł yę́ędóó Josáíyah biye' Zedekáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago ła'ts'áadah nááhaijį' ashdla' nídízííd binih Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii dabi'disnáajį' Bóhólníihii éí Jeremáíyah yich'į' hanádzihgo hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	Josiah son of Josiah began to rule over Judah in the reign of Josiah son of Josiah , king of Judah , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	4965
INPUT:	áádóó bee ééhózinii , doodaii' bik'ee t'óó ił ahayóii nihich'į' yee yáłti' yę́ę bik'eh áhoodzaago , jó , t'áá bítséedi kónihidííniid , Tį' , diyin dabidi'níinii doo béédahonohsinii bikéé' dah dahididiikah áádóó bá nideil'a' doo .
PRED:	And if you see the miraculous signs or wonders , you will follow the miraculous signs and wonders , ” they said , “ Let us follow God and serve him . ”
GOLD:	and the predicted signs or miracles occur . If they then say , ‘ Come , let us worship other gods ' — gods you have not known before —

ID:	4966
INPUT:	táá' góne' hanáádiit'i'ígíí éí jéísinth , áádóó égad , índa ámethist ;
PRED:	The third row will contain a measuring stick , a cedar lapis lazuli , and a cedar lapis lazuli .
GOLD:	The third row contained an orange jacinth , an agate , and a purple amethyst .

ID:	4967
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii kóní : Jó'akon , Záíyangi tsé bee naaná'ástł'inii ílį́įgo ats'ání'áanii ninish'aah , áko hoodlą́ągo ha'ólíhígíí doo haa yánízingóó ábidi'doolnííł .
PRED:	For this is what the Scriptures say : “ Look , this is what the Scriptures say : ‘ The builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone . '
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ I am placing a cornerstone in Jerusalem , chosen for great honor , and anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	4968
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God yee has'áanii diné yéé'iiłníihii bik'ehgo nihá nihwiit'aah dooleełii danohłį́įgo éí bik'ehgo hadahohdziih áádóó ádaahníił le' .
PRED:	And if you follow God 's law , you will judge the law of the law and judge them .
GOLD:	So whatever you say or whatever you do , remember that you will be judged by the law that sets you free .

ID:	4969
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'oii yiyiisxį́ áádóó shash ałdó' yiyiisxį́ , áko díí Filístiya dine'é doo bąąh náhineeshgizhii ałdó' ákwíidoolííł , háálá Diyin God hináanii bisiláo yódziih .
PRED:	Your servant will be cut off from the hand of a lion , and it will be cut off from the Philistines . And if the Ark of God will be cut off from the community .
GOLD:	I have done this to both lions and bears , and I 'll do it to this pagan Philistine , too , for he has defied the armies of the living God !

ID:	4970
INPUT:	Éí bąą shí ałdó' díí t'áá ałtso t'áá dadeezt'i'dóó wóshdę́ę́' hazhó'ó bik'i'diitą́ągo t'áá ádaat'éégóó ałkéé' sinilgo bee nich'į' ak'e'deeshchíiłgo yá'át'ééh nisin , Thiyáfilas t'áá íiyisí ił nílíinii ,
PRED:	So I am giving you all these things from the beginning of the beginning . I will teach you what you have said .
GOLD:	Having carefully investigated everything from the beginning , I also have decided to write an accurate account for you , most honorable Theophilus ,

ID:	4971
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii ayóó'ánihó'nínígíí biniinaa áádóó danihizhé'é yę́ę yich'į' kéyah yee ádee hadoodzíi'go t'áádóo nídí yee nihoní'ánígíí yi'doolíłígíí biniinaa Bóhólníihii bigaan ayóó ábóodziilii yee háánihíí'eezh índa naalte' danohłį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ędę́ę́' , t'áá éí Féro bits'ą́ąjį' nihik'é niná'ídlá ,
PRED:	But the Lord was very angry with you because of your ancestors , and he brought you out of the land he had sworn to you . He brought you out of the land of Egypt , for he rescued you from Pharaoh .
GOLD:	Rather , it was simply that the Lord loves you , and he was keeping the oath he had sworn to your ancestors . That is why the Lord rescued you with such a strong hand from your slavery and from the oppressive hand of Pharaoh , king of Egypt .

ID:	4972
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné t'áá ałtso Gílgalgóó dah diikai , áádóó Gílgalgi Bóhólníihii binááł Saul éí aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa . Áadi nááhidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii Bóhólníihii binááł náádayiisnii' , áko áadi Saul índa Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso ayóó át'éego bił dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	So all the men of Gilgal and went to Gilgal to Gilgal , where the Lord had peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings to the Lord at Gilgal .
GOLD:	So they all went to Gilgal , and in a solemn ceremony before the Lord they made Saul king . Then they offered peace offerings to the Lord , and Saul and all the Israelites were filled with joy .

ID:	4973
INPUT:	Seth bits'ą́ą́dóó adideezhchíinii
PRED:	Descendants of Seth
GOLD:	The Birth of Seth

ID:	4974
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David dinééh ła' hágo yidííniidgo ííłní , Áháníjį' bich'į' dah diilyeedgo síłhé .
PRED:	Then David called out to the young men , “ Get up and kill them ! ” So David demanded .
GOLD:	Then David said to one of his men , “ Kill him ! ” So the man thrust his sword into the Amalekite and killed him .

ID:	4975
INPUT:	Éíbraham áádóó Abímelek
PRED:	Abimelech and Abimelech
GOLD:	Abraham Deceives Abimelech

ID:	4976
INPUT:	Tó ałt'anehegeehgo ałk'iditą́ągo áyiilaa ; kin biyi' hasht'e'na'aznilígi át'éego tónteel ayóó íídéetą́'ígíí beełt'éego hasht'éyiilaa .
PRED:	He has made a footstool under his feet , and he has made us beautiful in the sea .
GOLD:	He assigned the sea its boundariesand locked the oceans in vast reservoirs .

ID:	4977
INPUT:	Béégashii bits'ą́ą́dóó géeso índa dibé bibe' áádóó dibé yázhí áádóó Béíshandóó deenásts'aa' áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh agháago yá'át'éehii índa tł'oh naadą́ą́' agháago yá'át'éehii bił jiyą́ą́ nít'éé' ; ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' dił nahalingo łichíi'ii nidlą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	I am the shepherd of the sheep and goats , goats , and goats , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	He fed them yogurt from the herdand milk from the flock , together with the fat of lambs.He gave them choice rams from Bashan , and goats , together with the choicest wheat.You drank the finest wine , made from the juice of grapes .

ID:	4978
INPUT:	Áko David bits'ą́ą́dóó náás ahoolchíłígíí yóó'adashizhdeez'ánígíí biniinaa atídeeshłííł , nidi hool'áágóó doo t'áá ákót'ée da doo .
PRED:	And David will have many descendants from David 's family , but I will not let them die . ”
GOLD:	Because of Solomon 's sin I will punish the descendants of David — though not forever . ' ”

ID:	4979
INPUT:	Áko índída , Nigaan nish'náájí bee yisdá'ádííníltį́ bííníghah , nidideeshniił .
PRED:	Then he saved your arm , and put it on your right hand .
GOLD:	Then even I would praise you , for your own strength would save you .

ID:	4980
INPUT:	nidi ádiníl'įįhgo áádóó dah diigháahgo ánoolninii t'óó yaa yoonah .
PRED:	But if you look up , it is not the end of the end , it is clear to the end of the earth .
GOLD:	You see yourself , walk away , and forget what you look like .

ID:	4981
INPUT:	Ákwii kénáádahat'į́į doo áádóó doo atínáádoolníił da , nidi Jerúsalemgi ts'ídá hasihgo ákwii diné kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	They will never again live in Jerusalem , but they will live in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	And Jerusalem will be filled , safe at last , never again to be cursed and destroyed .

ID:	4982
INPUT:	Ákohgo bidiyin Nísrak wolyéii bikin góne' yich'į' nahałáago haye'ké Adrámelek áádóó Sharíízer diltłish yee hwiisxį́įgo Armíniya kéyahgóó yóó'ahi'noolchą́ą́' , áko haye' Íísar-hádan hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	One day when he arrived at the temple of God , he killed his sons and killed his sons . They killed him and killed him with their swords and killed him . They also killed the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	One day while he was worshiping in the temple of his god Nisroch , his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer killed him with their swords . They then escaped to the land of Ararat , and another son , Esarhaddon , became the next king of Assyria .

ID:	4983
INPUT:	Éí bąą Trówasdóó nihił dah adii'éelgo Sá<unk> jį' t'óó k'ídahosiildǫǫd , índa biiskání Ni<unk> lisdi nihił aní'éél ,
PRED:	So we went to Troas and found him on the day of Troas , but we were afraid of the next day .
GOLD:	We boarded a boat at Troas and sailed straight across to the island of Samothrace , and the next day we landed at Neapolis .

ID:	4984
INPUT:	Áko Réíchel izh'niiltsąądgo ashkii jishchį́ , áádóó ájíní , Doo ił nishłį́į da yę́ę Diyin God shits'áidiní'ą́ ;
PRED:	So Rachel gave birth to Rachel , and she gave birth to a son . She said , “ I am the God of my people . ”
GOLD:	She became pregnant and gave birth to a son . “ God has removed my disgrace , ” she said .

ID:	4985
INPUT:	T'áá Christ Jesus aa nitsíkees yę́ęgi át'éego nihí ałdó' ákót'éego ahaa nitsídaahkees .
PRED:	As for you , you think of Christ Jesus Christ , as you are as plentiful as you were .
GOLD:	You must have the same attitude that Christ Jesus had .

ID:	4986
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	4987
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nik'ee dadiniihii t'áá íiyisí bik'ee dinishniih . Áádóó nich'į' nídahidiikáahii bił ni'nish'įįh .
PRED:	O Lord , remember what I am saying , O Lord , and let them be disgraced .
GOLD:	O Lord , should n't I hate those who hate you ? Should n't I despise those who oppose you ?

ID:	4988
INPUT:	Háálá nahasdzáán bikáá' t'áá át'éé nít'éé' kéédahojit'ínígíí t'áá ádzíłtso łoh á si'ą́ nahalingo haa hodoolzhish .
PRED:	For all the people of the earth are like a trap of a trap .
GOLD:	like a trap . For that day will come upon everyone living on the earth .

ID:	4989
INPUT:	Nidi ná sodeeszin , áko ne'oodlą' bee aa dzódlí doo bígééd dííleeł da , áko adíísihígíí bits'ą́ąjį' dah nídinidzáago , nik'isóó dabidziilgo áńdadíídlííł .
PRED:	But when you pray , dear brothers and sisters , you will have no faith in your faith , and you will turn away from their own relatives .
GOLD:	But I have pleaded in prayer for you , Simon , that your faith should not fail . So when you have repented and turned to me again , strengthen your brothers . ”

ID:	4990
INPUT:	Háálá awéé' éí doo yá'át'éehii yóó'ahidit'aah índa yá'át'éehii nihidit'aahgi bił bééhózin dooígíí t'ah bítséedi díí aláahgo naat'áanii nidilt'éego bééníldzidígíí bikéyah yóó'adidoot'ááł .
PRED:	For you know that you are not ashamed of the wicked and the wickedness of the wicked will be forgiven .
GOLD:	For before the child is that old , the lands of the two kings you fear so much will both be deserted .

ID:	4991
INPUT:	éí Shálam yę́ę biye' , éí Zéídak yę́ę biye' , éí Aháítab yę́ę biye' ,
PRED:	Zadok son of Zadok , son of Zadok ,
GOLD:	son of Shallum , son of Zadok , son of Ahitub ,

ID:	4992
INPUT:	Íínak hwe'oodlą' bee éí doo dazdootsaał da biniyé dego aho'dooltį́ . Áko t'áadoo nááho'diiltsą́ą da , háálá Diyin God nááhodiiłtį́ . Háálá t'ah doo nááho'diilteeh yę́ędą́ą́' Diyin God yił hóshǫ́ ha'níigo há ha'oodzíí' .
PRED:	It was by faith that Abraham had never been raised to die because he had been raised to die because he had been raised from the dead . For God had been raised to death .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Enoch was taken up to heaven without dying — “ he disappeared , because God took him. ” For before he was taken up , he was known as a person who pleased God .

ID:	4993
INPUT:	Tónteel ałdó' bí , háálá bí áyiilaa áádóó ni' yíłtseii áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made the Red Sea , for he created the Red Sea .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	4994
INPUT:	Áko Esther ázhdííniidígíí Mórdiikai yee yił dahoolne' .
PRED:	Esther told Mordecai what had happened .
GOLD:	So Hathach gave Esther 's message to Mordecai .

ID:	4995
INPUT:	( Áko Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é yisdábidooniłii yeidiní' ą́ , ákót'éego Síriya dine'é biyaadóó hajookai , áko índa Ízrel dine'é átséédą́ą́' dabighan yii' kéédahat'į́į́ nít'é'ígi át'éego ninákai .
PRED:	So the Lord asked Israel to save Israel and asked him , “ Why did you want to live in any way ? ” So they returned to their own home .
GOLD:	So the Lord provided someone to rescue the Israelites from the tyranny of the Arameans . Then Israel lived in safety again as they had in former days .

ID:	4996
INPUT:	Áko níyáago , aa dasooláhígíí Jerúsalemgóó dazhdoojih biniyé t'áá háiida hwee lą́ da'soohłį́'ígíí naaltsoos bee haa hashne'go bił dahodeesh'aał .
PRED:	So you went to Jerusalem and told them , ‘ If you have told you what I have told you , I will tell you what I have told you . ' ”
GOLD:	When I come , I will write letters of recommendation for the messengers you choose to deliver your gift to Jerusalem .

ID:	4997
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nihida'ana'í nihik'ijį' náádadiibahígíí nihinááł nidabi'ditseedgo áyósin doo ; t'ááłáhídę́ę'go nihich'į' náádadiibah doo , áádóó nihits'ą́ąjį' tsosts'idgóó tanídanoochéeh doo .
PRED:	The Lord will fight against our enemies , and he will scatter them into the wilderness . He will scatter them in the wilderness , and he will scatter them in the wilderness .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will conquer your enemies when they attack you . They will attack you from one direction , but they will scatter from you in seven !

ID:	4998
INPUT:	Kót'éego éí bí'néél'ąąd doo : t'áá dį́į́'dę́ę́' t'ááłá'ídóó náá'áłníí' tsin sitą́ ákódahonízah doo .
PRED:	“ These are the same size of the altar , which will be measured by the top of the altar .
GOLD:	The city will measure 11/2 miles on each side — north , south , east , and west .

ID:	4999
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá yówééh át'éego doo ádahosoołyąąd da ! Da' Níłch'i Diyinii bee nínáádanihi'dizhchį́įgo dahisidoonaadgo k'adísh éí bee haz'áanii bik'eh hól'į́ bee hadaałt'é ída'dołnééh lá ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you are not right ? Do n't you realize that the Spirit of God 's law is born ?
GOLD:	How foolish can you be ? After starting your new lives in the Spirit , why are you now trying to become perfect by your own human effort ?

ID:	5000
INPUT:	Éí dazhdínóonéłígíí t'áadoo baa dahwiilzhíshí t'áá bítséedi nahjį' kódaho'diilyaa . Bee dadzíłdzilii yę́ę adahaaz'éél .
PRED:	Those who have been circumcised , but they are trying to die . They are arranged for the island of Cyprus .
GOLD:	They were snatched away in the prime of life , the foundations of their lives washed away .

ID:	5001
INPUT:	Níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' yah anídaakahgo átsé tá'ánídadigisgo , áko doo dadínóonéeł da , doodaii' bikáá' náá'iiniihí yich'į' ninádaakahgo shá nidaal'a'go Bóhólníihii yich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii náádayiiłniih doo biniyé ,
PRED:	When they enter the Tabernacle , they will not be washed into the Tabernacle , and they will go to the Lord and offer sacrifices to me .
GOLD:	They must wash with water whenever they go into the Tabernacle to appear before the Lord and when they approach the altar to burn up their special gifts to the Lord — or they will die !

ID:	5002
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh daalkizhii dadilwo'ígíí bilááh át'éego dabilį́į́' ayóó ádeídóolwo' ; e'e'áahgo mą'iitsoh hashké daniidzįįhígíí bilááh át'éego hashké dandzin . Bisiláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii t'áá nízaadę́ę́' łį́į́' bił yijah . Bisiláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii atsági át'éego yidooyį́įłii yich'į' nídiilwo'go yił haat'ahígi át'éego naaldeeh .
PRED:	“ Go and fight against the mighty army , like a whirlwind of horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and horses are as numerous as the army of battle .
GOLD:	Their horses are swifter than cheetahsand fiercer than wolves at dusk.Their charioteers charge from far away.Like eagles , they swoop down to devour their prey .

ID:	5003
INPUT:	Nihíká a'doolwoł biniyé ch'ééh dadíit'į́į'go nihináá' ch'ééh dadeeskai . Hada'iilzíidgo dine'é ła' yisdádanihidooniłgo yídaneel'áanii ádin .
PRED:	But when they cry out , they would n't help us . We ca n't escape from this world .
GOLD:	We looked in vain for our alliesto come and save us , but we were looking to nationsthat could not help us .

ID:	5004
INPUT:	Áko Béthaniigi Sáíman éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bee bąąh dah haz'ą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí bikin góne' Jesus yah ajííyáago ,
PRED:	As he arrived at Bethany , Simon ( which was healed of leprosy ) , he went to the house of Jesus .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jesus was in Bethany at the home of Simon , a man who had previously had leprosy .

ID:	5005
INPUT:	Áko shii' dahonohłǫ́ǫgo , áádóó shizaad nihii' dahólǫ́ǫgo , t'áá danohsinígíí dayínóhkeed , áko nihá bi'doolnííł .
PRED:	Then you will ask me , and you will ask me what you have done .
GOLD:	But if you remain in me and my words remain in you , you may ask for anything you want , and it will be granted !

ID:	5006
INPUT:	Shitsi' haada yinilaago áádóó asdzání ła' ne'asdzą́ą́ ánáádeindlaago , azhą́ diné doo ła' nihinaagóó naagháa da nidi , Diyin God nihita'gi hólǫ́ǫgo ániit'éegi bił bééhózin ; éí béénílniih .
PRED:	“ My daughter would not have sexual relations with his wife , and there is no other wife . Even if you do n't know God 's wife , you know that there is no other gods .
GOLD:	If you mistreat my daughters or if you marry other wives , God will see it even if no one else does . He is a witness to this covenant between us .

ID:	5007
INPUT:	<unk> tsą́ą́ nít'éé' , awéé' nihéédadii'nah nít'éé' , níyol t'éiyá dashiilchį́įgi ádeidzaa ; nihokáa'gi t'áadoo yisdáda'ii'nil da , doo nidi nihokáá' dine'é ła' dashiilchį́į da .
PRED:	But if we had been born , we would never be able to drown the wind . But no one was able to rescue us from the world .
GOLD:	We , too , writhe in agony , but nothing comes of our suffering.We have not given salvation to the earth , nor brought life into the world .

ID:	5008
INPUT:	T'áá háiida Diyin God biYe' joodlą́ągo baijólíii Diyin God t'áá bí biYe' yaa halne'ígíí hoł bééhózin doo . Nidi t'áá háiida Diyin God doo joodláanii éí Diyin God biyooch'íidii nilį́ jinízin , háálá Diyin God t'áá bí biYe' yaa halne'ígíí t'áadoo joosdląąd da .
PRED:	Anyone who believes in the Son of God is the Son of God . But anyone who believes in him is not God 's Son . But anyone who believes in him is the Son of God .
GOLD:	All who believe in the Son of God know in their hearts that this testimony is true . Those who do n't believe this are actually calling God a liar because they do n't believe what God has testified about his Son .

ID:	5009
INPUT:	Háálá tsin ałnáoszid bąąhjį' Christ daaztsą́ągo baa hane'ígíí yi'ana'í danilíinii t'óó ahayóí deíkááh , éí t'áá ahą́ą́h bee nihił náháshnih nít'éé' , áádóó k'ad nidi shinák'eeshto' náálį́įgo bee nihił nááháshne' .
PRED:	For I am sending you into the cross of the cross of the cross of the cross of the cross , and now I could tell you the truth .
GOLD:	For I have told you often before , and I say it again with tears in my eyes , that there are many whose conduct shows they are really enemies of the cross of Christ .

ID:	5010
INPUT:	Haleebee naalnishii naalye'é bee áda'azįįdjį' bá dahodiit'i' , nidi doo hodina' naalnishii tsxį́įłgo té'é'į́ yileeh .
PRED:	If your wealth is on , it 's a hard price for your wealth , it 's better to grow .
GOLD:	Good planning and hard work lead to prosperity , but hasty shortcuts lead to poverty .

ID:	5011
INPUT:	Áko alą́ąjį' danihizhé'é yę́ę Jóseph dayoołch'į́įdgo Ííjipgóó nidahwiisnii' , nidi Diyin God hoł hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' ,
PRED:	So they sent ambassadors to Egypt to Egypt , but God sent them away to Egypt .
GOLD:	“ These patriarchs were jealous of their brother Joseph , and they sold him to be a slave in Egypt . But God was with him

ID:	5012
INPUT:	Nít'éé' naaldlooshii naayéé' nilíinii áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii bisiláo t'áá bił , éí łį́į́' yik'i dah sidáhígíí bisiláo bił yik'ijį' anaa' ádeidoolííł biniyé áłah silį́į'go yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Then the beast and the earth saw that the king of the earth had gathered for battle .
GOLD:	Then I saw the beast and the kings of the world and their armies gathered together to fight against the one sitting on the horse and his army .

ID:	5013
INPUT:	bik'i dah adishjée'go ádíílííł ; bich'į' bine' na'adzi'ii ádíílííł índa bíilk'idgo ádíílííł áádóó ałdó' binaagóó siláo dah deínéehgo ádíílííł índa binaagóó tsin bee na'nílgohígíí naaznilgo ádíílííł .
PRED:	“ Tell them to sit down and build an army against its walls , and use it against its walls .
GOLD:	Show the city under siege . Build a wall around it so no one can escape . Set up the enemy camp , and surround the city with siege ramps and battering rams .

ID:	5014
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí asdzání áyidííniid , Da' díísh doo t'áá át'é Jó'ab ná yinahaz'ą́ą da ? Áádóó asdzání ádííniid , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hiníná ; bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí doo ła' nish'náajigo , doodaii' nishtł'ajigo bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii yee haadzíi'ii bits'ą́ąjį' ázhdooníił da , háálá ná naal'a'í Jó'ab díí yich'į' shííł'aad ; saad t'áá át'é bee hahideesdzihii shá hasht'eyiilaa .
PRED:	Then the king said to Joab , “ Do n't you realize that I am the king of Moab ? ” And the king replied , “ I will never be your servant , for I have told you the king , ‘ He has sent me back to me . '
GOLD:	“ Did Joab put you up to this ? ” And the woman replied , “ My lord the king , how can I deny it ? Nobody can hide anything from you . Yes , Joab sent me and told me what to say .

ID:	5015
INPUT:	Diyin God yee a'ááh nízinii éí Paul yaa ahééh nízin
PRED:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer
GOLD:	Paul 's Gratitude for God 's Mercy

ID:	5016
INPUT:	Nidi łahjį' éí Éífek kin haal'áágóó adaneezhchą́ą́' ; ákwii naadiin tsosts'idi míilgo diné ch'éékaígíí éí kin haal'áii ditą́ągo binaa ahéé'ítł'inígíí bik'iiłdááz . Áko Ben-héídad éí kin haal'áajį' náwóne' góne' anííchą́ą́' .
PRED:	But when the Israelite army fled , they fled to the city and died . But when they fled , they fled to the city of Ben-hadad 's army , they fled to the city of Ben-hadad .
GOLD:	The rest fled into the town of Aphek , but the wall fell on them and killed another 27,000 . Ben-hadad fled into the town and hid in a secret room .

ID:	5017
INPUT:	Áko sołtį' , Béthel góde dii'nééł ; áadi Diyin God bich'į' náádi'yeesh'nih biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí ádeeshłííł ; shich'į' nahwii'ná yę́ędą́ą́' éí shich'į' ééhoosinii éí t'áá naasháágóó shaa áhályą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Come to Bethel , ” says the Lord , “ and I will send my enemies into the altar of trouble .
GOLD:	We are now going to Bethel , where I will build an altar to the God who answered my prayers when I was in distress . He has been with me wherever I have gone . ”

ID:	5018
INPUT:	Díí bitaa'iisíłta'ígíí t'áá ałtso háidíígíi<unk> Bóhólníihii ádayiilaago doo hoł bééhózin da ?
PRED:	“ Who made this sacred offering to the Lord ? ” they demanded .
GOLD:	For they all knowthat my disaster has come from the hand of the Lord .

ID:	5019
INPUT:	Hastą́ągo ats'áda'az'á ; bee hool'iní bá yadaa'áhígíí łahjí táá' bits'ání'á ; náánáłahjí ałdó' táá' bits'ání'á ;
PRED:	Holy Place each side of the lampstand , and the third moved from the third side of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	The lampstand had six branches going out from the center stem , three on each side .

ID:	5020
INPUT:	ATaa' baa yájíłti'go t'áadoo yik'ida'diitą́ą da .
PRED:	The Father did n't understand what he was saying .
GOLD:	But they still did n't understand that he was talking about his Father .

ID:	5021
INPUT:	Kodóó ándishnínígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' : Diné shich'į' nidaalteehígíí nahalingo t'áadoo shich'į' nanilteehí ; na'astso'ígíí niyą́ .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , my people ! Do n't be afraid of me ! Do n't be afraid of me .
GOLD:	Son of man , listen to what I say to you . Do not join them in their rebellion . Open your mouth , and eat what I give you . ”

ID:	5022
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Diyin God aTaa' áádóó biYe' Jesus Christ bił ahił daniidlį́ . Nihí ałdó' ahidiníłnáago nihił ahił daniidlį́į doo biniyé dahoníil'į́'ígíí áádóó dahosidiits'ą́'ígíí bee nihił dahwiilne' .
PRED:	And we know that we are the Son of God and the Son of our Father , and we have heard that we have heard him .
GOLD:	We proclaim to you what we ourselves have actually seen and heard so that you may have fellowship with us . And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son , Jesus Christ .

ID:	5023
INPUT:	Áádóó dabíínáłígíí diné éí níłch'i bida'iiníziinii bii' hólǫ́ǫ́ nít'éé' yę́ę ádzaaígíí índa bisóodi ádaadzaaígíí t'áá ałtso baa nidahodzisne' .
PRED:	When the devil saw that the demon was possessed by the demon possessed by the evil spirits of the field and everything he did .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others about the demon-possessed man and the pigs .

ID:	5024
INPUT:	Áádóó Líívai dine'é éí Kóhath dine'é áádóó Kórah dine'é danilíinii deizį'go Ízrel dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God yaa dahaniihgo chánahgo dahataał .
PRED:	Then the Levites stood up and stood before the Lord their God and all the Israelites stood in praise the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the Levites from the clans of Kohath and Korah stood to praise the Lord , the God of Israel , with a very loud shout .

ID:	5025
INPUT:	Ła' ádaaní , Díí saadígíí doo níłch'i bi'iiníziinii bii' hólóonii ła' bizaad át'ée da . Da' níłch'i bi'iiníziiniísh doo oo'íinii oo'į́įgo íidoolííł ?
PRED:	Some say , “ Do n't you understand this evil spirit ? Do n't you use an evil spirit ? ”
GOLD:	Others said , “ This does n't sound like a man possessed by a demon ! Can a demon open the eyes of the blind ? ”

ID:	5026
INPUT:	Áko Íísa ádííniid , Haa'íshą' diné bił naashkaígíí ła' nił ninish'nííł . Áko ájíní , Éíshą' ha'át'íí biniyé ? Shinanit'a'í nílíinii , háni'dii ajooba' t'éí bee shich'oha'néego shąąh tsídíkees .
PRED:	“ What do you want to do ? ” Esau replied . “ What do you want to help me ? Why are you waiting for me ? ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Esau said , “ but at least let me assign some of my men to guide and protect you. ” Jacob responded , “ That 's not necessary . It 's enough that you 've received me warmly , my lord ! ”

ID:	5027
INPUT:	Áko hasiláo ałts'ájíínilgo táa'go dah yinéełgo halgaigi bił baa nijiyeekai , áádóó jidéé'į́į'go kin haal'áádóó diné ch'ídahaazhjée'ii áadi dziiłtsą́ , áko náhizhdiitahgo bich'į' jiyeedzáago ałtso nidzistseed .
PRED:	When the soldiers saw that they were going on the road , they saw a man coming out to the town of the town and killed everyone in the town .
GOLD:	he divided his men into three groups and set an ambush in the fields . When Abimelech saw the people coming out of the city , he and his men jumped up from their hiding places and attacked them .

ID:	5028
INPUT:	Díí baa nisíníyá . Shí éí t'óó dííníshhéél nít'éé' . T'áá shígi ájít'é nínízingo shaa nitsíníkees nít'éé' . Nidi k'ad éí nidideeshteh , baa nisíníyáhígíí ałkéé' sinilgo bee nił hashne' doo .
PRED:	I was too hard for you , so I could see you . But if you were afraid of me , I would not be afraid of you . But if you were afraid of what you have done .
GOLD:	While you did all this , I remained silent , and you thought I did n't care.But now I will rebuke you , listing all my charges against you .

ID:	5029
INPUT:	Diné nílíinii , díí oo'áłígíí , díí jínígíí bízhi' bikáá' ánílééh ; díí jį́ Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo Jerúsalem yináshzhiizh .
PRED:	“ Son of man , give this message to the name of the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , write down today 's date , because on this very day the king of Babylon is beginning his attack against Jerusalem .

ID:	5030
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Prophecy of Simeon

ID:	5031
INPUT:	Nich'į' nidahwiisnáá' yę́ę ba'áłchíní nich'į' nihidookahgo nitsidadidoogoh , áádóó dani'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso nikétsį́įjį' yaa ádadoonííł , índa ádandidooniił , Bóhólníihii bikin haal'áhígíí , t'áá éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin nilíinii biDził Záíyan yinílyée doo .
PRED:	As for your children , your children will come to you , and you will fall into the mountains.You will say , ‘ O Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	The descendants of your tormentorswill come and bow before you.Those who despised youwill kiss your feet.They will call you the City of the Lord , and Zion of the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	5032
INPUT:	T'óó hodíínáá'ígo ádahodooníiłii Jesus Christ bá nidaal'a'í yich'į' íidoolííł biniyé Diyin God bił yit'íní áyiilaa , áádóó John éí Christ bá naal'a'í jílíinii hach'į' bidiyingo naal'a'í yiníł'a'go hoł yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	And Christ sent his servants to preach the Good News to God and his servant Jesus Christ . He sent his servant to the angel of God and the angel of God , who sent him to be with him .
GOLD:	This is a revelation from Jesus Christ , which God gave him to show his servants the events that must soon take place . He sent an angel to present this revelation to his servant John ,

ID:	5033
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá adinídíín biyi' hojílónígi át'éego adinídíín biyi' dayíníikáahgo , ahidiníłnáago ahił daniidlį́ , áko haYe' Jesus Christ t'áá bí bidił yee nihibąąhági át'éii t'áá át'é ałtso nihąąh tánéigis .
PRED:	But we are in the light of the light of the light , just as we live in the light of Christ Jesus Christ . And we will be raised to death because of our sins .
GOLD:	But if we are living in the light , as God is in the light , then we have fellowship with each other , and the blood of Jesus , his Son , cleanses us from all sin .

ID:	5034
INPUT:	Éí doo dił bits'ą́ą́dóó nidahaazhchį́į da , doo nidi ats'íís yinízinii bik'ehgo da , doo nidi diné íinízinii bik'ehgo da , nidi Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó nidahaazhchį́ .
PRED:	And if you do n't have any part of their own body , it is not a person who does not have a human body .
GOLD:	They are reborn — not with a physical birth resulting from human passion or plan , but a birth that comes from God .

ID:	5035
INPUT:	Dandósinii áádóó nibik'ehgo iináanii yik'eh dahół'íinii t'áá ałtso bik' <unk> nishłį́ .
PRED:	May all who fear me and obey the commandments of all who obey me .
GOLD:	I am a friend to anyone who fears you — anyone who obeys your commandments .

ID:	5036
INPUT:	Áádóó bikéédę́ę́' éí Ábsalam bitsi' Méíyakah yá náá'ásgeh ; éí Abáíjah áádóó Áteiyai áádóó Záíza índa Shelómith há niyiishchį́ .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Absalom had sexual relations with his daughter , Solomon 's daughter , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years .
GOLD:	Later Rehoboam married another cousin , Maacah , the granddaughter of Absalom . Maacah gave birth to Abijah , Attai , Ziza , and Shelomith .

ID:	5037
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí t'áá ałtsoní t'áá bí bíniik'eh áyiilaa ; t'áá aaníí diné doo yá'ájíshóonii atího'dil'į́į doo biniyé áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has done everything he has done for them .
GOLD:	The Lord has made everything for his own purposes , even the wicked for a day of disaster .

ID:	5038
INPUT:	nidi shitsilí Táítas ákwii t'áadoo bik'íníyáágóó biniinaa ch'į́į́góó ch'ééh nitséskeesgo shik'isóó t'óó bílák'e dadéshnii' áádóó Masedóniyagóó dah náádiisdzá .
PRED:	But when I was there , I could n't have a little while I was there , I could n't go to Macedonia and brothers .
GOLD:	But I had no peace of mind because my dear brother Titus had n't yet arrived with a report from you . So I said good-bye and went on to Macedonia to find him .

ID:	5039
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Hilkáíyah biye' Iiláíyakim áádóó Shébna índa Jó'ah éí Rábshakeh ádeiłní , Baa nídaniikąąh , ná nidaal'a'í bich'į' Síriya dine'é bizaad bee yáníłti' , háálá éí dadiits'a' ; Jew dine'é bizaad éí t'áadoo bee nihich'į' yáníłti'í , áko tsé ahénátł'inígíí bikáá'dę́ę́' diné doo dandidoots'į́įł da .
PRED:	Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah , Shebna , Shebna , and Joah son of Asaph , the Assyrian chief of staff said to him , “ Listen to the Jews , for they will hear the message of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah , Shebna , and Joah said to the Assyrian chief of staff , “ Please speak to us in Aramaic , for we understand it well . Do n't speak in Hebrew , for the people on the wall will hear . ”

ID:	5040
INPUT:	Diné doo ádahalyáanii nidadi'a'go wólts'ą́'ígíí biláahgo diné hóyáanii hashkéego wólts'ą́ą́'jígo yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	It 's better to say that the wise are being destroyed , and the wise are being destroyed .
GOLD:	Better to be criticized by a wise personthan to be praised by a fool .

ID:	5041
INPUT:	Andrew , áádóó Philip , áádóó Barthálemew , áádóó Matthew , áádóó Thomas , áádóó James éí Alfíyas biye' , áádóó Thádiyas , áádóó Sáíman éí Kéínan dine'é jílínígíí ,
PRED:	Philip , Thomas ( Matthew ) , Matthew ) , Matthew ( Matthew ) , Matthew ( son of Alphaeus ) ,
GOLD:	Andrew , Philip , Bartholomew , Matthew , Thomas , James ( son of Alphaeus ) , Thaddaeus , Simon ( the zealot ) ,

ID:	5042
INPUT:	Tł'iish báhádzidii biyęęzhii yii' hadahakáahgo ádeile' , áádóó na'ashjée'ii bitł'óól nideiniłdiz ; biyęęzhii t'áá háiida yiyííyą́'ígíí éí dadootsaał , áádóó yists'ilígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó tł'iish báhádzidii hadoogááł .
PRED:	When the snake into the snake , they will die in the mouths of a poisonous snake . Anyone who eats it from a poisonous snake will die , and those who are like poisonous snake will die .
GOLD:	They hatch deadly snakesand weave spiders ' webs.Whoever eats their eggs will die ; whoever cracks them will hatch a viper .

ID:	5043
INPUT:	Ákohgo dóola yázhí ła' dadziisxį́ áádóó ashkii éí Íílai bich'į' bił dadziskai .
PRED:	Some of the young bulls and his young men killed Eli .
GOLD:	After sacrificing the bull , they brought the boy to Eli .

ID:	5044
INPUT:	Díí táyi' nidaaldeehii t'áá át'é kódaat'éhígíí t'éí daohsą́ą doo : tó bii'góó áádóó tónteel bii'góó índa tooh bii'góó bit'a' dahólǫ́ǫgo yee nida'ałkǫ́ǫ'ii áádóó bikágí dadich'íizhii éí daohsą́ą doo .
PRED:	These are the instructions regarding the animals that are ceremonially unclean . You must not eat the rivers of the Nile , and you will eat the rivers of the Nile .
GOLD:	“ Of all the marine animals , these are ones you may use for food . You may eat anything from the water if it has both fins and scales , whether taken from salt water or from streams .

ID:	5045
INPUT:	Éí bąą ayóó át'éego hashké niidzį́'ígíí índa bidziilgo anaa' hak'i yayiiką́ áádóó éí yee diltłi'go í'diilyaago doo baa ákozniizį́į' da índa <unk> <unk> go hajéí doo baa nitsídzíkees da nít'éé' .
PRED:	So he remembered his fierce anger and his fierce anger , and he did n't realize that he could n't be able to help them .
GOLD:	Therefore , he poured out his fury on themand destroyed them in battle.They were enveloped in flames , but they still refused to understand.They were consumed by fire , but they did not learn their lesson .

ID:	5046
INPUT:	Mk . 1 : <unk>
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Heals Many People

ID:	5047
INPUT:	Sálaman bikin náádaała'ígíí
PRED:	Solomon 's Many Achievements
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	5048
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Kéyah biih nihideesh'ishígíí biih woonáago
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : I will enter the land I am giving you .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel. “ When you arrive in the land where I am taking you ,

ID:	5049
INPUT:	háálá Diyin God bił bééhózin , éí bijį́ wooyą́ą'go jideezghaliigi ádoohnííł áádóó Diyin Godgi ánóht'ée doo ; yá'át'ééhjí índa doo yá'át'ééhjí nihił ééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	For God knows what you eat and eat it , and you will die in the place of rest of the wicked ways of God .
GOLD:	“ God knows that your eyes will be opened as soon as you eat it , and you will be like God , knowing both good and evil . ”

ID:	5050
INPUT:	T'áá dahidikááhgóó nida'iiłchxǫǫh índa ti'da'a<unk> nííh ,
PRED:	They rush to obey your commands and regulations .
GOLD:	Destruction and misery always follow them .

ID:	5051
INPUT:	Stephen seesyį́į́dóó bik'ijį' Jesus dajoosdląądígíí biniinaa atídahodil'į́įgo bik'ee tadzooskaígíí Finííshiya áádóó Sáípras índa Ántiyakjį' dajíkááhgóó , t'áá hazhó'ó Jew dine'é t'éiyá Diyin God bizaad bee bił nidahodzisne' .
PRED:	From there , some Jews who were teaching in Antioch of Syria , Paul and Barnabas went to Antioch of Syria . They were waiting for the Jews to Antioch of Syria .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the believers who had been scattered during the persecution after Stephen 's death traveled as far as Phoenicia , Cyprus , and Antioch of Syria . They preached the word of God , but only to Jews .

ID:	5052
INPUT:	Háálá bitsį' áádóó bidił dahólóonii doo bił da'ahiigą́ą da , nidi doo daat'į́į́góó aláahdi bídahólníihii , áádóó dabidziilii , áádóó díí k'ad nahasdzáán bikáa'gi chahałheeł bee bídahólníihii , índa níłch'i bida'iiníziinii t'áadoo bee néelą́'ígóó yádiłhił biyi' nahaz'ą́ądi dahólóonii bił da'ahiigą́ .
PRED:	For there is no resurrection of the blood of the Jews and teachers of religious law , teaching , “ We are trying to live in darkness , but we are trying to live in darkness . ”
GOLD:	For we are not fighting against flesh-and-blood enemies , but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world , against mighty powers in this dark world , and against evil spirits in the heavenly places .

ID:	5053
INPUT:	Índa kin bii' sohodizin bá ahénátł'inígíí yínáá'nééł'ąąd nít'éé' éí neeznáadi ké silá íídéetą́ą́' ; díí kin bá nástł'inígíí binahjį' hooghan éí hastą́ądi ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódaníłtsogo ádaalyaago ahéénínil .
PRED:	He measured the walls of the Temple , and he measured the walls of the Temple . He measured the walls of the Temple .
GOLD:	Then he measured the wall of the Temple , and it was 101/2 feet thick . There was a row of rooms along the outside wall ; each room was 7 feet wide .

ID:	5054
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Éran biye' Eliyéízar bich'į' handziih , Tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee nidaakáhígíí néididooniłgo kǫ' da'níłts'ą́ą'jį' níléígóó iidiyoołkał , háálá tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii bee nidaakáhígíí dílzin .
PRED:	“ Say to Aaron son of Aaron , son of Eleazar the priest , and present incense to the fragrant incense . For the incense burners are holy by burning incense .
GOLD:	“ Tell Eleazar son of Aaron the priest to pull all the incense burners from the fire , for they are holy . Also tell him to scatter the burning coals .

ID:	5055
INPUT:	íídą́ą́' David éí Zóbah dine'é neistseed yę́ędą́ą́' Ríízan aghada'ii'níiłii danilíinii ádíyii'nilgo yinanit'a'í silį́į́' , áko éí Damáskasgóó eekaigo áadi kéédahat'į́įgo ákwii nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	When King David saw that he was captured , he led his army to Damascus and led them to Damascus to Damascus .
GOLD:	and had become the leader of a gang of rebels . After David conquered Hadadezer , Rezon and his men fled to Damascus , where he became king .

ID:	5056
INPUT:	nidi shá halne'ii ła' nááhódlǫ́ , áko yee shaa halne'ii éí ts'ídá t'áá aaníí át'éego shił bééhózin .
PRED:	But I know he is my witness , and he knows me .
GOLD:	But someone else is also testifying about me , and I assure you that everything he says about me is true .

ID:	5057
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí adiists'a'go áshiilaago doo bich'į' naashteeh da , doo nidi bits'ą́ą́' t'ą́ą́' kónáshnéeh da .
PRED:	For the Lord my God has heard me , but I will not listen to them .
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord has spoken to me , and I have listened.I have not rebelled or turned away .

ID:	5058
INPUT:	áko doo ákójínééhgóó éí t'áá ho'dizhchínígi át'éego t'áá łichí'ígo áhodeeshłííł áádóó honoojíigi t'áá hóółtseii nahalingo áhodeeshłííł índa dibáá' hodiyoołhééł .
PRED:	I will destroy them like a flood , like a flood , like a thirsty child in the wilderness . I will destroy them like thirst .
GOLD:	Otherwise , I will strip her as nakedas she was on the day she was born.I will leave her to die of thirst , as in a dry and barren wilderness .

ID:	5059
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , doo t'óó shaa yáhásinígi áshidi'doolníił da , háálá nánooshkąąhgo sodeeszin ; bíni' doo yá'ádaashóonii t'óó baa yáhásinígi ádabi'dilnééh ; bíni'dii t'áadoo yee hadaodziihígóó daneeznánígíí bitahgi łeeyi' shijée' le' .
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let me be afraid ; let my cry out for help , for I will pour out the wicked in the grave .
GOLD:	Do n't let me be disgraced , O Lord , for I call out to you for help.Let the wicked be disgraced ; let them lie silent in the grave .

ID:	5060
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego Mó'ab kéyahdi áádóó Áman dine'é bitahgóó áádóó Íídam kéyahdi índa kédaayahgóó Jew dine'é kéédahat'ínígíí t'áá ałtso éí Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Júdah dine'é daadziihígíí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ kéédahat'į́įgo áyiilaago áádóó Shéífan biye' Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah honant'áa doo biniyé niiníłtį́įgo dayíínii' .
PRED:	So Moses gave the following instructions to the people of Moab , including the people of Edom , and all the people of Judah . He gave them victory over Gedaliah son of Shaphan and grandson of Shaphan . He appointed Gedaliah son of Shaphan and grandson of Shaphan son of Ahikam son of Shaphan .
GOLD:	When the Judeans in Moab , Ammon , Edom , and the other nearby countries heard that the king of Babylon had left a few people in Judah and that Gedaliah was the governor ,

ID:	5061
INPUT:	Áádóó Saul biye' Jánathan nídii'na'go tsintahdi David yaa níyáago Diyin God binahjį' chánah ánáhojiidlaa .
PRED:	So Saul 's son Jonathan returned to the City of David .
GOLD:	Jonathan went to find David and encouraged him to stay strong in his faith in God .

ID:	5062
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá bí binaagóó nida'dilch'ilgo ííł'į́áádóó tónteel biyaadi haz'ánígíí bik'i ditą́ągo ííł'į́ .
PRED:	But he was in the middle of the forest , and he tore his clothes in the valley .
GOLD:	See how he spreads the lightning around himand how it lights up the depths of the sea .

ID:	5063
INPUT:	Mózes éí Éran bidá'í Azáíyel biye'ké Mísheiyel áádóó Elzéífan hágo yidííniidgo ííłní , Kojį' ninoh'aashgo nihik'is yę́ę hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ch'ínóhjáahgo níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi ninohjááh .
PRED:	Then Moses called together the servants of Midian , Mishael , and went out to the camp of Midian . Then he called out to the camp of the camp .
GOLD:	Then Moses called for Mishael and Elzaphan , Aaron 's cousins , the sons of Aaron 's uncle Uzziel . He said to them , “ Come forward and carry away the bodies of your relatives from in front of the sanctuary to a place outside the camp . ”

ID:	5064
INPUT:	Áko kin ííł'íní éí óola yitsidii chánah áyiilaa , áádóó bee atsidí yee adiiłkǫǫhii béésh nitł'izii yitsidii ííłní , Ahididoolyįh biniyé hasht'eelyaa , áádóó ił adaalkaałí bee niłdzil doo biniyé yił adeiskaal .
PRED:	Then he called the gold and placed it in the house of the Covenant and placed it in the middle of the cart . He said to them , “ The stone tablets of the Covenant , the builders , and the builders . ”
GOLD:	The carver encourages the goldsmith , and the molder helps at the anvil. “ Good , ” they say . “ It 's coming along fine. ” Carefully they join the parts together , then fasten the thing in place so it wo n't fall over .

ID:	5065
INPUT:	Háálá kin haal'áii shízhi' bee wójíii bik'ijį' atí'deeshłíiłgo baa nídiisdzá , jó'akon . Ákoósh nihí doo atínihidi'doolníił da ? Nihí ałdó' atínihidi'doolnííł , háálá t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso atídoolnííł biniyé diltłish yee atída'ał'íinii hágo bidideeshniił .
PRED:	For I will destroy your name , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ The city will be completely completely destroyed , for I will destroy you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	I have begun to punish Jerusalem , the city that bears my name . Now should I let you go unpunished ? No , you will not escape disaster . I will call for war against all the nations of the earth . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '

ID:	5066
INPUT:	Diyin God bidiyį́į́' danohłíinii , Bóhólníihii baa dahohniihgo bich'į' dahohtaał , áádóó bízhi' diyinii béédaołniihgo baa ahééh danohsin .
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , O God , and praise the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , all you godly ones ! Praise his holy name .

ID:	5067
INPUT:	T'áá ayóó'ádanihííníi'nínígi át'éego Bóhólníihii éí ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'níi dooígíí áádóó diné t'áá ałtso ayóó'ádeínóh'níi dooígíí t'ah yówehígo nooséełgo áyóle' .
PRED:	Love each other in the Lord 's love and love for all who love you .
GOLD:	And may the Lord make your love for one another and for all people grow and overflow , just as our love for you overflows .

ID:	5068
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' yéego ádíshní . T'áá shí shiinéé' bee bich'į' hadeesdzihgo shididoots'į́į́ł .
PRED:	Then God said to me , “ I will listen to my voice .
GOLD:	I cry out to God ; yes , I shout.Oh , that God would listen to me !

ID:	5069
INPUT:	Áko ashchíinii t'óó bił ahayóí , nidi ábizhdííniid , Áhóót'įįdígíí t'ááká diné ła' bił hoołne' lágo .
PRED:	One day Jesus told him , “ Do n't let anyone tell you what he has done . ”
GOLD:	Her parents were overwhelmed , but Jesus insisted that they not tell anyone what had happened .

ID:	5070
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go báhádzidii índa jį́įgo k'aa' yee da'diłt'ohígíí doo bééníldzid da doo .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the wicked , and you will be afraid of the wicked .
GOLD:	Do not be afraid of the terrors of the night , nor the arrow that flies in the day .

ID:	5071
INPUT:	Ne'oodlą' bidziilgo índa t'áá ákogi ánít'į́įgo bee ádaa ákonínídzin doo . Éí ła' doo deiniizį́į́'góó tsinaa'eeł neheestǫ'ígíí nahalingo bi'oodlą' dayííłchxǫ' .
PRED:	You have seen what is right and right , and you have seen what is right .
GOLD:	Cling to your faith in Christ , and keep your conscience clear . For some people have deliberately violated their consciences ; as a result , their faith has been shipwrecked .

ID:	5072
INPUT:	Ayóo ajit'į́įgo bee haa ha'niihii áádóó ts'ídá aláahgo bee hóhólníihii hólónígíí bá daníl'į́įgo t'óó ahayóí yiską́ ; t'áá éí neeznádiindóó ba'aan tseebídiin yiską́ .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the king , and the kingdom of the kingdom of the Almighty .
GOLD:	The celebration lasted 180 days — a tremendous display of the opulent wealth of his empire and the pomp and splendor of his majesty .

ID:	5073
INPUT:	áko Bóhólníihii éí nahasdzáán yidooghał biniyé yich'į' nídii'na'go Bóhólníihii bik'ee ił yée'ii áádóó yee ayóó át'éii bits'ádi'nílíidii bits'ąą tsénídahasdzą́ą́góó áádóó tséní'da'deezbaalgóó yóó'adajiijeeh doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord will let the earth fall into the earth , and the glory of the Lord will be filled with joy and joy .
GOLD:	while they crawl away into cavernsand hide among the jagged rocks in the cliffs.They will try to escape the terror of the Lordand the glory of his majestyas he rises to shake the earth .

ID:	5074
INPUT:	Da'ołzhishgo ásaa' yigádígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'ígíí ał'ąą ádaat'éii índa tsin bee í'dílzoołí bee baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Sing to the gates of the bottomless pit and the music of the flute .
GOLD:	Praise him with the tambourine and dancing ; praise him with strings and flutes !

ID:	5075
INPUT:	Naat'áanii yah anádáahgo éí yah a'atiin bik'i chaha'ohídę́ę́' yah anádáah doo áádóó t'áá ákóne' ch'ééhédáah doo .
PRED:	The prince will enter the door of the coming , and he will go back to the place where he is coming .
GOLD:	“ The prince must enter the gateway through the entry room , and he must leave the same way .

ID:	5076
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham hwe'asdzą́ą́ Sárah , Shideezhí át'é , jiníigo biniinaa Gíírar kin haal'áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii Abímelek wolyéii aníł'a'go Sárah yił anídaaskai .
PRED:	And Abraham said to Sarah , “ You are my sister , my sister , ” Abraham said , “ I am the king of Sodom . ”
GOLD:	Abraham introduced his wife , Sarah , by saying , “ She is my sister. ” So King Abimelech of Gerar sent for Sarah and had her brought to him at his palace .

ID:	5077
INPUT:	Áko diné danilíinii Sháílohgóó ada'as'a' , áko t'áá ałtsoní biBóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii áádę́ę́' nídeidoo'ááł ; éí Bóhólníihii jílíinii diyingo naal'a'í chérabim wolyéii bita'gi wódahdi hojílǫ́ , áko Íílai biye'ké Háfnai áádóó Fíniyas áadi Diyin God bitsits'aa' dílzinii éí bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii yéské .
PRED:	Then the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent the Ark to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the two sons of Eli , and the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	So they sent men to Shiloh to bring the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim . Hophni and Phinehas , the sons of Eli , were also there with the Ark of the Covenant of God .

ID:	5078
INPUT:	Jó , ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii ayóó ádaat'éii naalte' dajílį́įgo ałdó' ádahodoolííł , áádóó ádajooníiłii , índa ádajíít'įįdii bik'ehgo k'ééhodideeshdlííł .
PRED:	For I will repay many nations and kings , and kings will repay them . I will repay them , just as they have done .
GOLD:	Many nations and great kings will enslave the Babylonians , just as they enslaved my people . I will punish them in proportion to the suffering they cause my people . ”

ID:	5079
INPUT:	Zébyulan dine'é ałdó' <unk> kin shijaa'gi índa Néíhalal kin shijaa'gi kéédahat'ínígíí t'áadoo ch'ídeineeskaad da , nidi Kéínan dine'é t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ hatahgóó kéédahat'į́įgo hanaalte' ádajiilaa .
PRED:	He did n't let his people go out to the Canaanites and Canaanites living in Canaan . He did not drive them out of the Canaanites living among the Canaanites .
GOLD:	The tribe of Zebulun failed to drive out the residents of Kitron and Nahalol , so the Canaanites continued to live among them . But the Canaanites were forced to work as slaves for the people of Zebulun .

ID:	5080
INPUT:	Héízar-shúwal , Bíyer-shííba , <unk> <unk> jah ,
PRED:	Beersheba , Beersheba , Beersheba ,
GOLD:	Hazar-shual , Beersheba , Biziothiah ,

ID:	5081
INPUT:	Shoo , t'áá aaníí , k'idoolyá , ákoósh dínóosééł ? Ha'a'aahdę́ę́' bich'į' deeyolgo ałtso dínóołnah . K'ídoolyáago nooséłígi t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ dínóołnah .
PRED:	“ Look , what will you say , ‘ What is it right ? Look ! Look , it is here ! '
GOLD:	But when the vine is transplanted , will it thrive ? No , it will wither awaywhen the east wind blows against it.It will die in the same good soilwhere it had grown so well . ”

ID:	5082
INPUT:	Síízar bich'į' tax nahalyéegoósh bee haz'ą́ , dooda daats'í ?
PRED:	“ Are you the Messiah ? Are you the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	Now tell us — is it right for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	5083
INPUT:	Hak'is ayóó'ájó'nínígíí éí t'áá áłahjį' hool'ingi hojílǫ́ , áko ła'da doo haniinaa didoogoh da .
PRED:	A friend is not a close believer , and no one will stumble .
GOLD:	Anyone who loves a fellow believer is living in the light and does not cause others to stumble .

ID:	5084
INPUT:	Áko hódzą́ áádóó áhodiigis índa doo hóshkał shił bééhodoozįįł biniyé shijéí baa diní'ą́ , áko díí ałdó' níyol ch'ééh bíjílyeed nahalinígíí baa ákoniizį́į́' .
PRED:	I wanted to find wisdom and foolishness , so I could n't know how much it would be enough to get the wind .
GOLD:	So I set out to learn everything from wisdom to madness and folly . But I learned firsthand that pursuing all this is like chasing the wind .

ID:	5085
INPUT:	Kót'éego diné doo yóó'ábidi'doolnííłgóóínda diltłish doo bee bi'diilyéégóó áyósin .
PRED:	So they will be cut off from their own sword , and they will lie in shame .
GOLD:	He protects them from the grave , from crossing over the river of death .

ID:	5086
INPUT:	Remaláíyah biye' Pííkah éí Ízrel dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo naaki náhááh góne' Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Azáíyah biye' Jótham aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Pekah son of Jotham began to rule over Israel in the fourth year of King Uzziah 's reign in Judah .
GOLD:	Jotham son of Uzziah began to rule over Judah in the second year of King Pekah 's reign in Israel .

ID:	5087
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Ag wolyéii áádóó haye'ké índa hadine'é ałtso nideistseedgo doo ła' hináágóó ádayiilaa , áko hakéyah bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	He also captured the land of Israel and his sons and his sons , and he killed them .
GOLD:	And Israel killed King Og , his sons , and all his subjects ; not a single survivor remained . Then Israel occupied their land .

ID:	5088
INPUT:	K'ad Jó'ash haye'ké bídadéét'i'ii áádóó ayóó át'é naanish bidziilii baa nijiyáhígíí índa Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédaalyaaígíí , jó , éí aláahgo naat'áanii danilínígíí binaaltsoos bii' baa dahane'go bik'inídaháasdzoh . Áko haye' Amazáíyah hatsásk'ehgi nant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jehoash 's reign , his sons , are recorded in The Book of the Lord 's Temple , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Amaziah , are recorded in The Book of the Lord 's reign .
GOLD:	The account of the sons of Joash , the prophecies about him , and the record of his restoration of the Temple of God are written in The Commentary on the Book of the Kings . His son Amaziah became the next king .

ID:	5089
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii bizhé'é baa bił nihoozhǫǫh doo , áádóó haye' há yizhchíinii hóyą́ągo nooséełii baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	May the godly be glad , and let the mother of the godly be glad .
GOLD:	The father of godly children has cause for joy.What a pleasure to have children who are wise .

ID:	5090
INPUT:	Áádóó Kaldíya dine'é nídoo'néełgo díí kin haal'áhígíí deidoołnéełgo yidahodidoonił áádóó ałtso adeididoołk'ą́ą́ł .
PRED:	The Babylonians will attack the Babylonians , and fire will attack them .
GOLD:	Then the Babylonians will come back and capture this city and burn it to the ground . '

ID:	5091
INPUT:	áko dazhníł'į́į nidi doo deizdoołtséeł da , dazdiits'a' nidi doo bik'idazhdi'dootį́įł da ; doodaii' bąąhági ádadziidzaaígíí bits'ą́ąjį' ninázhdookah , áádóó há yóó'anídahididoot'ááł .
PRED:	They will never see their eyes , but they will never see their eyes . They will never see their sins , and they will turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled : ‘ When they see what I do , they will learn nothing.When they hear what I say , they will not understand.Otherwise , they will turn to meand be forgiven . ' ”

ID:	5092
INPUT:	Ániid nidaakaii kót'é bidoo'niid
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Advice for Young and Old

ID:	5093
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham t'áá íiyisí abínígo nízhdii'na'go bááh áádóó tó abid bił nízhdiinilgo Héígar baazhnínilgo nihiiníłjid , áádóó ashkii bił dashdiił'a'go dah dii'áázh , áádóó Bíyer-shííba hoolyéedi kéyah bii' doo naagháhídi niji'aash .
PRED:	So Abraham got up early the next morning and took it into the cistern . So Abraham sent the boy to the land of Canaan , where the boy went to Beersheba in the south .
GOLD:	So Abraham got up early the next morning , prepared food and a container of water , and strapped them on Hagar 's shoulders . Then he sent her away with their son , and she wandered aimlessly in the wilderness of Beersheba .

ID:	5094
INPUT:	Áádóó náábík'ijį' bitsilí Éíbel jishchį́ . Éíbel éí dibé yaa áhályáanii silį́į́' , nidi Kéin éí dá'ák'ehgi naalnishii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Later , during the next morning , she became the shepherd of his brother 's brother 's brother , and the sheep of Abel .
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to his brother and named him Abel.When they grew up , Abel became a shepherd , while Cain cultivated the ground .

ID:	5095
INPUT:	Da' Christ yá nidaal'a'iísh danilį́ ? Shí lá t'ah aláhígo yá'át'éehgo éí nishłį́ ni ; naanish t'ah aláhídi ádaat'éii baa naashá , doo jóołta' ánéelą́ą'di náshidi'neesghaal , t'ah aláhídi át'éego awáalyaaí nísísdlį́į́' , índa lą'ídi k'asdą́ą́' shi'diisyį́ ( doo áhályáanii nahalingo ádíshní ) .
PRED:	“ Are you the Messiah ? For I am the one who is greater than I am the least to you ? No , I am sending you into prison , and I am like a little while I am in prison .
GOLD:	Are they servants of Christ ? I know I sound like a madman , but I have served him far more ! I have worked harder , been put in prison more often , been whipped times without number , and faced death again and again .

ID:	5096
INPUT:	K'os níyizgo bii'dę́ę́' bich'į' hanádzih nít'éé' . Yee hahaasdzíi'ii índa bik'eh hoogáałii yeidiní'ánígíí yik'eh dahół'į́įgo tádadookai .
PRED:	Then he turned from heaven and told them what he had promised . He refused to obey his decrees and regulations .
GOLD:	He spoke to Israel from the pillar of cloud , and they followed the laws and decrees he gave them .

ID:	5097
INPUT:	háálá t'ahdii ts'ísee k'ehgo ádanoht'é . Nihitahgi ła' da'ahoołch'į́į́d , ła' ahináádadoołtłi' , ła' ał<unk> kah , áko ts'ísee k'ehgo ádanoht'é . Doo da'oodláanii dayíkáhígi át'éego dayínóhkááh .
PRED:	For there is no part of your sinful nature . As a sinful sinful nature , it is sinful and sinful nature , it is sinful to be sinful and sinful .
GOLD:	for you are still controlled by your sinful nature . You are jealous of one another and quarrel with each other . Does n't that prove you are controlled by your sinful nature ? Are n't you living like people of the world ?

ID:	5098
INPUT:	Áádóó awáalyaají éé'ę́ę háázhdii'nilgo ahóyííłką́ąjį' t'áá ákwíí jį́ aláahgo naat'áanii ná'ádį́hígi níjídį́į́h nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then he broke his prison with a covenant with the king , and he gave birth to the king .
GOLD:	He supplied Jehoiachin with new clothes to replace his prison garb and allowed him to dine in the king 's presence for the rest of his life .

ID:	5099
INPUT:	Bee ánísht'éii baa nitséskeesgo bee háínídzíi'ii bich'į' dah nídiisdzá .
PRED:	I did what I told you , and I went to you .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	5100
INPUT:	Díí tó háána'ígi Méribah hoosye' , háálá ákwii Ízrel dine'é éí Bóhólníihii yich'į' saad dahasłį́į́' índa ákwii hach'į' diyingo í'diilyaa .
PRED:	That is why the Lord was there at Kadesh because the people of Israel had appeared to him in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	This place was known as the waters of Meribah ( which means “ arguing ” ) because there the people of Israel argued with the Lord , and there he demonstrated his holiness among them .

ID:	5101
INPUT:	( Éí dinéhígíí kin haal'áagi hááhoniłcha'go naat'áanii yił da'ahigą́ągo , índa diné neiłtseedgo biniinaa awáalyaa góne' yah eelt'e' . )
PRED:	He killed the people in the city of the city , for he struck the walls of the city .
GOLD:	( Barabbas was in prison for taking part in an insurrection in Jerusalem against the government , and for murder . )

ID:	5102
INPUT:	Dooda shį́į́ , doo ákót'ée da , háálá nihits'íís bee hadadilyaii azhą́ doo hózhǫ́ bidziil da nidi éí t'áá ákónéehee ádaat'é ,
PRED:	No , it is not like a human body , for it is not weak and weak .
GOLD:	In fact , some parts of the body that seem weakest and least important are actually the most necessary .

ID:	5103
INPUT:	Áko hwe'asdzą́ą́ jíł'íní Shííkem kin haal'áagi haye' ła' há yishchį́ , éí Abímelek bee jíízhi' .
PRED:	So Abimelech gave birth to his wife , and he gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	He also had a concubine in Shechem , who gave birth to a son , whom he named Abimelech .

ID:	5104
INPUT:	Nidi díí t'áá ádzaagóó nida'nitinii t'áadoo ééhóziní ił nida'í'įįh áádóó naaldlooshii doo nitsídaakeesii nahalingo t'áadoo tsíhodeeskézí t'óó nida'ádiilchxǫǫh .
PRED:	But this is what the Scriptures say : “ You must not commit adultery with a vow or unclean animal . He must not defile himself . ”
GOLD:	But these people scoff at things they do not understand . Like unthinking animals , they do whatever their instincts tell them , and so they bring about their own destruction .

ID:	5105
INPUT:	Áádóó Péntekast beiníłką́ągo t'áá ádzíłtso [ aheełt'éego nitsídadzikeesgo] t'ááłáhígi nidzíiztą́ .
PRED:	So the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	On the day of Pentecost all the believers were meeting together in one place .

ID:	5106
INPUT:	Tó éí tsé nidayii<unk> ; t'áá íiyisí nahałtį́įhgo łeezh ayiił'eeł ; t'áá ákót'éego diné bee bił chohoo'ínígíí ááłdįįł .
PRED:	You have made the Rock of the earth ; you destroy the soil with violence .
GOLD:	as water wears away the stonesand floods wash away the soil , so you destroy people 's hope .

ID:	5107
INPUT:	Kéyah bits'ą́ą́dóó nídahoodleełii neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' Bóhólníihii baa náhidit'aahígíí t'áá át'é , éí kéyah bits'ą́ą́dóó nídaneest'áanii , doodaii' tsin bineest'ą' ádaat'éii , éí Bóhólníihii bíí' át'é , áko Bóhólníihii bich'į'go dadílzin .
PRED:	“ All the crops of the land will be given to the Lord , and the land will be given to the Lord . This is what the Lord says : ‘ The land is holy . '
GOLD:	“ One-tenth of the produce of the land , whether grain from the fields or fruit from the trees , belongs to the Lord and must be set apart to him as holy .

ID:	5108
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí doo ła' kéyah biih doohkah da . Díí kéyah bii' kéédahoht'į́į doo , dishníigo bee ádee haasdzíí' nít'éé' ; t'áá hazhó'ó Jiifáneh biye' Kéíleb áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa t'éiyá yah adoo'ash .
PRED:	“ You must not enter the land I swore to drive out the land of Caleb son of Nun , Joshua son of Nun , and Caleb son of Nun .
GOLD:	You will not enter and occupy the land I swore to give you . The only exceptions will be Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun .

ID:	5109
INPUT:	Binááł Diyin God ts'ídá doo deidísin da .
PRED:	They do n't want God to do what pleases God .
GOLD:	“ They have no fear of God at all . ”

ID:	5110
INPUT:	Nidi diné doo yá'ádaashóonii biye'ké t'áá ałtso ch'il ahoshí nahgóó kól'įįhígi ádabidi'doolnííł , háálá éí doo yílá bee naaljooł da .
PRED:	But if the wicked are destroyed , they will not be destroyed , for they are not guilty of the wicked .
GOLD:	But the godless are like thorns to be thrown away , for they tear the hand that touches them .

ID:	5111
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é bił hojilne'go Bóhólníihii yee áhodííniidígíí t'áá át'é baa hojoolne' .
PRED:	So Moses told the Israelites what the Lord had said .
GOLD:	So Moses gave all of these instructions to the people of Israel as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	5112
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádaat'į́į́góó nináháháahii t'áá éí bik'ehgo táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan náhást'édiin yiską́ąjį' ákót'éego sínítį́į dooleełgo naa diní'ą́ , kót'éego Ízrel dine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádáát'įįdii bá dah yíyéeł doo .
PRED:	“ When the Israelites are living in Israel , you will die for three days . Then you will be judged for the sins of Israel . ”
GOLD:	I am requiring you to bear Israel 's sins for 390 days — one day for each year of their sin .

ID:	5113
INPUT:	Éí diné ání , Kin ayóó áníłtsogo nideesh'ááł áádóó ná'ádeídi dahótsaago dahooghango ádeeshłííł , áádóó tsésǫ' dadooleełgóó bá bighádahaasdzą́ągo ádeeshłííł , índa dilk'is tsin neheeshjíí' ádaał t'ą́'ígíí bii'dę́ę́' a<unk> deeshkałgo łichíi'go deeshdlish .
PRED:	They said , “ I will make a great room for the Temple of Heaven 's Armies , and I will make a cedar stick of cedar and high above the walls of the city . I will put it on the walls of the Temple . ”
GOLD:	He says , ‘ I will build a magnificent palacewith huge rooms and many windows.I will panel it throughout with fragrant cedarand paint it a lovely red . '

ID:	5114
INPUT:	Díí t'áá ałtso ákóhóót'įįd nidi , Job t'áadoo ádił asziihígi da , índa t'áá áhoodzaagóó t'áadoo Diyin God yik'i hodii'ą́ą da .
PRED:	But Job had done this , but Job refused to sin . He did not commit adultery .
GOLD:	In all of this , Job did not sin by blaming God .

ID:	5115
INPUT:	T'áá áko tsxį́įłgo siláo índa siláo neeznádiingo bindanit'a'í ákóyaa yił dah diijéé' , áko éí siláo aląąjį' binanit'a'í índa siláo ałdó' dayiiłtsą́ągo , Paul nídeiniłhałígíí yę́ę yik'i deeskai .
PRED:	So the officer and the soldiers went to Paul and ordered that Paul and the soldiers could see what Paul had done .
GOLD:	He immediately called out his soldiers and officers and ran down among the crowd . When the mob saw the commander and the troops coming , they stopped beating Paul .

ID:	5116
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Tónteel bikáa'jigo dah didiilnííh , áko Ííjip dine'é áádóó bitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí índa łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii tó bik'i diilkǫǫh .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Let us go out of Egypt , and let the Egyptians go down to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	When all the Israelites had reached the other side , the Lord said to Moses , “ Raise your hand over the sea again . Then the waters will rush back and cover the Egyptians and their chariots and charioteers . ”

ID:	5117
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , diné dabidósinii t'áá áyídígi bee yisdá'iildéehii bá hólǫ́ , áko nihikéyahgi bee baa ha'niihii hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	But those who fear him will be saved , and those who fear him will rejoice in the land of our salvation .
GOLD:	Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him , so our land will be filled with his glory .

ID:	5118
INPUT:	Shí Éíbraham biDiyin God áádóó Áízak biDiyin God índa Jéíkab biDiyin God nishłį́ . Diyin God éí daneeznáanii doo biDiyin God jílį́į da , nidi dahináanii biDiyin God jílį́ .
PRED:	I am the God of Isaac , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob , the God of Jacob , the living God of Jacob .
GOLD:	‘ I am the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . ' So he is the God of the living , not the dead . ”

ID:	5119
INPUT:	Naalye'é yaa áhályáanii bina'adlo'ii binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	A Warning to the Rich Man
GOLD:	Parable of the Shrewd Manager

ID:	5120
INPUT:	Hasht'e'ádadołnéehgo nihílááh ; nihik'is ałdó' bił diné baa nínáánóhkááh .
PRED:	Get up and live in peace , and take your friend .
GOLD:	Then take your brother , and go back to the man .

ID:	5121
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go éí Daniel nídeizlóozgo náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí shijéé' góyaa adayiisxan . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí Daniel áyidííniid , NiDiyin God t'áá áłahjį' bá nanil'a'ígíí yisdánółtééł .
PRED:	Then the king sent this message to the king and threw him into a lion 's hand and threw him into his hand . But the king said to him , “ You are afraid of God ! ”
GOLD:	So at last the king gave orders for Daniel to be arrested and thrown into the den of lions . The king said to him , “ May your God , whom you serve so faithfully , rescue you . ”

ID:	5122
INPUT:	Áádóó bílátah dah si'ánígíí éí tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá áníłnééz ; béésh łitsoii naneesdizgo da'ahól<unk> go áádóó tsin pámgrenit aneest'ą' nahalingo éí bílátah dah si'ánígíí binázt'i'go ályaa ; łahjí t'áá ákót'éego béésh łitsoii bik'i naneesdizgo ałdó' ályaa .
PRED:	The top of the pillars was 71/2 feet long and attached them to the top of the cart . It was 71/2 feet long and attached to the top of the cart .
GOLD:	The bronze capital on top of each pillar was 71/2 feet high and was decorated with a network of bronze pomegranates all the way around .

ID:	5123
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é náádabidideeshłááł niizį́į'go Íífreiyim dine'é doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii áádóó Samériya bidoo yá'áshǫ' t'áadoo bahat'aadí silį́į́' ; jó , éí ayóogo binda'adlo' áádóó da'ni'įįh índa t'áá tł'óó'dóó aghada'ii'nííł .
PRED:	The people of Israel tried to heal their sins and Samaria , for their sins are destroyed , and their sins are destroyed . They have been turned away from Samaria and robbed .
GOLD:	“ I want to heal Israel , but its sins are too great.Samaria is filled with liars.Thieves are on the insideand bandits on the outside !

ID:	5124
INPUT:	Iiláíyashib , Jóíyada , Johéínan índa Jeidúwa bídayééłkaahdą́ą́' Líívai dine'é éí dabizhé'é aláahgo bídahólníhígíí dabízhi' naaltsoos bikáá' ádaalyaa ; nááda'iiłniihii ałdó' , éí Pérzha dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í Daráíyas nant'á silį́į'jį' daházhi' ádaalyaa .
PRED:	Next were the priests and Levites who were Zerubbabel son of Kareah and the Levites who were in charge of the Temple of Eliashib . They were also the priests who were the priests , and the priests of Persia .
GOLD:	A record of the Levite families was kept during the years when Eliashib , Joiada , Johanan , and Jaddua served as high priest . Another record of the priests was kept during the reign of Darius the Persian .

ID:	5125
INPUT:	Azhą́ atídanihi'dil'į́ áádóó nihich'į' nidahwii'náa nidi hada'íínółníigo yéego nisoozį́įgo da'iinohdlą́ . Éí bąą Diyin God dayoodláanii áłah nídaadleehgóó nihaa dahwii'niih .
PRED:	Even if you are suffering and suffering , you are suffering in trouble and suffering . So you believe in the faith of God .
GOLD:	We proudly tell God 's other churches about your endurance and faithfulness in all the persecutions and hardships you are suffering .

ID:	5126
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , Bóhólníihii íinízinii bik'ehgo tízhdiilyaa ; yínííł hade át'éego áhoolaa , áádóó bąąhági át'éii biniinaa náá'ázdiisnii'go ha'áłchíní yizdoołtsééł , áádóó as'ahgóó jiináa doo , índa Bóhólníihii íinízinii yá'át'éehgo ájoolíił doo .
PRED:	But if the Lord opened his hand , he will lift his eyes into the middle of the eye of the Lord , and he will see his children . He will see his life , and he will see the Lord .
GOLD:	But it was the Lord 's good plan to crush himand cause him grief.Yet when his life is made an offering for sin , he will have many descendants.He will enjoy a long life , and the Lord 's good plan will prosper in his hands .

ID:	5127
INPUT:	Áko bá nijil'a'í hwe'asdzą́ą́ dooleełii hainíłtį́įgo éí haye'ké doodago hatsi'ké há niyiishchį́įgo hwe'asdzą́ą́ áádóó ha'áłchíní éí bá nijil'a'í t'áá bídéét'i' , áko t'áá hó t'éí dah nídizh'doodááł .
PRED:	He had sexual relations with his servant , and he had children to marry her . He was married to her , and he was married to her .
GOLD:	“ If his master gave him a wife while he was a slave and they had sons or daughters , then only the man will be free in the seventh year , but his wife and children will still belong to his master .

ID:	5128
INPUT:	Áádóó Tónteel Dók'ǫ́ǫzhii siyį́įgo bee hoodzooígíí éí Jórdan tooh biih yílíníjį' éí ha'a'aahjígo hoodzo dooígíí át'é . Áádóó náhookǫsjí hoodzo dooígíí éí Tónteel Dók'ǫ́ǫzhii táłts'á hiníyínígi Jórdan tooh biih yílínídóó hahoodzo .
PRED:	The boundary of the Jordan River on the east side of the Jordan River on the east side of the Jordan River . The boundary of the Dead Sea was camped beside the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	The eastern boundary extended along the Dead Sea to the mouth of the Jordan River.The northern boundary began at the bay where the Jordan River empties into the Dead Sea ,

ID:	5129
INPUT:	Zíklag , <unk> bath , Héí<unk> ,
PRED:	Ziklag , Meremoth ,
GOLD:	Ziklag , Beth-marcaboth , Hazar-susah ,

ID:	5130
INPUT:	Ha'át'íísh biniyé dooląął shį́į́ shich'į' náádahołniih ? Deenásts'aa' áádóó naaldlooshii dabinilk'ahígíí bik'ah didlidgo náádahaniihii doo binádíízįįd da ; dóola áádóó dibé yázhí índa tł'ízíchǫǫh éí dabidił doo baa shił hózhǫ́ǫ da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	How long will you say to me ? How long will you offer sacrifices to me ? How long will you be with my rams , rams , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	“ What makes you think I want all your sacrifices ? ” says the Lord. “ I am sick of your burnt offerings of ramsand the fat of fattened cattle.I get no pleasure from the bloodof bulls and lambs and goats .

ID:	5131
INPUT:	Áłts'íísígíí éí miil nídoodleeł , áádóó a'oh áníłtsooígíí éí dine'é bidziilii dooleeł ; shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii baa hoolzhiizhgo tsxį́įłgo ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	“ Go and get up , and I will make you a great nation for the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The smallest family will become a thousand people , and the tiniest group will become a mighty nation.At the right time , I , the Lord , will make it happen . ”

ID:	5132
INPUT:	Doo bił éédahózin da índa doo ak'ida'diitįįh da ; t'áá chahałheełgóó deíkááh ; nihokáá'góó bee dahółdzilii t'áá ałtso nídadíníizhoozh .
PRED:	They do n't understand what is wrong , and those who follow me with violence .
GOLD:	But these oppressors know nothing ; they are so ignorant ! They wander about in darkness , while the whole world is shaken to the core .

ID:	5133
INPUT:	Áko áłah silį́'ígíí biníi'gi nidahazh'eezhgo , Ha'át'íí bee adziilii shį́įshą' , índa háishą' bízhi' binahjį' díí baa nishoo'áázh ? daaníigo nidahódééłkid .
PRED:	And when they saw this , they asked them , “ Who is the one who has been healed ? ”
GOLD:	They brought in the two disciples and demanded , “ By what power , or in whose name , have you done this ? ”

ID:	5134
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God índa Dibé Yázhí nilíinii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii bits'ą́ą́dóó tooh niłtólígo tséghádi'nídínii bik'i <unk> diiłtólígi át'éego bik'i <unk> diił<unk> go iiná tó ch'ínílį́įgo shich'į' áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then God sent me out of the Lamb and the Lamb of the Lamb and the waters of the river , and the waters covered me with the water .
GOLD:	Then the angel showed me a river with the water of life , clear as crystal , flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb .

ID:	5135
INPUT:	Nił hóyée'ii , nílááh , wóláchíí' bich'į' dínáahgo yaa naagháhígíí nabik'ítsíníłkees áádóó honíyą́ą le' .
PRED:	“ Go and get him rich , and do what is happening to them .
GOLD:	Take a lesson from the ants , you lazybones.Learn from their ways and become wise !

ID:	5136
INPUT:	Áádóó Iiláíjah éí diné t'áá ałtso yich'į' niníyáago ání , Haa lá nízáágóó naakigo haz'ą́ bita' nidadinohdle' doo ? Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God nilį́įgo bikéé' ninohkááh . Nidi Béíyal éí diyin át'é ládą́ą́' bikéé' ninohkááh . Áko diné łá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' hach'į' haadzíi' da .
PRED:	Then Elijah turned to the men and asked , “ How long will you be ? ” But the Lord , the God of Baal replied , “ Do n't go back to Baal ! ” But the Lord , the God of Baal replied .
GOLD:	Then Elijah stood in front of them and said , “ How much longer will you waver , hobbling between two opinions ? If the Lord is God , follow him ! But if Baal is God , then follow him ! ” But the people were completely silent .

ID:	5137
INPUT:	Nidi damį́įgo aleeh góne' naaniiníłką́ągo , łikání halchinii spáis wolyéii hasht'edajiilaa yę́ę dajíjáahgo tséní'ootséeldi náájíkai , [ áádóó ła'ígíí ałdó'] .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the second month , during the Passover celebration , Jesus called the new spices , and the other spices .
GOLD:	But very early on Sunday morning the women went to the tomb , taking the spices they had prepared .

ID:	5138
INPUT:	Áko John bídahooł'aahii díí dayíínii'go ákwii yíkaigo bits'íís dah deidiiłtį́įgo tséní'ootséél góne' yóó'ádayiilaa .
PRED:	When John heard this , he took his body and buried them in the tomb of his body .
GOLD:	When John 's disciples heard what had happened , they came to get his body and buried it in a tomb .

ID:	5139
INPUT:	Béégashii éí tádiindóó ba'aan hastą́ądi miil ánéelą́ą́' , áko Bóhólníihii bich'į' nályéhígíí éí tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan naaki lá .
PRED:	and he brought the oxen to the Lord .
GOLD:	36,000 cattle , of which 72 were the Lord 's share ;

ID:	5140
INPUT:	Jiihóram bíídíiską́ą́dóó Íídam dine'é éí Júdah dine'é bee bóhólníihii yich'į' nidaastee'go yits'ą́ąjį' daazlį́į'go aláahgo naat'áanii ádá nideistį́ .
PRED:	Jehoram lived in Judah , and his kingdom became the king of Judah .
GOLD:	During Jehoram 's reign , the Edomites revolted against Judah and crowned their own king .

ID:	5141
INPUT:	Áko nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é danilíinii índa diné t'áá ałtso bitahgi yáá'iilt'e' baa ninéiikah nít'éé' : éí bik'ehgo danihizhé'é yę́ę bada'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii a <unk> níjaa' bik'ehgo t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh nídeit'aahígíí bik'ehgo chizh bee náádi'yoonihii nihiDiyin God bikinjį' ninádayiijih doo , áko bee haz'áanii biyi' bee ak'e'ashchínígíí bik'ehgo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bibikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' deidiłid doo .
PRED:	Then the priests and Levites will return to their divisions , and they will return to the Lord their ancestors . They will teach them to serve the Lord your God , and they will bring them to the altar of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ We have cast sacred lots to determine when — at regular times each year — the families of the priests , Levites , and the common people should bring wood to God 's Temple to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God , as is written in the Law .

ID:	5142
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jéfthah éí Gíliyadóó dine'é aląąjį' naazíinii yił dah diikaigo bóhólníihgo nant'áago ádayiilaa . Áko Bóhólníihii binááł Mízpeh kin haal'áagi Jéfthah hazaad t'áá át'é bee yájííłti' .
PRED:	So Jephthah led the elders of Gilead and marched against the Lord at Mizpah . When he was teaching in Mizpah , he spoke to the Lord at Mizpah .
GOLD:	So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead , and the people made him their ruler and commander of the army . At Mizpah , in the presence of the Lord , Jephthah repeated what he had said to the elders .

ID:	5143
INPUT:	Ex . <unk> : <unk>
PRED:	Building the Land
GOLD:	Plans for the Lampstand

ID:	5144
INPUT:	Áko e'e'aahjí hoodzo dooígíí éí ayóó át'é tónteel siyínígíí bibąąhgóó hodeesdzo . Díí éí Júdah dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bináhásdzo .
PRED:	So the boundary began to rule over the Mediterranean Sea . These are the clans of Judah . This was the clans of Judah .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	5145
INPUT:	Háá'áyį́į́h jį́ éí hodílzingo íínísingo aná'át'áah doo ; jó , Bóhólníihii niDiyin God ákót'éego yee nich'į' haadzíí' .
PRED:	“ On the Sabbath day the Sabbath day of the Lord your God has commanded you .
GOLD:	“ Observe the Sabbath day by keeping it holy , as the Lord your God has commanded you .

ID:	5146
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip kéyah biishdoonééł biniyé Béthlehem bíighahgóó <unk> ham hoolyéegi nidadziizná .
PRED:	So the land of Egypt went to Egypt to live in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	They took them all to the village of Geruth-kimham near Bethlehem , where they prepared to leave for Egypt .

ID:	5147
INPUT:	Áko Iiláísha éí yiyiiłtsą́ągo hadoolghaazh , Shizhé'é , shizhé'é , tsinaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí Ízrel dine'é bee bich'ą́ą́h na'abaahii índa łį́į́' yee nida'ałbąąsii ! Áádóó t'áadoo náádziiłtsą́ą da . Áko t'áá hó ha'éé' dziiłtsoodgo ałts'á dzíízǫ́ǫ́z .
PRED:	When Elisha saw this , he cried out to his father , “ My father , my father , my father 's chariots and charioteers . When he saw that he was thrown into his chariot , he broke his clothes and broke his clothes .
GOLD:	Elisha saw it and cried out , “ My father ! My father ! I see the chariots and charioteers of Israel ! ” And as they disappeared from sight , Elisha tore his clothes in distress .

ID:	5148
INPUT:	Háálá shí ánihidishní , Diyin God bits'ą́ą́dóó t'áá aaníinii ííshjání íidoolííł biniyé Christ éí Jew dine'é yá naal'a'í silį́į́' , ałk'idą́ą́' dabizhé'é yę́ę baa dadeest'áanii yi'doolííł biniyé ,
PRED:	For I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth of Christ Jesus Christ , the message of the Jews .
GOLD:	Remember that Christ came as a servant to the Jews to show that God is true to the promises he made to their ancestors .

ID:	5149
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii haadzíi'go ání , Shinanit'a'í , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , t'áá ádínínígíí bik'ehgo shí áádóó shee hólónígíí t'áá ałtso ni .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to the king , “ My lord , my lord , you have given me everything I have done .
GOLD:	“ All right , my lord the king , ” Israel 's king replied . “ All that I have is yours ! ”

ID:	5150
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii diné doo yá' áshóonii t'áá bił ádííłdįįłígíí éí doo ákóone' ánít'ée da ! Ákwíindzaago diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii diné doo yá'áshóonii bił aheełt'éego ákóníléehgo doo ákóone' ánít'ée da ! Nahasdzáán bikáa'gi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' Ánihwii'aahii nilíinii , da' éísh doo t'áá ákwii ádooníił da ?
PRED:	Do n't you think of the wicked , and let the wicked get away from the wicked ? Do n't let the wicked say , “ What do you want to do ? What do you want to do ? What do you want to do ? ”
GOLD:	Surely you would n't do such a thing , destroying the righteous along with the wicked . Why , you would be treating the righteous and the wicked exactly the same ! Surely you would n't do that ! Should not the Judge of all the earth do what is right ? ”

ID:	5151
INPUT:	T'áá bihidijáahgo nihilą́ąjį' hahidínéeshkał ; lą'í soolį́į'go índa kéyah nihíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	I will scatter you with many nations , and you will take possession of your land .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	5152
INPUT:	T'áá níléídę́ę́'ésh nihidááhdóó ách'ą́ą́h yéiilti' nít'ée'go baa nitsídaahkees ? Ayóó'ánihósh'níinii , Diyin God binááł Christ bił łá'í niidlį́įgo yéiilti' nít'éé' , áko danihidziil dadoohłeeł biniyé t'áá ałtsojį' nihíká aná'ahiniilchééh nít'éé' .
PRED:	Dear friend , why are you trying to hear the word of God , dear brothers and sisters . We have tried to speak in the sight of Christ .
GOLD:	Perhaps you think we 're saying these things just to defend ourselves . No , we tell you this as Christ 's servants , and with God as our witness . Everything we do , dear friends , is to strengthen you .

ID:	5153
INPUT:	Rebékah áyidííniid , Alą́ąjį'ígíí éí akéédę́'ígíí yá naal'a' doo .
PRED:	Rebekah said to Rebekah , “ The oldest brother will be sent . ”
GOLD:	he calls people , but not according to their good or bad works . ) She was told , “ Your older son will serve your younger son . ”

ID:	5154
INPUT:	Bee na'abaahii niniyé ályaaígíí t'áá ałtso doo nidídóołniił da índa saad bee nahwiinít'į́įgo nik'ijį' nehe'níłígíí bá nahoyí'aah doo . Díí Bóhólníihii bá nidaal'a'í bíí' dooleełígíí át'é , áádóó bit'áá ákogi át'éii éí shits'ą́ą́dóó át'é , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	I will say to you , ‘ This is what the Lord says : This is what I am giving you the Holy Spirit , the Lord , the one who is given to me . '
GOLD:	But in that coming dayno weapon turned against you will succeed.You will silence every voiceraised up to accuse you.These benefits are enjoyed by the servants of the Lord ; their vindication will come from me.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5155
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Iiláísha éí asdzání biyáázh hináago ánáyiidlaaígíí yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Nídiidáahgo nighandóóígíí bił dah diinéehgo háágóó shį́į́ doohnéełgo áadi nihighan doo , háálá Bóhólníihii hodidoochįįłii yee haadzíí' , áádóó tsosts'id nááhaijį' ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	Then Elisha said to the woman , “ Get up and take it back to the house of your son . Go back to the house of the Lord , for it is still alive ! ” So the Lord told him , “ for he has given you seven days . ”
GOLD:	Elisha had told the woman whose son he had brought back to life , “ Take your family and move to some other place , for the Lord has called for a famine on Israel that will last for seven years . ”

ID:	5156
INPUT:	Nijéí bee yá'át'éehgo tsíńdííníkéezgoáádóó Diyin God bich'į'go dah díílnihgo
PRED:	“ If you pray to God , listen to what is good .
GOLD:	“ If only you would prepare your heartand lift up your hands to him in prayer !

ID:	5157
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí níłch'i bináhoodǫ́ǫsii hatah nahale'go áyiilaa , áko adláanii názkwigo yik'i naaná'noot'ihígi át'éego Ííjip dine'é yaa nidaakaii t'áá át'é yee ádił nída'alnaadgo ádayósin nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of the Lord came to Corinth , and he went to the wilderness of Egypt to see how the Egyptians had done .
GOLD:	The Lord has sent a spirit of foolishness on them , so all their suggestions are wrong.They cause Egypt to staggerlike a drunk in his vomit .

ID:	5158
INPUT:	Nílááh , aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah bich'į' góde dínááh , áko éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' béeso yah aajaa'ígíí , yah e'etiin yaa ádahalyáanii éí dine'é bits'ą́ą́dóó áłah ádayiilaaígíí yíídóołtah .
PRED:	“ Go to Hilkiah , Hilkiah , and go to the Temple of the Lord . Then they went to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Go to Hilkiah the high priest and have him count the money the gatekeepers have collected from the people at the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	5159
INPUT:	Bida'oodlą' bee sáanii danilíinii bits'ą́ą́' ádaasdįįdii náádabi'diiljée'go baa nídahaas'nil . Náádaała' éí yá'ąąshdi iiná t'ah aláhígo yá'át'éehii bee dahinii'náa dooleełgo náádidiijah danízingo , níík'eh nihe'oodlą' bee nisiidzį́ danízingo biniinaa béédahididoochiłę́ę t'óó bił nidadziisghaal .
PRED:	Therefore , you have heard the message of faith that you have been taken away from heaven . We have been put to shame in heaven , and we will enjoy the faith of your faith . We will be put to shame in the faith of your faith .
GOLD:	Women received their loved ones back again from death.But others were tortured , refusing to turn from God in order to be set free . They placed their hope in a better life after the resurrection .

ID:	5160
INPUT:	Áko áká anánílwo'go t'áadoo yi'niihí baa naniná , áko niTaa' t'áadoo yi'niihí ááníiłii yoo'íinii , éí na'doolééł .
PRED:	Do n't believe your Father , and do n't believe your Father . And do n't believe the truth .
GOLD:	Give your gifts in private , and your Father , who sees everything , will reward you .

ID:	5161
INPUT:	Diné badahojoobá'íii bide áhojósinii éí Ábiilaii doo hoł nilį́į da , nidi diné jooba' nahas'áanii baa jijooba'ii éí Áhoolaii hoł nilį́ .
PRED:	The poor are poor , but the one who created the poor are the one who made the poor .
GOLD:	Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker , but helping the poor honors him .

ID:	5162
INPUT:	Tsits'aa' dílzinii álnéhígíí
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Building the Ark of the Covenant

ID:	5163
INPUT:	Áádóó ashdladiin náháhígíí dadíínóhsin , índa kéyahgóó kéédahat'íinii t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áhonídlee' bee bił dahołne' ; díí danihich'į'go hózhǫ́ǫ́jí náhááh át'é , áko diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo bidáda'ak'eh yich'į' nihéédahidookah áádóó bik'éí yich'į' nihéédahidookah .
PRED:	“ In the third year of your reign , you must return to the land of peace and peace and peace in peace . Then you will return to the land of peace and return to your relatives .
GOLD:	Set this year apart as holy , a time to proclaim freedom throughout the land for all who live there . It will be a jubilee year for you , when each of you may return to the land that belonged to your ancestors and return to your own clan .

ID:	5164
INPUT:	Éínab , Éshtii<unk> , Éínim ,
PRED:	Jarmuth , Adullam ,
GOLD:	Anab , Eshtemoh , Anim ,

ID:	5165
INPUT:	Áko díí kéyah t'áá náhwiist'ą́ą́ nít'éé' doo naagháhí da doo , áádóó t'óó bik'ee ayói doo , índa díí dine'é dajílíinii tsosts'idiin nááhaijį' Bábilan dine'é bá nidajil'a' doo .
PRED:	“ It will be a desolate land , and there will be no one for seventy years . It will be seven years old and seventy years . ”
GOLD:	This entire land will become a desolate wasteland . Israel and her neighboring lands will serve the king of Babylon for seventy years .

ID:	5166
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes índa Éran ákǫ́ǫ́ ííł'a' , áádóó bee até'ésh'íinii bee Ííjip dine'é atíishłaa , áádóó éí bik'ijį' áádę́ę́' ch'ínihiní'eezh .
PRED:	Then Moses sent for Aaron and Aaron , and he sent them out of Egypt to weep .
GOLD:	“ Then I sent Moses and Aaron , and I brought terrible plagues on Egypt ; and afterward I brought you out as a free people .

ID:	5167
INPUT:	áko Zekaráíyah bighan góne' yah ajííyáago Elízabeth k'é bizhdííniid .
PRED:	Zechariah went to the palace of Zechariah and said to Elizabeth .
GOLD:	where Zechariah lived . She entered the house and greeted Elizabeth .

ID:	5168
INPUT:	nahasdzáán bikáa'gi tó yaa ná'nool'ąął . Neeznádiindóó ba'aan ashdladiin yiską́ągo tó yaa aná'nool'ąąd .
PRED:	He measured the earth , and he measured the water of the earth .
GOLD:	So the floodwaters gradually receded from the earth . After 150 days ,

ID:	5169
INPUT:	Diné bidziilii éí yee naabaahii t'áá át'é bee hólǫ́ǫgo , t'áá bí bighan yich'ą́ą́h naagháago binaalye'é hazhó'ó sinil łeh ,
PRED:	If a person finds a person 's house , it turns to the rich person 's house ,
GOLD:	For when a strong man is fully armed and guards his palace , his possessions are safe —

ID:	5170
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii , Táá' yiską́ągo shaa nídoohkah , hałníigo há nihoní'áanii bik'ehgo táá' yiską́ągo Jerobówam áádóó dine'é t'áá ałtso Riihobówam yaa haaskai .
PRED:	So the king told him , “ Get up for three days of Jeroboam 's reign , and all the days of Jeroboam .
GOLD:	Three days later Jeroboam and all the people returned to hear Rehoboam 's decision , just as the king had ordered .

ID:	5171
INPUT:	Tséghą́ą'di tsé binída'astséélgóó kéédahoht'íinii , bee nihádahadzidii índa bee ádaa dadzíínóhdlíii nihina'azlo' ; azhą́ atsá bit'oh ííł'ínígi ánízáadi nihit'oh ádaohłaa nidi , áádę́ę́' adanihidiyeeshtł'ił , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	You will break the foundations of the tomb of the tomb of the tomb where you live in the middle of the tomb . You will trample the foundations of the earth , but I will destroy you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	You have been deceivedby the fear you inspire in othersand by your own pride.You live in a rock fortressand control the mountain heights.But even if you make your nest among the peaks with the eagles , I will bring you crashing down , ” says the Lord .

ID:	5172
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Éran éí Bóhólníihii bizaadk'ehgo Dził Hor góde haayá , índa áadi daaztsą́ ; Ízrel dine'é Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch' ínínáádóó bik'ijį' dízdiin nááhaigo ashdla' nídízííd binih ła'a jį́į́ góne' áhóót'įįd .
PRED:	So Aaron did as the Lord commanded Moses , and he died in the land of Egypt . He reigned in the land of Egypt for forty years .
GOLD:	While they were at the foot of Mount Hor , Aaron the priest was directed by the Lord to go up the mountain , and there he died . This happened in midsummer , on the first day of the fifth month of the fortieth year after Israel 's departure from Egypt .

ID:	5173
INPUT:	Diyin God t'áadoo baa'ihgo baa yáníłti'í , doodaii' nidine'é binanit'a'í nidi doo hóyée'go bá hadíídzih da .
PRED:	“ Do n't say to God , ‘ You will not curse your servant , but you will not curse you .
GOLD:	“ You must not dishonor God or curse any of your rulers .

ID:	5174
INPUT:	Díí Éran haye'ké kódaolyé : éí nááda'iiłniihii ak'ah bik'i yadaadziidgo bee dabi'doolzį́į'ii , nidaal'a'go náá'iiłniihii danilį́į doo .
PRED:	These are the names of Aaron 's sons , the priests , and the priests will serve as priests .
GOLD:	These sons of Aaron were anointed and ordained to minister as priests .

ID:	5175
INPUT:	Nihił bééhózingo t'áá bíneesh'ánígi bee nihizhé'é bá naashnish nít'éé' .
PRED:	You know that your father was circumcised , just as he had done .
GOLD:	You know how hard I have worked for your father ,

ID:	5176
INPUT:	Ákohgo <unk> gi t'áá ákwe'é Hííbran hoolyé ; Kéínan kéyah biyi'gi Sárah daaztsą́ , áko Éíbraham atínízhdindleehgo áá jiníyáago Sárah baa jííchah .
PRED:	So Hebron went to Hebron and buried Sarah in the land of Canaan . So Abraham went to the town where Sarah died .
GOLD:	she died at Kiriath-arba ( now called Hebron ) in the land of Canaan . There Abraham mourned and wept for her .

ID:	5177
INPUT:	Bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , da' díísh ninahat'a' bik'ehgo ádzaa , áko ná naal'a'í nishłíinii éí t'áadoo bee shił hwíínílne' da ? Háishą' bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii bikéé'dóó bikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá'dóó dah sidáa doo ?
PRED:	“ O Lord , do you remember my plans ? ” I asked the king , “ Who is your servant ? Who is the one who sits on my throne ? ”
GOLD:	Has my lord the king really done this without letting any of his officials know who should be the next king ? ”

ID:	5178
INPUT:	Shaa háashjée'ii ádabidi'dooldįįłígíí yiiłtsą́ ; diné doo yá'ádaashóonii shich'į' nidaabaahii bik'eh hodidoodleełii diséts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	I have seen what I have seen the wicked , and I have heard what I have done .
GOLD:	My eyes have seen the downfall of my enemies ; my ears have heard the defeat of my wicked opponents .

ID:	5179
INPUT:	Nidi ch'ééh ásht'į́įgo baa bił dahóózhǫǫdgo shiniyé áłah silį́į́' ; t'áá aaníí doo ádił dandlíinii doo béédahasinígíí shiniyé áłah silį́į'go t'áadoo áádahoot'įįhí dashijoołáago shá nidahałt'i' .
PRED:	But when they were afraid , they were afraid of me , they were afraid of me , and they would know what they were doing .
GOLD:	But they are glad now that I am in trouble ; they gleefully join together against me.I am attacked by people I do n't even know ; they slander me constantly .

ID:	5180
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ádzíłtso diyingo náádajiiłniihígíí éí náá'iiłniihii bí doo ; t'áá ha'át'íhída náá'iiłniihii baazhníláhígíí t'áá bíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	All the people must not belong to the priest , and it must not belong to the priest .
GOLD:	Each priest may keep all the sacred donations that he receives . ”

ID:	5181
INPUT:	Diné ahiní'diiltłáád yąąh ádít'íinii éí diné baa ha'niih , nidi diné doo ádahalyáanii éí saad dahółǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	Pride leads to a sensible person , but those who are wise .
GOLD:	Avoiding a fight is a mark of honor ; only fools insist on quarreling .

ID:	5182
INPUT:	Nidi dah yiigaii yę́ę doo k'ee'ąą deeshzhiizhgóogo , nidi dinilzhingo éí ázhdoodlidígi hadzííyáhígíí át'é ; náá'iiłniihii éí , Doo ánít'éhí da , hodidooniił ; jó , ázhdoodlidgo hadzííyáhígi t'óó sid dooleeł .
PRED:	But if the affected area has no future , it will be broken into pieces , and no one will pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . The priest will pronounce the burnt offering for the burnt offering .
GOLD:	But if the affected area has not changed or spread on the skin and has faded , it is simply a swelling from the burn . The priest will then pronounce the person ceremonially clean , for it is only the scar from the burn .

ID:	5183
INPUT:	Éíhaz éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh áádóó David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi yóó'ádaalyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa ; nít'éé' haye' Heziikáíyah hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	When Ahaz died , he was buried in the City of David , and his son David became the next king .
GOLD:	When Ahaz died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Hezekiah became the next king .

ID:	5184
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Shí k'ad dah diishááh , áko nihí hadashinohtáa dooleeł , ákondi t'áá ádił da'íínółzíihgo dadínóohnééł ; déyáágóó doo dadohkááh át'ée da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I will search for you , but you will never die . But you will die , but you will die . ”
GOLD:	Later Jesus said to them again , “ I am going away . You will search for me but will die in your sin . You can not come where I am going . ”

ID:	5185
INPUT:	Áko bá nidaal'a'í ádabiłní , Jó k'ad , Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii dajooba'go baa dahosidiits'ą́ą́' ; nánooshkąąh , nihíni'dii tł'oh yishbizh nihiníí' gónaa bik'ídadiiltih , índa tł'óół nihitsii' binídadiilt'ihgo Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' diikah ; néididoochiłgo da'át'é .
PRED:	So they went to the king and said to the king of Israel , “ Come to the king of Israel ! Let 's go to their heads and dressed in burlap . Let 's go to the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Ben-hadad 's officers said to him , “ Sir , we have heard that the kings of Israel are merciful . So let 's humble ourselves by wearing burlap around our waists and putting ropes on our heads , and surrender to the king of Israel . Then perhaps he will let you live . ”

ID:	5186
INPUT:	Ch'ikéí neeznált'éego binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	The Resurrection of the ten wives
GOLD:	Parable of the Ten Bridesmaids

ID:	5187
INPUT:	áko doozhǫǫgo dah adii'ą́ągo , hadaneesánígíí yideez , índa bihétł'óól ádingo biniinaa daniiłna' .
PRED:	When the sun grew up , it was broken , and it covered its roots .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	5188
INPUT:	Jerúsalem biná'áznáago hanááł ályaa
PRED:	The Collection for Jerusalem
GOLD:	A Sign of the Coming Siege

ID:	5189
INPUT:	Áko Mózes ádayidííniid , Da' Ííjip kéyahdiísh łeehwii'nííł ádaadingo honoojíidi dadíníi'nééł biniyé nihíí'ish ? Ha'át'éegoshą' Ííjip kéyahdóó hanihííní'eezhgo doodahági ánihiinilaa ?
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ Are you suffering suffering suffering suffering in the wilderness of Egypt ? Why did you bring us into the wilderness of Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	and they said to Moses , “ Why did you bring us out here to die in the wilderness ? Were n't there enough graves for us in Egypt ? What have you done to us ? Why did you make us leave Egypt ?

ID:	5190
INPUT:	Aa a'ááh hasin índa t'áá aaníinii ahidii'áázh ; t'áá ákogi át'éii índa bee asht'ehodít'éii ahizts'ǫs .
PRED:	He has given us his unfailing love and faithfulness ; he will kiss us with unfailing love .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and truth have met together.Righteousness and peace have kissed !

ID:	5191
INPUT:	Ákódzaago yéego hadeeshghaazhgo bi'éé' t'áá ákǫ́ǫgo ch'élwod .
PRED:	When he opened his cloak , he ran out and left his robe .
GOLD:	“ But when I screamed , he ran outside , leaving his cloak with me ! ”

ID:	5192
INPUT:	Áádóó hwe'ana'í honáshzhiizhgo bik'ee nitsijikaigo ádahoolaago índa hazéé' nidei'áhígíí hach'į' nidahwiiłnáago haye'ké áádóó hatsi'ké dabits'íís dahodiyeesį́į́ł índa kwá'ásiní da<unk> níinii dabits'íís nídazhdoolghał .
PRED:	When they saw that they were afraid of their enemies , they tore their mouths into the mouths of their enemies and daughters . They will eat their bodies and drink their bodies .
GOLD:	I will see to it that your enemies lay siege to the city until all the food is gone . Then those trapped inside will eat their own sons and daughters and friends . They will be driven to utter despair . '

ID:	5193
INPUT:	éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Íídam dine'é hak'ijigo k'ídideeshnihgo diné áádóó naaldlooshii nideestsiłgo doo naagháhígóó haz'ą́ągo ádeeshłííł ; Tííman hoolyéédóó níléí Díídan hoolyéejį' diltłish bee dazhdínóonééł .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy the people of Edom , and I will destroy the land of Edom .
GOLD:	Therefore , says the Sovereign Lord , I will raise my fist of judgment against Edom . I will wipe out its people and animals with the sword . I will make a wasteland of everything from Teman to Dedan .

ID:	5194
INPUT:	Áko Réíchel índa Líyah éí Jéíkab yich'į' haadzíi'go áyidííniid , Nihizhé'é bighandi ha'át'íhída nihíí' dooleełii ádin .
PRED:	Then Rachel said to Leah , “ We have no property for our father , Jacob , but we have no property . ”
GOLD:	Rachel and Leah responded , “ That 's fine with us ! We wo n't inherit any of our father 's wealth anyway .

ID:	5195
INPUT:	Áko bida'oodlą' yee aa dadzólíii jiiłtsą́ągo diné bitah doo nahwii'nánígíí ábizhdííniid , Shiye' , ádił ni'iyínílzí'ígíí ná yóó'adoot'ą́ .
PRED:	When they saw their faith , he said , “ Oh , my son , you have forgiven my son . ”
GOLD:	Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the paralyzed man , “ My child , your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	5196
INPUT:	Áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii náádahizhdoołnih biniyé yah ajookaigo Jííhu éí tł'óó'dę́ę́' diné tseebídiingo niinínilgo ání , Díí diné nihaa diní'ánígíí ła' t'óó bi'noołnii'go t'áá nihí bá ninádoohtłish .
PRED:	So Jehu went out to the burnt offering and told them , “ This man should be killed . If you want to be killed , you will be killed . ”
GOLD:	So they were all inside the temple to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings . Now Jehu had stationed eighty of his men outside the building and had warned them , “ If you let anyone escape , you will pay for it with your own life . ”

ID:	5197
INPUT:	Doo t'áá aaníí na'iisgeelii yaa dahalne'ii , éí dabiyooch'íidgo áádóó t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee ádaa daha'niihgo yee shidine'é ádił nida'iilzíihgo ádeile'ii éí bik'ijį' nishłį́ , jó'akon , ní Bóhólníihii . Nidi éí t'áadoo dahóół'aad da , áádóó kódadohníi dooleeł t'áadoo hodííniid da , índa díí dine'é t'áadoo bee bá chodajoo'įįhí da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	They will say , ‘ The prophets are prophets who are false prophets , ' says the Lord , “ I am the prophets of my people . I am the Lord ! ' But do n't say , ‘ You have spoken ! ' ”
GOLD:	I am against these false prophets . Their imaginary dreams are flagrant lies that lead my people into sin . I did not send or appoint them , and they have no message at all for my people . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5198
INPUT:	Áko áshidííniid , Daniel , diné ayóó'óó'níinii nílíinii , yiizįįh , áko saad bee nich'į' yáshti'ígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą'go bik'i'diitįįh , háálá Diyin God naa shiníł'a' . Áko t'ahdii díí saad yee shich'į' yáłti'go shitah hoditłidgo yiizį' .
PRED:	Daniel replied , “ Come and listen to me , my darling , and you have heard what I say . I am saying to you , for God has told me what I am saying .
GOLD:	And the man said to me , “ Daniel , you are very precious to God , so listen carefully to what I have to say to you . Stand up , for I have been sent to you. ” When he said this to me , I stood up , still trembling .

ID:	5199
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ash t'áá ákogi ájít'į́įgo Bóhólníihii binááł joogáałgo náá'iiłniihii Jiihóíyada nibíiníłką́ .
PRED:	Joash did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Joash did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight throughout the lifetime of Jehoiada the priest .

ID:	5200
INPUT:	Áádóó ádaałts'óózígíí éí tsosts'idgo yá'ádaat'ééh yę́ę adayiisna' , áko déest'į́į́' ádeił'íinii bee bił hweeshne' nidi doo bił béédahózingóó t'áadoo ła' yee shił náhoolne'í da .
PRED:	The seven days later they ate the seven times , and they did n't know what I told them .
GOLD:	And the shriveled heads swallowed the seven healthy heads . I told these dreams to the magicians , but no one could tell me what they mean . ”

ID:	5201
INPUT:	Ha'át'íí lá biniyé shits'ąą nanít'á , áádóó ha'át'íí lá biniyé ni'ana'í nishłį́įgo shaa nitsíníkees ?
PRED:	Why do you reject me ? Why are you afraid of me ?
GOLD:	Why do you turn away from me ? Why do you treat me as your enemy ?

ID:	5202
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó Jiifáneh éí Kíínez diné nilíinii biye' Kéíleb áádóó Nan biye' Jáshowa t'éiyá kéyah yiih doo'ash , háálá t'áá dzizį́į́ nít'éé' Bóhólníihii bik'ehgo joo'ash nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Caleb son of Jephunneh and Caleb son of Nun , for Joshua son of Nun was the Lord .
GOLD:	The only exceptions are Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua son of Nun , for they have wholeheartedly followed the Lord . '

ID:	5203
INPUT:	Áádóó ałtso hats'á'iizdéél . Nít'éé' éí kéyahígi t'áá íiyisí hodííchįįd , áko hahojoobá'ígo t'áá ałtsoní bídin jílį́ dzizlį́į́' .
PRED:	Then he broke off the land of Susa , and he became very angry . He was very angry with all his wealth .
GOLD:	About the time his money ran out , a great famine swept over the land , and he began to starve .

ID:	5204
INPUT:	Áko áhodííniid , T'áá aaníí nidine'é bich'į' nił néiikah doo .
PRED:	Then he said , “ You will know the truth . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” they said . “ We want to go with you to your people . ”

ID:	5205
INPUT:	Géíyas éí baa ha'niih
PRED:	Greetings from Paul
GOLD:	Caring for the Lord 's Workers

ID:	5206
INPUT:	Jótham éí dahazhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazh , áádóó hazhé'é David yę́ę bikin haal'áhígi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádabi'diilyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áko haye' Éíhaz hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Jotham became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . And his son Ahaz became the next king .

ID:	5207
INPUT:	Ákohgo naaltsoos ííł'íní Shéífan éí aláahgo naat'áanii yił hoolne'go ání , Aláahgo náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah éí naaltsoos léi' sheiní'ą́ . Áko Shéífan éí aláahgo naat'áanii yinááł yiyííłta' .
PRED:	Then Shaphan told the king , “ Hilkiah the priest has given it to Shaphan . ” So Shaphan read it before the king .
GOLD:	Shaphan also told the king , “ Hilkiah the priest has given me a scroll. ” So Shaphan read it to the king .

ID:	5208
INPUT:	Gídiyan náásgóó áát'įįdii índa daaztsánígíí
PRED:	Gideon Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Gideon 's Sacred Ephod

ID:	5209
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Heziikáíyah éí Aizéíyah ábizhdííniid , Bóhólníihii áníinii bee háínídzí'ígíí éí yá'át'ééh . Shíyoołkáłígíí biyi' hasht'ehodít'é áádóó t'áá aaníinii hólónígíí éí yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to Hezekiah , “ This is what the Lord says : You are doing what is good and true .
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ This message you have given me from the Lord is good. ” For the king was thinking , “ At least there will be peace and security during my lifetime . ”

ID:	5210
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yaa hodiizts'ą́ą'go bąąh nahókaadgo bigaan bąąh naníídee' ; nitseedzá áádóó asdzání awéé' bídii'na'ígi át'éego bił honiigaii .
PRED:	When the king of Babylon heard this , he ran out to Babylon 's arms and killed her arm .
GOLD:	The king of Babylon has heard reports about the enemy , and he is weak with fright.Pangs of anguish have gripped him , like those of a woman in labor .

ID:	5211
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , nihitahgi ła'da hane' t'áá aaníinii bits'ánooyáago , nít'éé' éí ła'da bił nánooht'áazhgo
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , if you were among you , you would n't have any other friends .
GOLD:	My dear brothers and sisters , if someone among you wanders away from the truth and is brought back ,

ID:	5212
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Jesus binahjį' doo shił naaki nilį́į́góó díí shił bééhoozin , t'áá ałtso yá'ádaat'éeh nidi doo yá'ádaat'éeh da jinízinígíí éí t'áá ádííghahígo doo hoł yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	I know that the Lord Jesus Christ is not talking about these things and good things . But if you do n't know what is good .
GOLD:	I know and am convinced on the authority of the Lord Jesus that no food , in and of itself , is wrong to eat . But if someone believes it is wrong , then for that person it is wrong .

ID:	5213
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ánółtso t'ááłá'í nootínígo Diyin God bá dahołne' doo , áko t'áá ałtso bił éédahodoozįįł , áádóó t'áá ałtso chánah dadooleeł .
PRED:	And all of you will be sure that you will know that God will be encouraged . Then everyone will be encouraged .
GOLD:	In this way , all who prophesy will have a turn to speak , one after the other , so that everyone will learn and be encouraged .

ID:	5214
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God bizaad yich'į' naastee' , áádóó Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii binahat'a' doo deiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	For they rebelled against God , and they rejected the Most High .
GOLD:	They rebelled against the words of God , scorning the counsel of the Most High .

ID:	5215
INPUT:	Tooh dahináanii
PRED:	springs into the river
GOLD:	Division and Unbelief

ID:	5216
INPUT:	Áko hódzą́ áádóó na'nitin bił béédahodoozįįł áádóó saad bik'idi'dootį́įłii yaa ákodadínóozįįł .
PRED:	The wise will understand what they say , and they will understand what they say .
GOLD:	Their purpose is to teach people wisdom and discipline , to help them understand the insights of the wise .

ID:	5217
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí bá nidaal'a'ígíí yich' į' haadzíi'go ání , T'áá nant'inee hazhó'ó David bił ahił dahodoołnihgo ádabididoohniił , Aláahgo naat'áanii naa bił nihoozhǫǫh , áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso ayóó'ádanó'ní , éí bąą k'ad aláahgo naat'áanii baadaaní dííleeł .
PRED:	Then Saul said to his servants , “ Tell us what you are doing , and you will say , ‘ The kings of Israel will be filled with joy and all the kings of the kings of Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	Then Saul told his men to say to David , “ The king really likes you , and so do we . Why do n't you accept the king 's offer and become his son-in-law ? ”

ID:	5218
INPUT:	Éí bąą haa'íshą' aláahgo bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii niłdzilgo doo hizh<unk> nááł át'éii nihee dahazlį́'ígíí baa ahééh daniidzin doo , áko haa'íshą' baa hasti'go dílzingo baa bił hózhǫ́ǫgo Diyin God bich'į' nidahwiidláa doo ,
PRED:	So why should we boast in the Kingdom of God , and we will thank God by giving thanks to God , and we will thank God .
GOLD:	Since we are receiving a Kingdom that is unshakable , let us be thankful and please God by worshiping him with holy fear and awe .

ID:	5219
INPUT:	Áádóó íídą́ą́' diné éí kin haal'áá góne' yah anídahineest'į́į́' ; éí anaa'dę́ę́' yóó'anídahaazhjé'ígíí t'óó ádaa yádandzingo ninádahineest'į́'ígíigi át'éego ninádahineest'į́į́' .
PRED:	When you see the noise of the city , you will be defeated by the enemy of the battle .
GOLD:	They crept back into the town that day as though they were ashamed and had deserted in battle .

ID:	5220
INPUT:	áádóó yíldzisgóó <unk> kin shijaa'ígíí , Beth-nímrah kin haal'áii , Sákath kin shijaa'ígíí áádóó Zéífan kéyahígíí áádóó Héshban kin haal'áii aláahgo binanit'a'í Sáíhan wolyéii bee bóhólnííh nít'éé' yę́ę łahjį' yidziihígíí , éí Jórdan tooh bee hoodzooígíí , Kíniireth tó siyíníjį' nihoodzo áádóó ha'a'aahjigo t'áá át'é baa hodeet'ą́ .
PRED:	From there they included the towns of the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River , across the Jordan River to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	In the valley were Beth-haram , Beth-nimrah , Succoth , Zaphon , and the rest of the kingdom of King Sihon of Heshbon . The western boundary ran along the Jordan River , extended as far north as the tip of the Sea of Galilee , and then turned eastward .

ID:	5221
INPUT:	Oodlání Níłch'i Diyinii bee łá'í danilį́
PRED:	The Spirit of Christ
GOLD:	Unity in the Body

ID:	5222
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bikáa'di tsé ílíinii bída'néél'ąądígíí bik'ehgo hasht'e'nibída' astsélígíí ahidaneeznil índa éí bikáá' dilk'is bídáátsélígíí ha'naa nidaaz'ą́ .
PRED:	The stone was placed on the first side of the pillars , which was placed on the first side of the first stone , and the body of the body of the body .
GOLD:	The blocks of high-quality stone used in the walls were also cut to measure , and cedar beams were also used .

ID:	5223
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éego yigáałii Bóhólníihii yidósin , nidi diné nahagizgo hináanii éí Bóhólníihii yik'ee diniih .
PRED:	The Lord detests the plans of the wicked , but he detests the humble .
GOLD:	Those who follow the right path fear the Lord ; those who take the wrong path despise him .

ID:	5224
INPUT:	Asdzání t'áá ałtso adiz yéédahósinii adiih ádaat'į́įgo tł'ízí bighaa' hadayiizdiz .
PRED:	All the women put their clothing in a tent and put it in a tent covering .
GOLD:	All the women who were willing used their skills to spin the goat hair into yarn .

ID:	5225
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph éí bizhé'é Jéíkab , Féro yich'į' yił yah íí'áázh , áádóó Jéíkab éí Féro yik'ijisdli' .
PRED:	So Joseph blessed Pharaoh and his father , Jacob blessed Pharaoh , and he blessed Pharaoh .
GOLD:	Then Joseph brought in his father , Jacob , and presented him to Pharaoh . And Jacob blessed Pharaoh .

ID:	5226
INPUT:	T'óó ahayóí bee ade áhólzinii biniinaa diné saał hahóół'á ; Ayóó ádabóodziilii hach'į' nidahwiiłnánígíí bąą nihíká oohjeeh , daaní .
PRED:	Some of the miraculous signs were afraid of the Lord , and they cried out to him , “ Come ! ”
GOLD:	“ People cry out when they are oppressed.They groan beneath the power of the mighty .

ID:	5227
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa hane'
PRED:	A Message for Philistia
GOLD:	A Message about Philistia

ID:	5228
INPUT:	Honíts'aa' góyaa ts'in nídááltseigo yíl'á
PRED:	The top of the Jordan
GOLD:	A Valley of Dry Bones

ID:	5229
INPUT:	Aláahgo nihinanit'a'í áádóó nihinaat'áanii danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę áádóó nihizhé'é danilíinii índa kéyahgóó diné kéédahat'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę t'áá ałtso éí ninaal'a'í ná dahalne'ii nízhi' yee nihił dahoolne' nidi , doo deísíníilts'ą́ą' da nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ We have never heard our kings and our ancestors , our ancestors , our ancestors , and our ancestors did not listen to us . We did n't listen to your name .
GOLD:	We have refused to listen to your servants the prophets , who spoke on your authority to our kings and princes and ancestors and to all the people of the land .

ID:	5230
INPUT:	Doo yá'áshóonii yiniyé ádaat'íinii yéego yąąh dashijéé' . T'áá nahont'inee łoh nidadii'nił , daaníigo yaa yádaałti' . Ádeinízin , Háísh deidoołtsééł ?
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked fall into the trap of the wicked , shouting , “ Who will see you ? ”
GOLD:	They encourage each other to do eviland plan how to set their traps in secret. “ Who will ever notice ? ” they ask .

ID:	5231
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é daadzí'ígíí
PRED:	The Priests of Israel
GOLD:	Hope for the

ID:	5232
INPUT:	Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Heziikáíyah éí diné bá nidaashnishii díí ałdó' saad bee dahodoodząąłii Sálaman yee ak'e'ashchínígíí yééda'iidlaa .
PRED:	He wrote this letter to King Hezekiah of Judah : “ These are the proverbs of King Solomon . ”
GOLD:	These are more proverbs of Solomon , collected by the advisers of King Hezekiah of Judah .

ID:	5233
INPUT:	Áko Jesus dah daask'id ła' bąąh híjiiyáago ákwii hódahooł'aahii bił nidzíiztą́ą́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Jesus returned to the disciples and stayed there .
GOLD:	Then Jesus climbed a hill and sat down with his disciples around him .

ID:	5234
INPUT:	Áádóó hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee hach'į' hadzoodzíí' , Da' doo oo'íiniísh t'áá bí na'ahidlóozgo bíighah ? Da' doósh t'áá áłah <unk> 'ádínóodah da ?
PRED:	Then Jesus told him , “ Is n't we going to die ? Do n't we want to die ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus gave the following illustration : “ Can one blind person lead another ? Wo n't they both fall into a ditch ?

ID:	5235
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é dabidiyinígíísh ła' dahakéyah Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yighadahodeest'ą́ ?
PRED:	“ Are you the kings of Assyria ? Are you the kings of Assyria ?
GOLD:	Have the gods of any other nations ever saved their people from the king of Assyria ?

ID:	5236
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Many Disciples Desert Jesus

ID:	5237
INPUT:	índa halah t'ah ch'ikę́ę́h nilį́įgo áhánígo hak'éígíí éí t'ah doo bahastiin haleehígíí éí t'éí bee ázhdidoolchxǫǫł .
PRED:	It was the virgin of sister of sister 's sister , for she is ceremonially unclean for her husband .
GOLD:	or his virgin sister who depends on him because she has no husband .

ID:	5238
INPUT:	Kííras , Sáíyah índa Péídan bada'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii ,
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Greetings ,
GOLD:	Keros , Siaha , Padon ,

ID:	5239
INPUT:	Naat'áanii bił adííyį́į́ł biniyé bił dah níkeehgo nidááhgóó naazkáanii hanisíidgo hazhó'ó baa nitsíníkees doo .
PRED:	“ You will be careful to understand what you are doing , and you will hear what is right .
GOLD:	While dining with a ruler , pay attention to what is put before you .

ID:	5240
INPUT:	Kót'éego Saul daaztsą́ , áádóó haye'ké tált'éego ałdó' naaztseed ; habee na'abaahí há neijaahii áádóó diné hoł naakai yę́ę t'áá ałtso ałdó' t'áá éí bijį́ t'áá łahjį' nidabi'diztseed .
PRED:	So Saul and his three sons were killed , and all the other men were killed .
GOLD:	So Saul , his three sons , his armor bearer , and his troops all died together that same day .

ID:	5241
INPUT:	Ana'í nidahałáhígi át'éego nihí éí t'áá ádzaagóó t'áadoo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' nidahohłáhí .
PRED:	You must not fear the Lord your God , just as you do .
GOLD:	“ Do not worship the Lord your God in the way these pagan peoples worship their gods .

ID:	5242
INPUT:	Mt . 4 : <unk>
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Casts Out a Demon

ID:	5243
INPUT:	ATaa' nilíinii bich'į' ahééh danohsingo bidiyį́į́' adinídíín yii' deíkáahii bíí' dooleełii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz dooígíí bą́ą́h da'niidlį́įgo ánihiilaa .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Father of our Father , and he has given it to those who live in the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	always thanking the Father . He has enabled you to share in the inheritance that belongs to his people , who live in the light .

ID:	5244
INPUT:	Nít'éé' yá'ąąshii ąą ádzaago , jó'akon , łį́į́łgaii léi' yiiłtsą́ ! Yik'i dah sidáii éí Ba'ahódlíii índa T'áá Aaníinii wolyé , áádóó ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éego ánihodoo'ááł índa anaa' ííł'į́ .
PRED:	As surely as I see , I saw a man named Simon Peter , and he is the one who sits on the throne . And he said , “ Yes , he is the one who is right ! ”
GOLD:	Then I saw heaven opened , and a white horse was standing there . Its rider was named Faithful and True , for he judges fairly and wages a righteous war .

ID:	5245
INPUT:	Áádóó díí bik'ijį' David éí Filístiya dine'é yik'eh deesdlį́į'go yee ádíhoos'níí' índa David éí <unk> <unk> mah hoolyéego Filístiya dine'é bikin haal'áhígíí yighaideet'ą́ .
PRED:	When David learned that David had defeated the Philistines , he took care of the Philistines and fled to the Philistines .
GOLD:	After this , David defeated and subdued the Philistines by conquering Gath , their largest town .

ID:	5246
INPUT:	Áádóó éí bijį́į́ góne' naat'áanii jílíinii áádóó diné t'áá kééhat'į́į́ nít'éé' ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii dóola yáázh t'ááłá'í ádá shódeizhdoołt'eełgo há nááhidoonih .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day of the king and the people of Israel must bring a young bull and a young bull for a sin offering .
GOLD:	On the day of Passover the prince will provide a young bull as a sin offering for himself and the people of Israel .

ID:	5247
INPUT:	Nináá'ídíshkid : Da' Ízrel dine'ésh t'áadoo bił éédahoozin da ? Átséedi Mózes kódííniid : Ła' dine'é doo t'áá aaníí t'ááłá'í dine'é danilíinii deinołch'į́įdgo ánihideeshłííł . Doo ádahalyáanii dine'é bee nihá dahodeeshchįįł .
PRED:	“ Do n't you understand this ? ” I asked . “ No , ” I replied , “ I am not a prophet . I 'm not a prophet . ”
GOLD:	But I ask , did the people of Israel really understand ? Yes , they did , for even in the time of Moses , God said , “ I will rouse your jealousy through people who are not even a nation.I will provoke your anger through the foolish Gentiles . ”

ID:	5248
INPUT:	jó , ayóó át'éego nahałniih yee Bóhólníihii éí nidine'é áádóó na' áłchíní áádóó nida'asdzą́ą́ índa nee hólónígíí t'áá át'é yee atíidoolííł .
PRED:	He will praise the Lord , for he has given you his wife and his wife and his wife .
GOLD:	So now the Lord is about to strike you , your people , your children , your wives , and all that is yours with a heavy blow .

ID:	5249
INPUT:	nidi Bóhólníihii yich'į' dah nídiikaigo dabintsíkees bik'ésti' yę́ę nahgóó iiltsos .
PRED:	But the Lord takes care of his plans ; he rescues them from a distance .
GOLD:	But whenever someone turns to the Lord , the veil is taken away .

ID:	5250
INPUT:	Áko hatsi' dziiłtsą́ągo ha'éé' ák'i nijooldláadgo ájíní , Héi' , shitsi' nílíinii , ayáhígo áshiinilaago biniinaa t'áá íiyisí shich'į' hodiiznáá' , háálá Bóhólníihii bich'į' ádee hadeesdzíi'go k'ad doo łahgo ánáoshdle' át'ée da .
PRED:	When she saw her , she said , “ O daughter of daughter , what will happen to me , O daughter of daughter , for I will never see you . ”
GOLD:	When he saw her , he tore his clothes in anguish . “ Oh , my daughter ! ” he cried out . “ You have completely destroyed me ! You 've brought disaster on me ! For I have made a vow to the Lord , and I can not take it back . ”

ID:	5251
INPUT:	T'áadoo biniinaanígóó shi'ana'í danilíinii doo shaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫ da le' ; t'áadoo baanígóó shik'ee dadiniihii t'áadoo bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo dashidi'niihí le' .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of my enemies ; let them rejoice because of my enemies .
GOLD:	Do n't let my treacherous enemies rejoice over my defeat.Do n't let those who hate me without cause gloat over my sorrow .

ID:	5252
INPUT:	Áko Peter ayá'niiłti'go ání : K'ad t'áá aaníí shił bééhoozin , Diyin God doo ał'ohgo diné yaa nitsíkees da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I know the truth , I do n't know God . ”
GOLD:	Then Peter replied , “ I see very clearly that God shows no favoritism .

ID:	5253
INPUT:	Doo yá'ádaashóonii haa bidi'doolníłígíí
PRED:	The Dedication of the wicked
GOLD:	Book Three

ID:	5254
INPUT:	Azhą́ kóhóót'įįd nidi , t'áá ádił da'ílzííh nít'éé' ; azhą́ t'óó bik'eda'ayóii áyiilaa nidi , t'áadoo dahoosdląąd da .
PRED:	But they did n't believe their sin , but they did n't believe it .
GOLD:	But in spite of this , the people kept sinning.Despite his wonders , they refused to trust him .

ID:	5255
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Jó'ab áyidííniid , Shoo , k'ad díí baa niséyá ; éí bąą nílááh , dinééh Ábsalam bił nánít'aash .
PRED:	Then the king said to Joab , “ Go and tell me what you have done . ”
GOLD:	So the king sent for Joab and told him , “ All right , go and bring back the young man Absalom . ”

ID:	5256
INPUT:	Áko nízhdii'na'go Zárefathgóó dashdiiyá . Nít' éé' kin haal'á bidáń'dítį́įhgi jiníyáago ; jó , ákwe'é asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii léi' chizh náyiilááh , áádóó bich'į' ázhdííniidgo ábijiní , Nánooshkąąh , ásaa' bee tó áłch'į́į́dígo shá nídiikaahgo deeshdlį́į́ł .
PRED:	So he went to the town and went to the town gate , where he went to the town gate . He said , “ Go and drink the water , ” he said . “ Go and drink the water and drink it . ”
GOLD:	So he went to Zarephath . As he arrived at the gates of the village , he saw a widow gathering sticks , and he asked her , “ Would you please bring me a little water in a cup ? ”

ID:	5257
INPUT:	Áko Jéíkab áháłní , Shik'isóó , háádę́ę'shą' ádaaht'į́ ? Áko ádaaní , Héírandę́ę́' ádeiit'į́ .
PRED:	Then Jacob said , “ What is your brothers ? ” So Jacob replied , “ We are going to see Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Jacob went over to the shepherds and asked , “ Where are you from , my friends ? ” “ We are from Haran , ” they answered .

ID:	5258
INPUT:	Áko John baa jíkaigo ádabizhdííniid , Na'nitiní , Jórdan biláahdi bił nani'aashgo baa hwíínílne'ígíí , jó'akon , t'áá éí tó yee asį́įhgo diné t'áá ałtso baa hakááh .
PRED:	When John returned to John , he said , “ Teacher , we are going to meet you in the Jordan River . ”
GOLD:	So John 's disciples came to him and said , “ Rabbi , the man you met on the other side of the Jordan River , the one you identified as the Messiah , is also baptizing people . And everybody is going to him instead of coming to us . ”

ID:	5259
INPUT:	Zedekáíyah nant'áii
PRED:	Zedekiah Rules in Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Fall of Jerusalem

ID:	5260
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Yuráíyah éí David áyidííniid , Jó , níbaal biyi'di tsits'aa' dílzinii si'ą́ áádóó Ízrel dine'é índa Júdah dine'é níbaal yii' nidaháaztą́ , áádóó bóhonishníihii Jó'ab índa shinanit'a'í bá nidaal'a'í éí t'áá halgaigi nidahaazná . Ákoósh shí t'óó shighangóó nídeeshdáałgo áadi t'óó ashą́ągo áádóó t'óó ashdlą́ągo she'asdzą́ą́ bił shiiłkáah doo ? Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hiníná áádóó nii' sizíinii hiná ; shí ałdó' ts'ídá t'áá aaníí doo ákódeeshníił da .
PRED:	Uriah said to David , “ Look , I have found the Ark of the Covenant of Judah and Judah . I will die in the wilderness of Judah and Judah . Why should I die ? ”
GOLD:	Uriah replied , “ The Ark and the armies of Israel and Judah are living in tents , and Joab and my master 's men are camping in the open fields . How could I go home to wine and dine and sleep with my wife ? I swear that I would never do such a thing . ”

ID:	5261
INPUT:	Áko k'é bee nihaazhníyá yę́ędą́ą́' nitsidaahkaigo , áádóó ádił nídahodoołchiłgo t'áá ánółtso ak'eh dahonoł'į́į́ nít'ée'ii bééjílniihgo ayóó'ánihijó'níigo t'ah aláhídi át'éego nihaa nitsídzíkees .
PRED:	And if you have been purchased , you will know that you have committed the blood of your own body and love to others .
GOLD:	Now he cares for you more than ever when he remembers the way all of you obeyed him and welcomed him with such fear and deep respect .

ID:	5262
INPUT:	E'elyaii yich'į' nidahałáhígíí bich'į' nidahojiłáago éí biniinaa łoh biih jííyá nahalingo azajookai .
PRED:	He is a trap to those who worship idols in a trap of a trap .
GOLD:	They worshiped their idols , which led to their downfall .

ID:	5263
INPUT:	Tsé ílíinii ániks wolyéii hasht'e'niyída'ak'aashii ál'ínígi át'éego tsé yinída'ak'aashgo yízhí bik'i naaznilgo bibąąhgóó óola bee ahéédeelghasgo Ízrel biye'ké dabízhi' bik'i sinilgo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He made two onyx stones of gemstones on a stone stone that decorated with carved wood . He decorated the stones of Israel 's sons with gold .
GOLD:	They mounted the two onyx stones in settings of gold filigree . The stones were engraved with the names of the tribes of Israel , just as a seal is engraved .

ID:	5264
INPUT:	Áko Sálaman sodizin niiníłti'go yá'ąąshdę́ę́' kǫ' bidadíínáadgo didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó náádahaniihígíí iidííłk'ą́ą́' , áko Bóhólníihii bee bi'oh hodidilyéehii kin bii' sohodizin bii' hadéébįįd .
PRED:	Then fire blazed forth from heaven and burning fire on fire . Then fire fire fire blazed forth from the Lord 's Temple and burned the fire .
GOLD:	When Solomon finished praying , fire flashed down from heaven and burned up the burnt offerings and sacrifices , and the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple .

ID:	5265
INPUT:	T'áá áníiltso , Jew dine'é índa doo Jew dine'é daniidlį́į da nidi , naalte' índa doo naalte' daniidlį́į da nidi t'ááłá'í niidlį́į dooleełgo Níłch'i Diyinii t'ááłá'íígíí bee danihi'doolzį́į́' , áádóó Níłch'i Diyinii t'ááłá'íígíí nihiih dahwiizle'go bee dahinii'ná .
PRED:	We have all belong to us , but we will be slaves , but we will have one Spirit 's slave and slave and slave to the Spirit of God . And we will give you the Spirit of the Spirit .
GOLD:	Some of us are Jews , some are Gentiles , some are slaves , and some are free . But we have all been baptized into one body by one Spirit , and we all share the same Spirit .

ID:	5266
INPUT:	Bénjamin dine'é kéyah baa deet'ą́
PRED:	The Land Given to Benjamin
GOLD:	The Land Given to Benjamin

ID:	5267
INPUT:	Jó , yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii , éí díí nahalin : diné léi' kéyah bił haz'ą́ągi bee bóhólníihii bich'il na'atł'o'ii bitahgóó bá nidadoolnishii ła' t'ah abínídą́ą́' yíká dah diiyá .
PRED:	“ Look , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a farmer who has been planted in the Kingdom of Heaven 's field .
GOLD:	“ For the Kingdom of Heaven is like the landowner who went out early one morning to hire workers for his vineyard .

ID:	5268
INPUT:	Nihik'isóó danohłíinii , nihíyee' azhą́ t'óó kónízahíjį' ałts'áhaakai nidi , t'áá áłahjį' nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' nihaa nitsídeiikees . Dooládó' nihídin dasiidlį́į' da ! Náádanihiidiiltséełgi haleebee bindahosiit'ą́ !
PRED:	But dear brothers and sisters , we have no interest in your mouth . We have never been able to see us , but we have never been able to see us .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , after we were separated from you for a little while ( though our hearts never left you ) , we tried very hard to come back because of our intense longing to see you again .

ID:	5269
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí Abímelek daaztsą́ągo dayiiłtsą́ , índa t'áá ałtso bighangóó anídahaaskai .
PRED:	So Abimelech died , and all the people of Israel died .
GOLD:	When Abimelech 's men saw that he was dead , they disbanded and returned to their homes .

ID:	5270
INPUT:	yéego hadoolghaazhgo ání , Jesus , Diyin God Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii biYe' nílíinii , haashą' shíléehgo ánít'į́ ? Diyin God binahjį' nánooshkąąh , atíshóólééh lágo .
PRED:	Jesus cried out , “ O God , why do you call me the Son of God Most High in the Most High ? ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	5271
INPUT:	Éí bąą shik'isóó , Bóhólníihii nádzáajį' hada'íínółní . Jó'akon , k'éé'dídléehii ni' bits'ą́ą́dóó aneest'ą' ílíinii yiba' át'éego , áłtséedi índa akée'di bik'i nahałtį́įhjį' ha'ólníi łeh .
PRED:	“ Now , dear brothers and sisters , ” says the Lord . “ A farmer who plants the crops of the harvest is coming , but the time is coming .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , be patient as you wait for the Lord 's return . Consider the farmers who patiently wait for the rains in the fall and in the spring . They eagerly look for the valuable harvest to ripen .

ID:	5272
INPUT:	Jó , Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchíinii ání , Dahóyą́ dabidó'níinii éí doo dahóyą́ą́góó ádadeeshłííł , Áádóó nidahazyąądii éí bibee hódzą' t'áadoo nánídlínígóó ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	For God says , “ You are the Scriptures , ‘ You are foolish and corrupt , and I will make you wise . '
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ I will destroy the wisdom of the wiseand discard the intelligence of the intelligent . ”

ID:	5273
INPUT:	Áádę́ę́' yee át'éii yee níni' ná'áhólééh lágo ; bikék'edóoya' lágo .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked go out into the land , and do n't let them get out of the land .
GOLD:	Do n't let your hearts stray away toward her.Do n't wander down her wayward path .

ID:	5274
INPUT:	Háálá átséedi da'iisiidląądgo t'áá nidasiildįįdjį' baa da'iisiidlí'ígíí yéego dayíníitą'go Christ bił da'ahííníitą' doo .
PRED:	We have been utterly destroyed by faith that we have been given to Christ . We will be united with Christ .
GOLD:	For if we are faithful to the end , trusting God just as firmly as when we first believed , we will share in all that belongs to Christ .

ID:	5275
INPUT:	Ts'ídá t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego Bóhólníihii hak'ijį' dooleeł , áko nahasdzáán bikáá' diyin dabidi'níinii t'áá ałtso yaa nididoodaał , áádóó ał'ąą dine'é t'ááłá'í nítínígo t'áá bił nahaz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' t'áá ałtso hach'į' nidahałáa doo .
PRED:	Then the fierce anger of the Lord will be upon all the nations of the earth , and all the nations will worship him .
GOLD:	The Lord will terrify themas he destroys all the gods in the land.Then nations around the world will worship the Lord , each in their own land .

ID:	5276
INPUT:	Nídideesh'nahgo shizhé'é bich'į' nídeeshdáałgo kóbidideeshniił , Shizhé'é , yá'ąąshii bich'į' índa ni nich'į' bąąhági ásdzaa ;
PRED:	“ I will return to my father and return to my father . I will say to my father , ‘ I am innocent . '
GOLD:	I will go home to my father and say , “ Father , I have sinned against both heaven and you ,

ID:	5277
INPUT:	Nidi íídą́ą́' Éíhab daaztsą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' Mó'ab dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii éí Ízrel dine'é yá aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' nidaastee' .
PRED:	But Ahab 's death rebelled against King Ahab of Israel , but the king of Israel rebelled against him .
GOLD:	But after Ahab 's death , the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel .

ID:	5278
INPUT:	Áko siláo danilínígíí tsin ałnáoszid yikáa'jį' Jesus yił ada'askaalgo bee hazhdít'éé nít'é'ígíí siláo dį́lt'éego ałtaadeisnii' ; ayaadi ha'éé' ałdó' . Nidi ayaadi ha'éé' éí doo ahídadiilkad da , éí t'áá bílátahdę́ę́' yaago t'áá ła' bizhi'ee yistł'ǫ́ ,
PRED:	When the soldiers saw that Jesus was crucified with the cross of the cross , he broke off his robe on the cross . But the soldiers could not tear off his robe , but they can not be healed .
GOLD:	When the soldiers had crucified Jesus , they divided his clothes among the four of them . They also took his robe , but it was seamless , woven in one piece from top to bottom .

ID:	5279
INPUT:	Shá oo'íinii danohłį́ , ní Bóhólníihii , áádóó shá naal'a'í éí nídiiłtíinii nílį́ ; shééhonísin áádóó shiinídlą́ą doo índa Diyin God nishłį́įgo bik'idi'díítį́į́ł biniyé nándiiłtį́ ; shítséedi doo diyin ła' hólǫ́ǫgo ályaa da , doo shikéédę́ę́' ła' hólǫ́ǫ da doo .
PRED:	You are my servant , O Lord , who is my servant . You are my servant , my servant , my servant , and you will never see me . I am the one who formed me from the beginning of my God .
GOLD:	“ But you are my witnesses , O Israel ! ” says the Lord. “ You are my servant.You have been chosen to know me , believe in me , and understand that I alone am God.There is no other God — there never has been , and there never will be .

ID:	5280
INPUT:	Nihitahdóoshą' háí hóyą́ áádóó ak'idi'yiitįįh ? Háni'dii yá'át'éehgo jiinánígíí áádóó baa hojíyą́ągo a'ohgo íz'dólzingo ájooníłígíí ííshjání ádzósin le' .
PRED:	Who makes you wise and wise , and if you want to understand what you want to do .
GOLD:	If you are wise and understand God 's ways , prove it by living an honorable life , doing good works with the humility that comes from wisdom .

ID:	5281
INPUT:	Ch'ééh dadeeskaii díí yee háádadoołyįh , yidííniidii ; díí háá'áyį́į́h baa dahidooh'aah ; ákondi t'áadoo dabidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	You have seen these evil deeds , for you have no rest . But do n't listen to them .
GOLD:	God has told his people , “ Here is a place of rest ; let the weary rest here.This is a place of quiet rest. ” But they would not listen .

ID:	5282
INPUT:	Doo nihik'édí nishłį́įgo nihidínéesh'įįł da ; doo yildinígi ádaot'įįdii t'ahdii nihitah hólǫ́ǫgo ádanoht'éii bik'ehgo k'éédanihidideeshdlííł , áko shí Bóhólníihii nihik'í'ołhaałgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will not look for you , and I will show you your detestable sins . I will show you your sins to the Lord , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will turn my eyes away and show no pity.I will repay you for all your detestable sins.Then you will know that it is I , the Lord , who is striking the blow .

ID:	5283
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Josáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' náá'iiłniihii Hilkáíyah díí naaltsoos yik'íníyáhígíí bee haz'áanii biyi' bee ak'e'ashchínígíí bizh'doolííł biniyé ch'į́įdii yábiiłti'ii áádóó da'diłgąshii áádóó dinéshchíín áádóó eda'alyaii índa doo daaldinii éí Júdah kéyahgi índa Jerúsalemgi hadadees'į́'ígíí ałtso nahjį' kójiilaa .
PRED:	Then Josiah took the Book of the Lord in the Temple of Josiah in the Book of the Lord . These are the priests who were living in the Temple of the Lord . He also destroyed the people of Judah and those who were living in Judah .
GOLD:	Josiah also got rid of the mediums and psychics , the household gods , the idols , and every other kind of detestable practice , both in Jerusalem and throughout the land of Judah . He did this in obedience to the laws written in the scroll that Hilkiah the priest had found in the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	5284
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi diné bee ádaa dahodzódli'ii a'ohgo ábidi'doolnííł áádóó ayóó át'éego ádaa deidzódli'ii wóyahgo ádahodi'doolnííł índa Bóhólníihii t'éiyá ayóó át'éego baa ha'niih dooleeł .
PRED:	On the day of judgment will be destroyed ; the proud will be destroyed . The proud will be praised in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Human pride will be humbled , and human arrogance will be brought down.Only the Lord will be exaltedon that day of judgment .

ID:	5285
INPUT:	Ayóó át'éego doo yá'áshónígi yee' íínít'įįdáádóó doo ákwii ááníłígíí yee' t'áá náás yíłt'ih .
PRED:	You have done good things , and your guilt is done .
GOLD:	No , it 's because of your wickedness ! There 's no limit to your sins .

ID:	5286
INPUT:	Éí bąą nihibąąhági ádaat'éii nihá k'ééda'doolchǫǫł biniyé łahgo át'éego tsíńdahidohkeesgo Diyin God bich'į' dah nídahidoohkááh , áko Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dóó bee ák'ééhwiitáadii nihee náhoodleeł doo .
PRED:	You will turn away from their sins , for the Lord your God will turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	Now repent of your sins and turn to God , so that your sins may be wiped away .

ID:	5287
INPUT:	Áko díí t'áá ałtso yaa naayáago , Shaa nídoodááł , dííniid . Nidi t'áadoo nádzáa da áádóó hádí Júdah dine'é doo bazh'dí'nóodlíí át'éii hoołtsą́ .
PRED:	So she went to her and told her , “ I have seen my sister , but she has not been my sister . ”
GOLD:	I thought , ‘ After she has done all this , she will return to me . ' But she did not return , and her faithless sister Judah saw this .

ID:	5288
INPUT:	Asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii , doodaii' dé'éyóní danilíinii , doodaii' badahojoobá'íii t'áadoo bide ádahwíínóhsiní . Índa nihijéí tł'ááhdę́ę́' t'áadoo nichxǫ́'ígo nihik'is bich'į' nitsídaohkeesí .
PRED:	“ You must not test widows , orphans , orphans , orphans , or widows . Instead , do n't turn your hearts from evil desires or widows .
GOLD:	Do not oppress widows , orphans , foreigners , and the poor . And do not scheme against each other .

ID:	5289
INPUT:	kóbijiníigo , Nihílááh , náwónaanídi nihidááhjí kin sinilíjį' doh'aash , t'áá áko ákwii télii ła' biyázhí bił dahaastł'ǫ́ǫgo bik'ídooh'ash ; éí k'e'dooh'ałgo shaa nídooh'ish .
PRED:	“ Go and stand here in front of the hill country and stand in front of the house where I am giving you a young donkey . ”
GOLD:	“ Go into the village over there , ” he said . “ As soon as you enter it , you will see a donkey tied there , with its colt beside it . Untie them and bring them to me .

ID:	5290
INPUT:	1Kgs . 10 : <unk>
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Summary of Solomon 's Reign

ID:	5291
INPUT:	Lk . 6 : 1-5
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	The Sign of Jonah

ID:	5292
INPUT:	Júdah biye' Zíírah ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii ła' Miishézabiil biye' Pethaháíyah éí diné bídadéét'i'ii t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii bee bił hojilne' nít'éé' .
PRED:	The family of Judah was taken from the family of Shallum son of Meshullam , and the family of Judah was taken to the king .
GOLD:	Pethahiah son of Meshezabel , a descendant of Zerah son of Judah , was the royal adviser in all matters of public administration .

ID:	5293
INPUT:	Éí Bóhólníihii binááł ayóó át'éego naalzheehii dzizlį́į́' , éí bąą Nímrad áát'įįdígi át'éego Bóhólníihii binááł ayóó át'éego nijilzheeh , hodi'ní .
PRED:	That is why the Lord appeared to him in his presence , just as the Lord had done . And he said , “ The Lord is coming ! ”
GOLD:	Since he was the greatest hunter in the world , his name became proverbial . People would say , “ This man is like Nimrod , the greatest hunter in the world . ”

ID:	5294
INPUT:	Jesus díí saad ałtso bee hadziisdzíi'go , Gálilii kéyahdóó dashdiiyáago Jórdan tooh wónaanídi Judíya nahós'a'di jiníyá ;
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he left Judea and returned to the Jordan River in Galilee of Galilee .
GOLD:	When Jesus had finished saying these things , he left Galilee and went down to the region of Judea east of the Jordan River .

ID:	5295
INPUT:	Anaa' bideezla' chodeiil'ínígíí éí doo ats'íís k'ehgo nidahazt'i'ii bik'ehgo da , nidi bidziilgo bąąhági át'éii yee bidziilii bił nahazhóodii Diyin God bibee adziilii bee íildįįł .
PRED:	We can not be crushed by human hands , but we are crushed by God 's power .
GOLD:	We use God 's mighty weapons , not worldly weapons , to knock down the strongholds of human reasoning and to destroy false arguments .

ID:	5296
INPUT:	Díí bee hool'iní bá yada'ii'áhígíí bee ályaii éí óola t'áá bízhání t'áá bitł'ááhdę́ę́' bich'ilátah hózhóón nahalingo naashch'ąą'íjį' óola yitseedgo bee ályaa ; bee hool'iní bá yada'ii'áhígíí ádoolníiłgi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' yit'íní áyiilaa yę́ę bik'ehgo ájiilaa .
PRED:	These are the lampstand that were made of pure gold , lamp snuffers , lamp snuffers , lamp snuffers , and petals . This is what the Lord had commanded through Moses .
GOLD:	The entire lampstand , from its base to its decorative blossoms , was made of beaten gold . It was built according to the exact design the Lord had shown Moses .

ID:	5297
INPUT:	Áko bikee' áádóó bikédiníbiní éí łeets'aa' ííł'íní hashtł'ish choyooł'íinii áádóó béésh nitł'izii bee ályaago yiniłtsáanii éí náásgóó aláahgo bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ahádahidoodzohii át'é . Béésh nitł'izii bidziilígi át'éego ła' bidziilgo bił nahaz'ą́ą doo ; hashtł'ishgi át'éego ła' doo dabidziilgóó bił nahaz'ą́ą dooleeł .
PRED:	Then he said to his feet , “ He will be made of clay , and he will rule over the walls of the earth . He will be completely destroyed , just as he did , just as he did .
GOLD:	The feet and toes you saw were a combination of iron and baked clay , showing that this kingdom will be divided . Like iron mixed with clay , it will have some of the strength of iron .

ID:	5298
INPUT:	Jó , t'áá ni nidine'é Ízrel chánah ádá íinilaago t'áá ni nidine'é danilį́įgo ahóyéel'áa doo , áádóó ni Bóhólníihii nílíinii , bí biDiyin God sínílį́į́' .
PRED:	For you have made your life for all Israel , and you are the Lord your God forever .
GOLD:	You made Israel your very own people forever , and you , O Lord , became their God .

ID:	5299
INPUT:	T'ah doo shich'į' nahwii'naah yę́ędą́ą́' yóó'ííyáá nít'éé' , nidi k'ad nizaad bik'eh honish'į́ .
PRED:	You have seen my troubles , but now I have seen your word .
GOLD:	I used to wander off until you disciplined me ; but now I closely follow your word .

ID:	5300
INPUT:	ShiDiyin God , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , t'áá íiyisí naa hashniih doo , áádóó hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áágóó nízhi' baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise you , O God , and I will praise you forever .
GOLD:	I will exalt you , my God and King , and praise your name forever and ever .

ID:	5301
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii na'adlo' yindayiiłdeełgo dahináá nít'éé' ; jó , wótashki' nidajiishchį́ . Índa lą́ą dah néitį́įhgo dá'ák'ehgóó nidazhniłt'ą'ii t'áá bił hó ałdó' haa nahodidoodaał .
PRED:	And the Lord has given birth to his people , for he has given birth to his son . He will produce a field for his own family .
GOLD:	They have betrayed the honor of the Lord , bearing children that are not his.Now their false religion will devour themalong with their wealth .

ID:	5302
INPUT:	áko t'áadoo bee nihik'ídahót'ahígóó índa niha'át'e' ádaadingo Diyin God ba'áłchíní doo ádąąh dahat'aahii dadoohłeeł , áko díí binda'adlo'go doo ts'ííd át'éégóó ahoolchíłígíí bitahdi nahasdzáán bikáa'jį' adiníłdíinii nahalingo da'díínółdíín ,
PRED:	You must not be ashamed of what you do . You must not be defiled by God 's children , and you will be destroyed by the light of the earth .
GOLD:	so that no one can criticize you . Live clean , innocent lives as children of God , shining like bright lights in a world full of crooked and perverse people .

ID:	5303
INPUT:	Áko éí bijį́įdi díí baa hodoolzhish : Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ą́dę́ę́' ts'ídá ayóó át'éego bik'ee ił áhodoodįįłii bik'i hwiidooleełgo t'ááłá'í nítínígo yił kééhat'íinii deidoosiłgo yił nida'ahilbaałgo da'ahidoogą́ą́ł .
PRED:	On that day the day of judgment will happen to the Lord , for they will be filled with joy , for they will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	On that day they will be terrified , stricken by the Lord with great panic . They will fight their neighbors hand to hand .

ID:	5304
INPUT:	Áko t'áá bee hahideesdzih dooleeł nít'é'ígi át'éego Christ baa hane' ííshjání ádeeshłíłígíí bíká sodadołzin .
PRED:	And pray that I will be revealed to you in Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Pray that I will proclaim this message as clearly as I should .

ID:	5305
INPUT:	Doo nidi bił aháda'doohheh da : t'ááká nihitsi'ké éí biye'ké bił ahaa dahohnííł lágo , doodaii' t'ááká bitsi'ké éí nihiye'ké yił ahaa dahakááh lágo .
PRED:	“ Do not make sexual relations with you , or you must not marry her or daughters .
GOLD:	You must not intermarry with them . Do not let your daughters and sons marry their sons and daughters ,

ID:	5306
INPUT:	Ts'ídá doo t'óó shaa yáhodoosįįł daígíí t'áá awołí bee bíká shił chohoo'į́įgo neíníshłí , nidi ts'ídá t'áadoosti'ee k'ad hinishná índa t'áá át'é yę́ęgi át'éego hinishnáá léi' , doodago éí dasétsą́ą́ léi' , t'áá sézį́į́ nít'éé' shee Christ baa ha'niih doo .
PRED:	No , I am not worthy of praise ! I am not worthy to argue with Christ . I am a stranger , not a drunkard , or a drunkard , or a drunkard , or a person who is not worthy of Christ .
GOLD:	For I fully expect and hope that I will never be ashamed , but that I will continue to be bold for Christ , as I have been in the past . And I trust that my life will bring honor to Christ , whether I live or die .

ID:	5307
INPUT:	Áádóó eda'alyaii t'áá ałtso hasht'e'nidaashk'aazhii dadidoolzéí , áádóó bik'é nijishnishii t'áá ałtso adidoolk'ą́ą́ł , índa eda'alyaii daahóhígíí nideeshbéezhgo ádeeshłííł , áko ałjiłnii baa daha'níiłgo bee shódaozt'e'ii náánáła' chonáádayooł'į́į doo .
PRED:	I will destroy all their idols , and they will burn up their idols . They will burn up their pagan altars and burn it on the ground . I will burn it up to the pagan gods of the fire .
GOLD:	All her carved images will be smashed.All her sacred treasures will be burned.These things were bought with the moneyearned by her prostitution , and they will now be carried awayto pay prostitutes elsewhere . ”

ID:	5308
INPUT:	Mó'ab át'ée dooleełii
PRED:	A Message about Moab
GOLD:	A Message about Moab

ID:	5309
INPUT:	Danisiłgo nihíníltǫ' áádóó t'áá biwosjį' baa adashínízhoozh ; nik'ijį' híniijéé' silį́į'go nihíníltǫ'go t'áá ałtso nida'nt'i'go íinilaa .
PRED:	You have broken your hand and broken your doors , and you have broken your doors . You have broken the burden of your hand , and you have broken your hand .
GOLD:	When Israel leaned on you , you splintered and brokeand stabbed her in the armpit.When she put her weight on you , you collapsed , and her legs gave way .

ID:	5310
INPUT:	<unk> 'ísh bidziilgo ádanile' ? Bik'osísh ayóó ábóodziilgo ádanile' ?
PRED:	Do n't you think of my body ? Do you make it strong ?
GOLD:	“ Have you given the horse its strengthor clothed its neck with a flowing mane ?

ID:	5311
INPUT:	hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Ízrel dine'é nohłíinii , nihíká oohjeeh ! Díí hastiin t'áá ałtsogóó diné kéédahat'íinii éí nihidine'é áádóó bee haz'áanii índa kwe'é haz'ánígíí yik'ijį' yáłti'go na'nitin . T'ah nááyówehgo , Gríik dine'é kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' yah ayíí'eezhgo , díí hodiyingo haz'áanii yiyííłchxǫ' .
PRED:	They cried out to the people of Israel , “ Come and tell the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the law of the law and the people of Israel have done to this Temple . '
GOLD:	yelling , “ Men of Israel , help us ! This is the man who preaches against our people everywhere and tells everybody to disobey the Jewish laws . He speaks against the Temple — and even defiles this holy place by bringing in Gentiles . ”

ID:	5312
INPUT:	Mózes saad yee haadzíi'ii t'áadoo doodaí t'áá át'é Ízrel dine'é áłah nilínígíí t'áá ałtso binááł Jáshowa saad jííłta' ; éí asdzánída áádóó á <unk> ní t'áá ádaałts'íísíjį' índa dé'éyóní danilíinii hatahgóó kéédahat'ínígíí da'íists'ą́ą́' nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Moses told all the people of Israel everything they did , and all the foreigners living in the presence of Joshua and the foreigners living among the Israelites .
GOLD:	Every word of every command that Moses had ever given was read to the entire assembly of Israel , including the women and children and the foreigners who lived among them .

ID:	5313
INPUT:	Jew dine'é éí nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é ła' Jerúsalemdóó John yich'į' ada'as'a'go , Háishą' ánít'į́ ? daaníigo nidahódééłkid yę́ędą́ą́' , kót'éego John ch'íhoní'ą́ ,
PRED:	The priests and Levites sent this message to John : “ Who was the Messiah ? ” they asked . “ Who was the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	This was John 's testimony when the Jewish leaders sent priests and Temple assistants from Jerusalem to ask John , “ Who are you ? ”

ID:	5314
INPUT:	Diné ayóó ádaat'éii doo áłahjį' dahóyą́ą da , índa hadaastihii daats'í t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii doo yik'idadi'yiitįįh da .
PRED:	No one can get away from the least of the godly , and those who do right .
GOLD:	Sometimes the elders are not wise.Sometimes the aged do not understand justice .

ID:	5315
INPUT:	Azhą́ ats'íís bee ániit'éii yi<unk> nidi , doo nihąąh nahakaad da , háálá nihiyi'di bee ániit'éii éí t'áá ákwíí jį́ ániidí ánáálnííł .
PRED:	Even if we do n't have any part of your body , we will not be counted as a few days .
GOLD:	That is why we never give up . Though our bodies are dying , our spirits are being renewed every day .

ID:	5316
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Bóhólníihii shich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Once again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5317
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii áádóó yaa ádahalyáanii binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	Parable of the Vineyard Seed
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	5318
INPUT:	<unk> xił ; ahíínígą́'ígíí béénílniih ; ts'ídá doo ákónáádíí'níił da .
PRED:	“ You must never again destroy it ; you will never again be destroyed .
GOLD:	If you lay a hand on it , you will certainly remember the battle that follows.You wo n't try that again !

ID:	5319
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Líyah ináá'niiltsąądgo Jéíkab bá ashkii náájíshchį́ ; éí bił hastą́ądi ajishchį́ .
PRED:	Then Jacob became pregnant again and gave birth to a son , but she gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	Then Leah became pregnant again and gave birth to a sixth son for Jacob .

ID:	5320
INPUT:	áko éí bą́ą́h azlį́'ígíí hwe'asdzą́ą́ t'áá bił bééhózingo ła'jį' ádá áádzísįįd , ła'jį' éí jiníjaa'go daal'aadii biyaajį' nizhnínil .
PRED:	So he did everything he had said to his wife , and he put his body into his field .
GOLD:	He brought part of the money to the apostles , claiming it was the full amount . With his wife 's consent , he kept the rest .

ID:	5321
INPUT:	níbaal yii' kéédahat'íinii éí Íídam dine'é áádóó Íshmeiyel dine'é , Mó'ab dine'é índa Héígar dine'é ;
PRED:	The people of Edom , Hagar , and Ishmael , Ishmael , the Edomites , Hagar , Hagar , Hagar , and Moab .
GOLD:	these Edomites and Ishmaelites ; Moabites and Hagrites ;

ID:	5322
INPUT:	Hódzą́ kóbidiní , Shilah nílį́ , áádóó bee ak'i'diitįįhii éí asdzání nik'éí nilį́įgo yínízhí .
PRED:	“ She is my sister , my sister , ” she said . “ A woman who is a woman who is a woman . ”
GOLD:	Love wisdom like a sister ; make insight a beloved member of your family .

ID:	5323
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih , háálá biwoo' yee nihidoolghał nít'ée'ii doo yaa nihidiní'ą́ą da !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , for he has never eaten your teeth .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , who did not let their teeth tear us apart !

ID:	5324
INPUT:	nidi Lat éí Sádam kin haal'áádóó ch'íníyá bijį́įdi yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' kǫ' índa tsékǫ' łitsoígíí nááłtą́ągo diné ałtso íísdįįd ;
PRED:	But Lot took the fire from the town of Sodom and all the people of Sodom and burning sulfur from the sky .
GOLD:	until the morning Lot left Sodom . Then fire and burning sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all .

ID:	5325
INPUT:	T'áá tooh nílį́į́góó dahináanii dah nida'asołgo kéédahat'į́į́góó éí dahináa doo áádóó łóó' t'óó ahayóí nídínóot'į́į́ł , háálá díí tooh áajį' íílį́ índa éí tónteel łikan dooleeł , áko tooh t'áá nílį́į́góó t'áá ałtsoní dahináa doo .
PRED:	The river will die , and the river will rise again . The river will die , and the river will be filled with water , and the river will live in the sea .
GOLD:	There will be swarms of living things wherever the water of this river flows . Fish will abound in the Dead Sea , for its waters will become fresh . Life will flourish wherever this water flows .

ID:	5326
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The Baptism of Jesus

ID:	5327
INPUT:	Binááł ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ádzíłtso t'áadoo dajílíní da ; t'áadoo dajílínígóó índa t'áadoo nídazhdoodleełígóó haa nitsíkees .
PRED:	Do n't let all nations be disgraced ; do n't let them think they are afraid of them .
GOLD:	The nations of the world are worth nothing to him.In his eyes they count for less than nothing — mere emptiness and froth .

ID:	5328
INPUT:	Tsin neheeshjíí' éí óola bik'ídaasti'go ádadoohłííł , áádóó óola názbąsgo bąąh yí'nilgo tsin níyizii naaniigo bąąh daní'áa dooígíí bii' nídaditsih dooígíí ałdó' ádadoohłííł , índa tsin níyizgo ii' nídaditsih dooígíí ałdó' óola bik'ídaasti'go ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	Make two gold rings and attach them to the rear corners of the Tabernacle . Make them to make them pure gold , and overlay them with gold .
GOLD:	Overlay the frames with gold , and make gold rings to hold the crossbars . Overlay the crossbars with gold as well .

ID:	5329
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Shoo , náhookǫsdi ał'ąą dine'é bídahólníihgo bił nahaz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' t'áá ałtso , Wóshdę́ę́' , dabidishní , áko nidahidoonéełgo t'ááłá'í níjaa'ígo Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi dáń'da'ditį́į́hgóó bídahólníih doo , índa tsé bee binaa ahééda'astł'inígíí t'áá át'é yik'ijį' danilį́į doo , áádóó Júdah dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígíí t'áá ałtso yik'ijį' danilį́į doo .
PRED:	“ Look , ” says the Lord , “ all the nations of the north will come from the north , and all the nations will be able to rebuild the gates of Judah .
GOLD:	Listen ! I am calling the armies of the kingdoms of the north to come to Jerusalem . I , the Lord , have spoken ! “ They will set their thronesat the gates of the city.They will attack its wallsand all the other towns of Judah .

ID:	5330
INPUT:	Jó , Jesus éí Martha áádóó bideezhí índa Lázaras ayóó'áyó'ní .
PRED:	Jesus loved Martha and Lazarus .
GOLD:	So although Jesus loved Martha , Mary , and Lazarus ,

ID:	5331
INPUT:	Áko diné ákǫ́ǫ́ eekaigo kéyah t'áá át'é yii' tádookai áádóó kéyah tsosts'idgo ałts'ádaasdzooígíí biyi' kin dah naazhjaa'ígíí bik'ehgo át'éhígíí naaltsoos bikáá' ádajiilaa , áko dah da'ínéhígóó dah nízhdiikaigo Sháílohgi Jáshowa baa níjíkai ,
PRED:	So the men went into the land and traveled to the land of the tribe of Levi . So Joshua went to Shiloh and went to Shiloh . Then Joshua went to Shiloh and went to Shiloh and went to Shiloh .
GOLD:	The men did as they were told and mapped the entire territory into seven sections , listing the towns in each section . They made a written record and then returned to Joshua in the camp at Shiloh .

ID:	5332
INPUT:	Hágo , sha'áłchíní , dashíísółts'ą́ą́' ; Bóhólníihii dólzingi bínanihinishtin doo .
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , and teach me what I am saying .
GOLD:	Come , my children , and listen to me , and I will teach you to fear the Lord .

ID:	5333
INPUT:	Áko siláo tł'óół k'ídayiizhgizhgo tsinaa'eeł yázhí bidah aalts'id .
PRED:	Then the soldiers grabbed the ship and grabbed it .
GOLD:	So the soldiers cut the ropes to the lifeboat and let it drift away .

ID:	5334
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bik'ehgo deínóhkáah doo , áko dahinohnáa doo , áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí kéyah nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłííł .
PRED:	You will live in the Lord your God , and you will live in the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	Let true justice prevail , so you may live and occupy the land that the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	5335
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Zííbah áádóó Zalmóna hasiláo <unk> kin haal'áagi bił nijikai ; éí diné danilíinii ashdla'áadahdi mííl ánéelą́ą'go ha'a'aahdę́ę́' dine'é kónéelt'e' nidahaasdzíí' lá , háálá t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiindi mííl ánéelą́ą'go diltłish yee nidaabaahii ałtso ábi'disdįįd .
PRED:	Then Zebah and Zalmunna , the men of Midian , and the men of the town were killed .
GOLD:	By this time Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with about 15,000 warriors — all that remained of the allied armies of the east , for 120,000 had already been killed .

ID:	5336
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad nihílááh , háálá tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz doo ła' nihaa náádadooljoł da , nidi bis t'áá ákódanéelt'e'go ádaahłe' .
PRED:	But now , go , for there is no grain or grain . ”
GOLD:	Now get back to work ! No straw will be given to you , but you must still produce the full quota of bricks . ”

ID:	5337
INPUT:	Éí yaa ánát'įįhgo yádiłhił áádóó nahasdzáán yinéł'į́ .
PRED:	He created the heavens and earth , and he sees the earth .
GOLD:	He stoops to look downon heaven and on earth .

ID:	5338
INPUT:	Nít'éé' diné éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii bąąh dahólónígíí yah a'atiingi naháaztą́ , áko áda'ahidi'níigo , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé t'áá daats'í kǫ́ǫ́ dadíníi'néełgo nahísíitą́ ?
PRED:	When the leprosy arrived at the house , the leprosy sat down in front of the leprosy . “ What are you doing ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	Now there were four men with leprosy sitting at the entrance of the city gates . “ Why should we sit here waiting to die ? ” they asked each other .

ID:	5339
INPUT:	Ajooba' nitsiinázt'i'go ándoolííł ; naat'á ch'ah ayóó ánóolninii neidoo'ááł .
PRED:	The crown of the wicked will rise , and the crown of the crown will be exalted .
GOLD:	She will place a lovely wreath on your head ; she will present you with a beautiful crown . ”

ID:	5340
INPUT:	dahaghą́ą́'ask'idii éí dį́įdi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiindóó ba'aan ashdla' , dahatélii éí hastą́ądi mííldóó ba'aan tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin ánéelą́ą́' .
PRED:	Their camels numbered 5555 donkeys .
GOLD:	435 camels , and 6,720 donkeys .

ID:	5341
INPUT:	Da' tsídiiłbáhísh ashdla'go doo naaki sindáo bą́ą́h ílį́įgo nahaniih da ? Ákondi éí Diyin God t'ááłá'í nidi doo yaa yoonéeh da .
PRED:	“ Does a small animal that is not a small price for the price of God ? No one can praise God .
GOLD:	“ What is the price of five sparrows — two copper coins ? Yet God does not forget a single one of them .

ID:	5342
INPUT:	Doo dichin áádóó dibáá' danilį́į da doo , doo nidi hadoh áádóó jį́honaa'éí bee bił nidadoołdoh da , háálá baa a'ááh nízinii éí boo'ish doo ; t'áá éí tó hadaazlį́į́góó bá yigáał doo .
PRED:	They will be hungry and thirsty , but the sun will not be covered with the sun , for they will never be able to bring them into a flood .
GOLD:	They will neither hunger nor thirst.The searing sun will not reach them anymore.For the Lord in his mercy will lead them ; he will lead them beside cool waters .

ID:	5343
INPUT:	Áko ch'il na'atł'o'ii bee hóhólníhígíí jiníyáago , ch'il na'atł'o'ii yaa ádahalyánígíí lá haazhdoolííł lá ?
PRED:	Then he asked the vineyard , “ What will he give you the vineyard ? ”
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	5344
INPUT:	Kót'éego níinii ádingi biniyé ádahat'íinii t'óó ąąh nidahwiiłkaad , nidi kót'éego daaníinii t'óó adahayóigi biniyé ádahat'íinii dabidziilgo hasht'edaalne' .
PRED:	This is the fate of the wicked , but those who are weak as weak as slaves .
GOLD:	Plans go wrong for lack of advice ; many advisers bring success .

ID:	5345
INPUT:	Áko nihizh'nínáago ha'át'íhída hwee hólónígíí bił dashdíníichą́ą́' , áádóó tooh ha'naa nizh'nínáago Dził Gíliyad bich'į' nihizh'níná .
PRED:	When he reached the water , he fled to the river , he fled to the river , and he fled to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	So Jacob took all his possessions with him and crossed the Euphrates River , heading for the hill country of Gilead .

ID:	5346
INPUT:	Azáíyah áádóó Jótham áádóó Éíhaz índa Heziikáíyah éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í nidahaleehgo yoołkááłdą́ą́' éí Júdah kéyahgi áádóó Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi át'ée dooleełgi Éímaz biye' Aizéíyah éí bił ádzaa .
PRED:	Jotham son of Jotham , Ahaz , king of Judah , and Hezekiah son of Amoz did what was pleasing in Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	These are the visions that Isaiah son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem . He saw these visions during the years when Uzziah , Jotham , Ahaz , and Hezekiah were kings of Judah .

ID:	5347
INPUT:	Áádóó Jesus áhodííniid , Łahgo haz'ą́ nanihídíshkid , Háá'áyį́į́h jį́į́ góne' daats'í yá'át'éehgo ázhdooníiłgo bee haz'ą́ , éí doodaii' atízh'doolííł daats'í ; hináanii yisdázhdoołtééł , éí doodaii' azhdiyoołhéełgo daats'í bee haz'ą́ ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If I tell you the Sabbath days of the Sabbath days , what is good and good ? Is it right for the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his critics , “ I have a question for you . Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ”

ID:	5348
INPUT:	háálá t'óó shi'dizhchį́ yę́ędą́ą́' t'áadoo shiisxį́į da , éí doodaii' shimá biishch'id bii'di dasétsą́ągo shimá bii' shijish<unk> doo nít'éé' , áko hool'áágóó shee bibid nitsaa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	For I had given birth to a mother , but it was not my mother 's mother . And I did n't have a baby in the womb .
GOLD:	because he did not kill me at birth.Oh , that I had died in my mother 's womb , that her body had been my grave !

ID:	5349
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , shaa jiiníbaah , háálá diné t'áá adashółneehgo shaa nitsídaakees . Shá bíighah shi'ana'í danilíinii shide ádahósin .
PRED:	Have mercy on me , O God , for he has come to help me .
GOLD:	O God , have mercy on me , for people are hounding me.My foes attack me all day long .

ID:	5350
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Diyin God yá dahalne'ii índa diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii lą'í yilt'éego daah'ínígíí k'adę́ę dayiiłtsééh , nít'éé' t'áadoo dayiiłtsą́ą da , áádóó dadoohts'a'ígíí k'adę́ę deidiits'į́į́h , nít'éé' t'áadoo deidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , the prophets and the prophets have never heard what is right and right .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see , but they did n't see it . And they longed to hear what you hear , but they did n't hear it .

ID:	5351
INPUT:	ákwii ajiyą́ągo asdzání léi' tsé alabáster wolyéhígíí bee tózis ályaago ak'ah t'áá íiyisí ílínígíí yee yah ayíí'ą́ągo hatsiits'iin yik'i yayiiziid .
PRED:	One night as a woman named Peter , a woman named Peter 's robe , was filled with olive oil and poured out his head .
GOLD:	While he was eating , a woman came in with a beautiful alabaster jar of expensive perfume and poured it over his head .

ID:	5352
INPUT:	Jit'íinii t'áadoo bik'éna'azhnishí shóozt'e'ii t'áá áko ábi'niidįįh , nidi diné naalnishgo áłah é'éléehii éí t'ah yówehgo bá bilááh yileeh .
PRED:	If a person 's life has been cut off , it is better for a person to be better off than a person .
GOLD:	Wealth from get-rich-quick schemes quickly disappears ; wealth from hard work grows over time .

ID:	5353
INPUT:	Áko Job t'áá ákogi ánísht'é nízinígíí bąą díí diné tált'éego t'áadoo hanáádaasdzíi' da .
PRED:	But Job refused to say , “ I am innocent . ”
GOLD:	Job 's three friends refused to reply further to him because he kept insisting on his innocence .

ID:	5354
INPUT:	Diné yíl'áhígíí haa áłah náánásdlį́į'go doo da'jóyą́ą́' ádzaa da .
PRED:	The people of the crowd had never eaten , and they ate no more .
GOLD:	One time Jesus entered a house , and the crowds began to gather again . Soon he and his disciples could n't even find time to eat .

ID:	5355
INPUT:	Áko níníł'į́įgo ná naal'a'í índa nidine'é Ízrel yaa nídanookąąhii yee nich'į' ádaaní bá yísíníłts'ą́ą'go biná'ookąąhígíí t'áá ałtso baa ákonínízin doo .
PRED:	Listen to my prayer and regulations , and listen to the people of Israel : Listen to listen to my plea .
GOLD:	“ May your eyes be open to my requests and to the requests of your people Israel . May you hear and answer them whenever they cry out to you .

ID:	5356
INPUT:	T'áá áko dił haghánílínígíí ásdįįd , áko hąąh dah haz'ánígíí náázdiidzáago hoł bééhoozin .
PRED:	So the man was healed , and he healed it . So he left the door of the man and left it .
GOLD:	Immediately the bleeding stopped , and she could feel in her body that she had been healed of her terrible condition .

ID:	5357
INPUT:	Áádóó hwe'eda'alyaii áádóó bik'ee dazhdiniihii índa bee haz'áanii doo bik'eh dahojííł'įįdii éí doo ła' bee ánáádazhdidoolchxǫǫł da ; kéédahojit'ínígóó ádił nida'dziiszíi'ii éí bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáhodiyeeshniłgo , t'óó badaa'ihii hwee dahólóonii hąąh dadeeshdahgo shidine'é dajílį́į doo áádóó haDiyin God nishłį́į doo .
PRED:	They will be ashamed of their idols , and I will erase their sins from their sins and detestable sins . I will be able to save themselves from their sins and their sins . I will be their God , and they will be their God .
GOLD:	They will never again pollute themselves with their idols and vile images and rebellion , for I will save them from their sinful apostasy . I will cleanse them . Then they will truly be my people , and I will be their God .

ID:	5358
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí dził ayóó ádaat'éii nidahalin ; bee ánihoyí'aahii tónteel ayóó íídéetą́'ígíí nidahalin ; Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ni éí diné índa naaldlooshii baa áhólyą́ .
PRED:	The mountains are as majestic as the Lord is like the ocean depths of the sea . You are like animals that scurry along the seashore .
GOLD:	Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains , your justice like the ocean depths.You care for people and animals alike , O Lord .

ID:	5359
INPUT:	Nihí ałdó' hada'íínółní . Nihijéí bidziilgo ádeínóhsin , háálá Bóhólníihii nídoodáłígíí koshídę́ę́' hadziih .
PRED:	But you will be strong , for the Lord will answer me .
GOLD:	You , too , must be patient . Take courage , for the coming of the Lord is near .

ID:	5360
INPUT:	Ákohgo aláahgo naat'áanii bee haz'áanii íidoolíłígíí éí aláahgo bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'ą́ą́góó , hótsaago bił haz'ą́ą nidi , t'áá át'é dadoo'nihgo asdzání danilíinii t'áá ałtso badahastiin , t'áá éí diné alááh ádaat'éii índa a'oh ádaat'éii bił danilį́į doo .
PRED:	Then the king 's kingdom will be mocked by the Kingdom of the Kingdom of Heaven . He will be honored , but everyone will be married to her husband .
GOLD:	When this decree is published throughout the king 's vast empire , husbands everywhere , whatever their rank , will receive proper respect from their wives ! ”

ID:	5361
INPUT:	Áko bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii hágo bizhdííniidgo hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii binahjį' ábijiní , Haash yit'éego Séítan t'áá bí ha'ídínóolchééł ?
PRED:	Then Jesus called the teachers of religious law and asked him , “ Are you going to carry out the way ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus called them over and responded with an illustration . “ How can Satan cast out Satan ? ” he asked .

ID:	5362
INPUT:	Áádóó Ízrel bibee ádaa hodzódli' bidáahgi hólǫ́ǫgo baa halne' . Éí bąągo Ízrel áádóó Íífreiyim ba'át'e' yii' didoogoh , áádóó Júdah dine'é ałdó' ákódoonííł .
PRED:	When you are proud , you will rise up and fall into the desert , and Israel will live in safety .
GOLD:	“ The arrogance of Israel testifies against her ; Israel and Ephraim will stumble under their load of guilt.Judah , too , will fall with them .

ID:	5363
INPUT:	Áko Ruth éí Mó'ab dine'é jílíinii ázhdííniid , Kwe'é ałdó' kóshidííniid , Shidá'ák'ehgi ałtso da'ííyizhjį' tsíłkéí shá nidaal'a'í t'éí bíighahgi nanináa doo .
PRED:	One day Ruth said to Ruth , “ This is what the young man said to me , ‘ I 'll live in my field . '
GOLD:	Then Ruth said , “ What 's more , Boaz even told me to come back and stay with his harvesters until the entire harvest is completed . ”

ID:	5364
INPUT:	Diné t'ah bich'į' yájíłti'go , nááda'iiłniihii índa kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi siláo binanit'a'í áádóó Sádjusii danilíinii hach'į' niikai ,
PRED:	While they were speaking , the leading priests and the teachers of religious leaders arrived at the Temple .
GOLD:	While Peter and John were speaking to the people , they were confronted by the priests , the captain of the Temple guard , and some of the Sadducees .

ID:	5365
INPUT:	Háá'áyį́į́h jį́ éí ts'ídá diyingo óolzin doo
PRED:	For the Sabbath
GOLD:	Wisdom from the

ID:	5366
INPUT:	Háálá shizéé' deidoot'įįł yiniyé shaa nidaa'na' , jó'akon . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné ayóó ádaat'éego dabidziilii shiniyé ahínéikah . Bee haz'áanii héti'ígíí índa ádił ni'iiszíhígíí doo yiniinaa ádaat'į́į da .
PRED:	“ Look , my life is coming , ” says the Lord . “ Look , my life is filled with great power , and those who have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	They have set an ambush for me.Fierce enemies are out there waiting , Lord , though I have not sinned or offended them .

ID:	5367
INPUT:	Éí kóbididííniił , Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God , t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Diltłish bee nidanihi'ditseedgo ánihideeshłííł biniinaa daohdlą́ áádóó nihił nidahondooh le' áádóó nídaohkwih índa danohnéego doo náádidoohjah da .
PRED:	Say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will test you with your sword , and I will make you drunk with my sword . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Now tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Drink from this cup of my anger . Get drunk and vomit ; fall to rise no more , for I am sending terrible wars against you . '

ID:	5368
INPUT:	Tł'oh naadą́ą́' agháago yá'át'éehii hwiyiyíí<unk> doo nít'éé' . Jó , tsé bąąhdę́ę́' tsés'ná bitł'izh bee hwiih nohłį́įgo ánihiishłaa doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	You gave birth to a spring of barley harvest , and you gave birth to honey .
GOLD:	But I would feed you with the finest wheat.I would satisfy you with wild honey from the rock . ”

ID:	5369
INPUT:	Wózhǫ́ shádi'ááhjígo Júdah dine'é bikin hadaas'áii éí Íídam kéyah hoodzo bich'į'goígíí éí kódahoolyé : Kábziyel , Ííder , Jéígar ,
PRED:	These are the tribes of Judah who lived in the south side of the tribe of Judah . These are the boundaries of the tribe of Edom .
GOLD:	The towns of Judah situated along the borders of Edom in the extreme south were Kabzeel , Eder , Jagur ,

ID:	5370
INPUT:	Náhookǫsjigo díí saad baa hólne' : Bóhólníihii áníłní , Ízrel dine'é t'ą́ą́' anáhítłíishii , nánídááh ; doo sháháchį'go ninísh'į́į da , háálá naa a'ááh nisin ; hool'áágóó doo sháháchį' da doo , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel are saying , ‘ I am coming to meet you , O people of Israel , for I am filled with unfailing love .
GOLD:	Therefore , go and give this message to Israel . This is what the Lord says : “ O Israel , my faithless people , come home to me again , for I am merciful.I will not be angry with you forever .

ID:	5371
INPUT:	Filístiya dine'é éí ałdó' kéyah ayeídi áádóó Júdah shádi'ááhjígo kin hadaas'áhígíí Beth-shíímesh áádóó Éíjalan áádóó <unk> <unk> áádóó Sóko áádóó Tímnah índa <unk> zo , éí binaagóó bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí ałdó' t'áá bił yaatįįh yikai , áko t'áá ákwii kéédahat'į́ .
PRED:	The Philistines went out to the south of the Philistines and Beth-shemesh , and Beth-shemesh , along with their surrounding villages . They also went to Timnah , along with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	And the Philistines had raided towns located in the foothills of Judah and in the Negev of Judah . They had already captured and occupied Beth-shemesh , Aijalon , Gederoth , Soco with its villages , Timnah with its villages , and Gimzo with its villages .

ID:	5372
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , diné bijééhkałii nahonishłingo t'áadoo bee <unk> dziihí da .
PRED:	“ I am as deaf as deaf as deaf as I live .
GOLD:	I choose to hear nothing , and I make no reply .

ID:	5373
INPUT:	Áádóó ákót'ée dooleeł , Shidine'é doo danohłį́į da , bi'doo'niidiits'ídá t'áá éí haz'ą́ągi , Diyin God hináanii ba'áłchíní danilį́ bi'di'níi dooleeł .
PRED:	And you will be my people , and you will be my people . They will be their children , and they will be their children .
GOLD:	And , “ Then , at the place where they were told , ‘ You are not my people , 'there they will be called ‘ children of the living God . ' ”

ID:	5374
INPUT:	Áká a'doolwoł biniyé sohodizin
PRED:	Wisdom for the Temple
GOLD:	Taw

ID:	5375
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóósh diyin dabidi'níinii ła' nahałtingo íidoolíiłgo yíneel'ą́ ? Yót'áahdiísh nahałtingo íidoolíiłgo yíneel'ą́ ? Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii , ni lą́ą nídahodiłtį́įhgo á<unk> į́ . Éí bąą niba' ádaniit'ée dooleeł , háálá díí t'áá ałtso íinilaa .
PRED:	“ Are you the nations of the nations of the nations ? Are you able to understand what the Lord says ? You are saying , ‘ He is the God of the heavens , for he has made us holy . ' ”
GOLD:	Can any of the worthless foreign gods send us rain ? Does it fall from the sky by itself ? No , you are the one , O Lord our God ! Only you can do such things.So we will wait for you to help us .

ID:	5376
INPUT:	Áko t'áá nináháhááh bik'eh ch'iyáán bee ída'azįįdgo óolzin doo , áádóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' t'áá ałtso Féro áníinii bik'ehgo áłah áńdaal'įįh doo , índa kin hadaas'áágóó ch'iyáán nooh nídaachíhígíí baa ádahojilyą́ą doo biniyé niho'dee'nil doo .
PRED:	In the fourteenth year of the month of the month of the year of all the grain and grain offerings , grain , and grain , and food they will eat .
GOLD:	Have them gather all the food produced in the good years that are just ahead and bring it to Pharaoh 's storehouses . Store it away , and guard it so there will be food in the cities .

ID:	5377
INPUT:	Bik'ehgo neiildeeh yę́ę doo deiit'į́į da ; Diyin God yá dahalne'ii doo ła' naagháa da , áádóó haa nízahjį' kót'ée dooleełígíí éí nihitahdóó doo ła' bił bééhóziní da .
PRED:	We do n't know that we have not been united with us . We do n't know what we are going to live among us .
GOLD:	We no longer see your miraculous signs.All the prophets are gone , and no one can tell us when it will end .

ID:	5378
INPUT:	Áko John haa ch'íhoní'ą́ągo ání , Yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' Níłch'i Diyinii hasbídí nahalingo hak'ijį' bidah hooleełgo yiiłtsą́ , áko t'áá ákwii dah neezdá .
PRED:	John said to John , “ I saw the Spirit of the heavens like the heavens , and the Spirit of God appeared to him .
GOLD:	Then John testified , “ I saw the Holy Spirit descending like a dove from heaven and resting upon him .

ID:	5379
INPUT:	John lá háádę́ę́' bee óhólníihii bik'ehgo tó yee asį́į́h nít'éé' ? Yá'ąąshdę́ę́' daats'í , éí doodaléi' diné bits'ą́ą́dóó daats'í ?
PRED:	For John the Baptist did he baptize baptize baptize baptize with water from heaven ?
GOLD:	“ Did John 's authority to baptize come from heaven , or was it merely human ? ”

ID:	5380
INPUT:	T'áá ałch'ijí nineel'ánídóó óola ałk'ésgizígíí bits'ánít'i'gi ałdó' óola naakigo ahéédeelghasígíí yídayiishcha'go éí bee ayidgi dah siłtsoozígíí íífad wolyéii bik'ijį' awostisjį' t'áá ałch'ijí bídajiishcha' .
PRED:	The top of the gold cords of the chestpiece to the ephod and the chestpiece to the ephod below the chestpiece .
GOLD:	They tied the other ends of the cords to the gold settings on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod .

ID:	5381
INPUT:	Ákohgo Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Azhą́ Mózes áádóó Sámuel shidááhdóó yiizį' nidi , díí dine'é bich'ijí aséłtą́ągo t'áadoo tsídíkéez da . Doo shá biyeet'į́į́' ánízáágóó yówehjį' aníłkaad .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ As surely as the Lord spoke to me , I did n't even lift my mind to the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Even if Moses and Samuel stood before me pleading for these people , I would n't help them . Away with them ! Get them out of my sight !

ID:	5382
INPUT:	Jesus áhodííniid , T'óó kónígháníjį' adinídíín nihił hólǫ́ . Adinídíín t'ah nihee hólónídą́ą́' nidaahkai , doodago éí chahałheeł nihik'iidooldoh ; chahałheełgóó naagháhígíí yigááłgóó doo bił bééhózin da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You know the light of light , but you do n't know the light of darkness . You do n't know the light of darkness .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	5383
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í haadzíi'go ání , Bił dahołne' , T'áá háiida béésh éé' háidii'nilígíí ádaa has'nihígi át'éego éí béésh éé' biishdoogáłígíí ádaa hojó'niih lágo .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to the king of Israel , “ Anyone who is wearing a beautiful robe in a furnace . ”
GOLD:	The king of Israel sent back this answer : “ A warrior putting on his sword for battle should not boast like a warrior who has already won . ”

ID:	5384
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí índa ooljéé' bá nihonít'i' bijį́įjį' oochííłgóó t'áá ałtso dandósin doo .
PRED:	In the day of the sun and the moon will fear you forever .
GOLD:	May they fear you as long as the sun shines , as long as the moon remains in the sky.Yes , forever !

ID:	5385
INPUT:	Ákohgo índa danihitsi'ké nihaa dahidii'nił , áádóó nihí ałdó' danihitsi'ké nihaa dahidoohnił , áko kéédahwiit'į́įgo t'ááłá'í dine'é dadiidleeł .
PRED:	Then we will take our daughters and daughters and daughters . We will be our daughters , and we will live with you .
GOLD:	then we will give you our daughters , and we 'll take your daughters for ourselves . We will live among you and become one people .

ID:	5386
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá ałtso índa tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii John Tó Yee Asį́įhii tó yee dabíísį́į'ii éí díí deidiizts'ą́ą'go ádadííniid , Diyin God ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éé lá ,
PRED:	And all the people and the teachers of religious law heard John the Baptist and the Baptist heard what he said , “ He is right ! ”
GOLD:	When they heard this , all the people — even the tax collectors — agreed that God 's way was right , for they had been baptized by John .

ID:	5387
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman bił hóóne' , Shímiyai éí Jerúsalemdóó Gathgóó naayá , áádóó áádę́ę́' nínáánádzá .
PRED:	When Solomon learned what he had happened , he returned to Jerusalem and returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Solomon heard that Shimei had left Jerusalem and had gone to Gath and returned .

ID:	5388
INPUT:	Nidi shik'is nílíinii , t'óó diné nílíinii , Diyin God bidááh yáníłti'go háishą' ásht'į́ nínízin ? Da' hashtł'ish łeets'aa'ásh diné ábiilaii áyididooniił , Ha'át'íí biniyé kót'éego áshiinilaa ?
PRED:	But my friend , my friend , why are you trying to argue with God ? Are you the one who made the clay ?
GOLD:	No , do n't say that . Who are you , a mere human being , to argue with God ? Should the thing that was created say to the one who created it , “ Why have you made me like this ? ”

ID:	5389
INPUT:	Kintah da'nítiingóó ániid nidaakaígíí índa hadaastihii naazhjéé' ; nich'eekę'í índa nitsíłkéí éí diltłish bee nidabi'diztseed ; náhóóchįįd yę́ędą́ą́' yíníghą́ą'go doo bik'édí nílį́į́góó nidasíníłtseed .
PRED:	The merchants of the city , the city of the city , and the houses of the city will be killed , and your sword will be killed .
GOLD:	“ See them lying in the streets — young and old , boys and girls , killed by the swords of the enemy.You have killed them in your anger , slaughtering them without mercy .

ID:	5390
INPUT:	T'áá ha'át'éegoda doo nidoołnish da ; díí bee nihoní'áanii ahóyéel'áágóó náás da'ahíínółchííhgóó t'áá danihiníghanígi t'áá ánółtso nihá át'ée doo .
PRED:	You must not eat any good works . You must never be observed from generation to generation to generation .
GOLD:	You must not do any work at all ! This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	5391
INPUT:	Haash yit'éego shinanit'a'í bá nidaal'a'í a'ohgo ádaat'éii siláo yinanit'a'í nilíinii níwehjį' bi'dííłnihgo Ííjip dine'é bitsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí lą'ígo índa dabisiláo łį́į́' yee nidaabaahígíí baa dzíínílíi doo ?
PRED:	Why do you think of my master 's officers ? How can you trust in the chariot of Egypt ?
GOLD:	With your tiny army , how can you think of challenging even the weakest contingent of my master 's troops , even with the help of Egypt 's chariots and charioteers ?

ID:	5392
INPUT:	shidine'é bitsį' ałdó' daołghał áádóó dabikágí bik'i dahołdlaad índa dabits'in nidahohtį́įhgo dahołne' ; atsį' doobish biniyé bee abézhí biih yi'nilígi át'éego ádaoł'į́ .
PRED:	“ You will eat my flesh and flesh — the flesh of my people — the flesh of my flesh — the bones of my people .
GOLD:	Yes , you eat my people 's flesh , strip off their skin , and break their bones.You chop them uplike meat for the cooking pot .

ID:	5393
INPUT:	Diyin God bich'į' dahohtaał ; bízhi' baa dahohniihgo dahohtaał ! Éí yót'ááh hiníláii yikáá' náhodididleehii yéego bich'į' dahohtaał ! Bízhi' éí Jii<unk> wolyé , éí bidááhdóó nihił nidahoozhǫǫh le' !
PRED:	Sing to the name of God ! Sing praises to the heavens ! Let the heavens sing praises to him in his name .
GOLD:	Sing praises to God and to his name ! Sing loud praises to him who rides the clouds.His name is the Lord — rejoice in his presence !

ID:	5394
INPUT:	íhooł'aahii nahonitinii bił ahijíłt'é jileehígíí hoł t'áá áko doo , áádóó naalnishí hananit'a'í bił ahijíłt'éhígíí hoł t'áá áko doo . Kin bee bóhólníihii éí Béíyalzííbab deiłníigo , kin bee bóhólníihii ba'áłchíní ałdó' t'ah yówehgo ákódeiłníi doo !
PRED:	Then he will tell his disciples , and he will tell you what he has said , ‘ The master 's servant will do , ' and he will ask , ‘ The Kingdom of Baal will never again be heard . ' ”
GOLD:	Students are to be like their teacher , and slaves are to be like their master . And since I , the master of the household , have been called the prince of demons , the members of my household will be called by even worse names !

ID:	5395
INPUT:	Áádóó Íshmeiyel ałdó' Mízpahdi Gedaláíyah éí Jew dine'é t'áá ałtso yił dah yikahii índa Kaldíya dine'é ákwii nidaakaii éí diné nidaabaahii danilíinii t'áá yił dayííghą́ą́' .
PRED:	Then Gedaliah and all the people who were at Mizpah to Mizpah , who had fled to Gedaliah at Mizpah .
GOLD:	Ishmael also killed all the Judeans and the Babylonian soldiers who were with Gedaliah at Mizpah .

ID:	5396
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii , éí díí nahalin : łóó' bee hahaltsósí taah deistsoozgo łóó' t'áá ał'ąą ádaat'eełii áłah áyiilaa ;
PRED:	And the Kingdom of Heaven is like a fish , a fish in the boat with nets .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a fishing net that was thrown into the water and caught fish of every kind .

ID:	5397
INPUT:	t'áá bee ádee hazdoodzí'ígíí , doodaii' t'áá bee ádá nihozhdiní'ánígíí hwii' sizíinii a'ohgo í'dólzin ájiił'įįhgo hahastiin éí há bohoníłdzilgo íidoolííł , doodaii' doo ílį́į́góó íidoolííł .
PRED:	“ If you swear by your vows , you will fulfill your vows and pledges will fulfill your vows , and you will fulfill your vows .
GOLD:	So her husband may either confirm or nullify any vows or pledges she makes to deny herself .

ID:	5398
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Ch'il na'atł'o'ii bineest'ą' bits'ą́ą́dóó wáin ániidíii shóot'eehígi át'éego , ła' ádííniid , <unk> dįįh lágo , háálá ak'ihojidlí bii' hólǫ́ , áko shinaal'a'í binahjį' doo ałtso ádeeshdįįł da biniyé doo ákódeeshníił da .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The fig tree is like a fig tree , ” the Lord said , “ I will never again destroy my enemies . I will never destroy them . ”
GOLD:	“ But I will not destroy them all , ” says the Lord. “ For just as good grapes are found among a cluster of bad ones ( and someone will say , ‘ Do n't throw them all away — some of those grapes are good ! ' ) , so I will not destroy all Israel.For I still have true servants there .

ID:	5399
INPUT:	Áko biyaajį' nitsidinígo' bich'į' nahodeeshłaał biniyé , nidi áshidííniid , T'áadoo ánít'íní ! Ni áádóó nik'isóó Jesus baa hane'ii dayoodlánígíí yił nidaal'a'í ła' ásht'į́ . Diyin God bich'į' nahółá ! Háálá Jesus baa hane'ii bee náásgóó ádahodooníiłii bee baa dahojilne' .
PRED:	Then he bowed down to the ground and said , “ Do n't worship me in front of my dear brothers and sisters . You know that I am the one of the church in the name of Jesus Christ . ”
GOLD:	Then I fell down at his feet to worship him , but he said , “ No , do n't worship me . I am a servant of God , just like you and your brothers and sisters who testify about their faith in Jesus . Worship only God . For the essence of prophecy is to give a clear witness for Jesus . ”

ID:	5400
INPUT:	tł'óó'góó dah náánéiteeh , kintahdi nináánádáah łeh , kin naanídaaz'áágóó aa nááhéesdáah łeh .
PRED:	When they enter the house of the house , they wait for the dead .
GOLD:	She is often in the streets and markets , soliciting at every corner .

ID:	5401
INPUT:	Shoo , iiná áádóó yá'át'éehii áádóó aniné índa doo yá'áshóonii díí jį́ nihidáahgi hólǫ́ǫgo áshłaa .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you today and the wicked and the wicked .
GOLD:	“ Now listen ! Today I am giving you a choice between life and death , between prosperity and disaster .

ID:	5402
INPUT:	Áko ałk'isóó danilínígíí bił béédahoozingo Sesaríya góyaa hoł daaskai , áádóó <unk> góó adahas'a' .
PRED:	When his brothers saw that he was in Caesarea and went to the region of Caesarea and then they went to the region .
GOLD:	When the believers heard about this , they took him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus , his hometown .

ID:	5403
INPUT:	Háálá diné awáalyaa sidáhígíí , bee bik'i hodiit'áanii t'áadoo bééhóziní deesh'aałgi , doo shił beełt'ée da .
PRED:	For I am writing to the prisoners of prison , but I do n't want you to send you into prison .
GOLD:	For it makes no sense to send a prisoner to the emperor without specifying the charges against him ! ”

ID:	5404
INPUT:	Éí Sáíman , Iskáriyat biye' nilíinii , Júdas ábijiní , háálá t'áá éí nináhodidoo'ááł , éí naakits'áadahígíí ła' atah nilį́ .
PRED:	Judas Iscariot , the disciple who was Judas , said , “ He is the twelve disciples , for he is twelve disciples . ”
GOLD:	He was speaking of Judas , son of Simon Iscariot , one of the Twelve , who would later betray him .

ID:	5405
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You must also sacrifice one male goat as a sin offering , along with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	5406
INPUT:	Éí diné t'áá ákogi át'éii jílį́įgo , diné doo yá'ádaashóonii bitahgi kééhojit'į́įgo bee haz'áanii doo yik'ehgóó ádaat'ínígíí joo'į́įgo áádóó jidiits'a'go biniinaa t'áá ákwíí jį́ hwii' sizíinii t'áá ákogi át'éhígíí bich'į' nahojiiłnáá nít'éé' .
PRED:	The godly have no attention to the wicked , but the godly have heard what is right and right .
GOLD:	Yes , Lot was a righteous man who was tormented in his soul by the wickedness he saw and heard day after day .

ID:	5407
INPUT:	Yisnááh daniidlį́įgo naakits'áadah náhááh góne' , neeznáá nídízííd binih , ashdla'góó yoołkáałgo Jerúsalemdę́ę́' diné léi' ła' yisdááyáá lágo shaa níyáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áii ts' ídá ałtso bi'disná , shiłníigo shił hoolne' .
PRED:	On January 15 , during the twelfth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , a man who had been cut off from Jerusalem . A man who had been cut off from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On January 8 , during the twelfth year of our captivity , a survivor from Jerusalem came to me and said , “ The city has fallen ! ”

ID:	5408
INPUT:	Doodaii' háí aláahgo naat'áanii shį́įshą' , náánáła' aláahgo naat'áanii yich'į' anaa' ííléehgo , da' doósh áłtsé dínóodaał da , áádóó yaa nitsídookos da , naadiindi mííl siláo yee shich'į' hideeskaígíí neeznáadi mííl bee bidááh deeshbahgo daats'í bíighah nízingo ?
PRED:	“ No one can tell the king what is going to do ? ” the king asked . “ How can I go to battle ? ”
GOLD:	“ Or what king would go to war against another king without first sitting down with his counselors to discuss whether his army of 10,000 could defeat the 20,000 soldiers marching against him ?

ID:	5409
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel diné danilíinii éí Náftalai dine'é áádóó Ásher dine'é índa Manáseh dine'é t'áá át'é bits'ą́ą́dóó áłah silį́į'go Mídiyan dine'é yikéé' aheezhjéé' .
PRED:	The men of Naphtali were from Naphtali , including the tribe of Naphtali , including the people of Manasseh and the Midianites .
GOLD:	Then Gideon sent for the warriors of Naphtali , Asher , and Manasseh , who joined in chasing the army of Midian .

ID:	5410
INPUT:	Ninish'náájí bee dah dinilnii'go nahasdzáán adabiisna' .
PRED:	Your right hand is left by your right hand .
GOLD:	You raised your right hand , and the earth swallowed our enemies .

ID:	5411
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí hool'áágóó bóhólníih doo , Záíyan nílíinii , niDiyin God oochííłgóó t'áá ałtso yá nant'áa doo . Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of Zion , the God of Zion , will rule over all generations .
GOLD:	The Lord will reign forever.He will be your God , O Jerusalem , throughout the generations.Praise the Lord !

ID:	5412
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii jidósingo éí iiná yaa halóós , áádóó éí hwee hólǫ́ǫgo t'áadoo anáhóót'i'í jiináa doo , áádóó doo yá'ádaat'éehii doo hainít'į́į da doo .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord is a life-giving fountain ; it is good to those who do good .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord leads to life , bringing security and protection from harm .

ID:	5413
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é éí diné bist'e' ła' nídeidiinil , áádóó t'áadoo Bóhólníihii nídeídíłkidí nídeidiinil .
PRED:	So the people of Israel picked up their hands to the Lord , and they forced them to serve the Lord .
GOLD:	So the Israelites examined their food , but they did not consult the Lord .

ID:	5414
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , yisdánihíínínilii nízhi' baa ha'niih doo biniyé nihíká anilyeed ; nízhi' binahjį' yisdánihínííł áádóó ádił nida'ayeelzíi'ii nihá yóó'adí'aah .
PRED:	O God , we pray for your name , O God , for we have saved us from our sins .
GOLD:	Help us , O God of our salvation ! Help us for the glory of your name.Save us and forgive our sinsfor the honor of your name .

ID:	5415
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , chánahgo nánooshkąąh , Biniiłt'aajį' anáníshchéehii shá nílį́ áádóó dahináanii bikéyahdi ni t'éí shíí' nílį́ , dishní .
PRED:	O Lord , I cry out to you , O Lord , for you are my refuge .
GOLD:	Then I pray to you , O Lord.I say , “ You are my place of refuge.You are all I really want in life .

ID:	5416
INPUT:	Índída hakin góde hajizh'eezhgo biyaa nizh'níką́ , áko Diyin God joosdląądgo , haghandóó danilíinii bił t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá íiyisí hoł dahózhǫ́ .
PRED:	Then he took the house of God and gave him a blessing . Then everyone who was filled with him and was filled with joy .
GOLD:	He brought them into his house and set a meal before them , and he and his entire household rejoiced because they all believed in God .

ID:	5417
INPUT:	índa bee nihot'áanii dooleeł biniyé bohoníłdzilgo Jéíkab baa deet'ą́ , áko hool'áágóó bee aha'deet'áanii át'éego Ízrel baa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	He made this covenant with the people of Jacob , so that Jacob made a covenant with the covenant of Jacob .
GOLD:	He confirmed it to Jacob as a decree , and to the people of Israel as a never-ending covenant :

ID:	5418
INPUT:	Nidi dandósin doo biniyé ádił ni'iidzííh yóó'ahidí'aah .
PRED:	But listen to those who do not forgive their sins .
GOLD:	But you offer forgiveness , that we might learn to fear you .

ID:	5419
INPUT:	Lébanangi gad jíl'áii alááh ádajít'éii áádóó ayóó ádajít'éii t'áá ájít'é áádóó Béíshangi chéch'il jíl'áii t'áá ájít'é ,
PRED:	And the mighty cedars of Lebanon , including the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	He will cut down the tall cedars of Lebanonand all the mighty oaks of Bashan .

ID:	5420
INPUT:	Áádóó ha'át'íí lá bee atídoolnííł lá daniizį́į'go ch'ééh yaa nitsínáádaazkééz , áko t'óó yówehda hoł yéé' áhodoolíiłii yee hach'į' hanáádahaasdzíi'go t'óó hwéédeideezhchid , háálá áhoodzaaígíí biniinaa diné t'áá át'é Diyin God yaa dahaniih .
PRED:	But when they were afraid of him , they could n't be afraid of him . They were afraid of him , because they were afraid of what God had done .
GOLD:	The council then threatened them further , but they finally let them go because they did n't know how to punish them without starting a riot . For everyone was praising God

ID:	5421
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Anointing Oil

ID:	5422
INPUT:	Chérab náánáła'ígíí ashdla'áadahdi ké silá bita' ánízah ; éí chérab t'áá áłah t'áá aheeníłtso áádóó t'áá aheełt'éego ályaa .
PRED:	The two feet of each other was 71/2 feet high , and each was 71/2 feet high .
GOLD:	The two cherubim were identical in shape and size ;

ID:	5423
INPUT:	Éí bąą , Áhodeeshdįįł , dííniid ; doo ázhdoołdįįłígíí áádóó t'óó báhádzidgo bee atíjíł'íinii nahjį' kózhdoolíłígíí biniyé Mózes hach'ą́ą́h ííyá .
PRED:	So he said , “ I will destroy you , and you are destroyed by the anger of Moses . ”
GOLD:	So he declared he would destroy them.But Moses , his chosen one , stepped between the Lord and the people.He begged him to turn from his anger and not destroy them .

ID:	5424
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Jó , ha'a'aahdę́ę́' áádóó e'e'aahdę́ę́' shidine'é yisdádeesh'nił .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will rescue my people from the west .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : You can be sure that I will rescue my people from the east and from the west .

ID:	5425
INPUT:	Ayóó'ó'ó'ní bee nił hashne'ígíí éí Diyin God bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é ts'ídá bik'eh dahoniil'į́į dooleełii ááhdishní . Bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii , Ayóó'áda'ahíínóh'ní , nínígíí éí hane' yá'át'éehii baa adaho'niine' yę́ędą́ą́' dasidoots'ą́ą́' , éí bik'eh deínóhkááh .
PRED:	Love the law of God 's law , and obey all his commands . Love each other 's commands , and love each other .
GOLD:	Love means doing what God has commanded us , and he has commanded us to love one another , just as you heard from the beginning .

ID:	5426
INPUT:	Éí bąą bá nidaal'a'í ałdó' łahgo át'éego ts'ídá t'áá ákogi é'ét'é yá nidaal'a'í nahalingo yí'ínídadiil'įįhígíí doo t'óó bik'ee ił ahayói da . Yaa nidaaskaígíí bik'ehgo até'él'į́ bii'jį' t'óó bá nidahwiizt'i' doo .
PRED:	So do n't let us think of justice , for those who do what is right . They do what is right .
GOLD:	So it is no wonder that his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness . In the end they will get the punishment their wicked deeds deserve .

ID:	5427
INPUT:	Míriyam áádóó Éran éí Mózes yik'ijį' haadzíí'
PRED:	Miriam and Aaron
GOLD:	The Complaints of Miriam and Aaron

ID:	5428
INPUT:	Mt . 18 : <unk>
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Lost Son

ID:	5429
INPUT:	Éí yiltsą́ , áádóó awéé' bídii'na'go índa i'niiłchį́įgo niigaígíí yik'ee hadoo'níí' .
PRED:	On that day the baby and the child 's child died , and he wore a little child .
GOLD:	She was pregnant , and she cried out because of her labor pains and the agony of giving birth .

ID:	5430
INPUT:	kóní , Diyin God bizaad yidiits'a'ii áádóó Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii bits'ą́ą́dóó ił ééhózin bił bééhózinii índa Aláahgo Ayóó'ábóodziilii ił ádzaii yiníł'íinii ni'jį' íítłizh , nidi t'áá yiníł'į́ :
PRED:	This is what God says : “ Listen to the Almighty , the Almighty , the Almighty , the Almighty , and the Almighty is greater than the Almighty .
GOLD:	the message of one who hears the words of God , who has knowledge from the Most High , who sees a vision from the Almighty , who bows down with eyes wide open :

ID:	5431
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa dahohniih ! Háálá nihiDiyin God baa dahwii'niihgo bich'į' dahwiitaałgo yá'át'ééh , háálá ayóó ánóolnin , áádóó haa ha'niihgo t'éiyá hweełt'é .
PRED:	Praise the Lord our God , for he has done wonderful things for us , for he is filled with joy .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! How good to sing praises to our God ! How delightful and how fitting !

ID:	5432
INPUT:	Éíhaz naadiin binááhaigo aláahgo nant'á silį́į'go hastą́'áadah nááhaijį' Jerúsalemgi nant'áá nít'éé' , nidi t'áadoo t'áá ákogi ájít'į́įgo Bóhólníihii binááł jideeyáa da ; hazhé'é David áát'įįdígi t'áadoo ádziidzaa da .
PRED:	Jehoahaz was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he refused to rule over Jerusalem . He refused to do what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He did not do what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	5433
INPUT:	Nidi lą'í nááhaigóó ha'íínílníigo hoolzhiizh áádóó hak'ijį' nílį́įgo ná dahalne'ii niNíłch'i Diyinii bii' dahólóonii bee hoł dahwíínílne' , nidi doo dajíists'ą́ą' da ; éí bąą kéyah naaznilgóó dine'é danilíinii bílák'ee dahodííní'ą́ .
PRED:	But many years later , you will listen to the Holy Spirit , and you will listen to the Holy Spirit , but you will listen to the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	In your love , you were patient with them for many years . You sent your Spirit , who warned them through the prophets . But still they would n't listen ! So once again you allowed the peoples of the land to conquer them .

ID:	5434
INPUT:	Doodaii' díí diné bił béédahózingo éí t'ah bítséedidą́ą́' béégashii éí náánáła' béégashii niyé'á<unk> go , ákondi halį́į́' ílíinii t'áadoo yah ajííłt'e'góó , t'áá aaníí t'áá hó béégashii bik'é ninázh'doołtééł , áko daaztsáanii hó dooleeł .
PRED:	“ If a man knew that he had been circumcised , he must not leave the herd of ox or a donkey for a thief . But if he stole the ox or a thief , he must not accept the dead animal .
GOLD:	But if the ox had a reputation for goring , yet its owner failed to keep it under control , he must pay full compensation — a live ox for the dead one — but he may keep the dead ox .

ID:	5435
INPUT:	Azhé'é ba'áłchíní neinitinígi át'éego Diyin God nanihineeztą́ą'ii daats'í baa deisoonah . Shą́ą́' , Diyin God kóní : Shiye' nílíinii , Bóhólníihii t'áá hashkée yína'niłtinii t'áadoo doo níníziní . Índa nándiiteehgo t'áadoo nąąh nááháka'í .
PRED:	“ Do n't you think of your children , O God , whom did you think of your ancestors ? Do n't you remember what I am saying , O Lord your God ? Do n't let you be able to be able to fight your enemies .
GOLD:	And have you forgotten the encouraging words God spoke to you as his children ? He said , “ My child , do n't make light of the Lord 's discipline , and do n't give up when he corrects you .

ID:	5436
INPUT:	T'áadoo náníldzidí , háálá doo ádaa yádíníidzįįł da , doo nidi nił halą́ą da doo , háálá doo naa yáhásingo ándi'doolníił da , nidi ániid nanináádą́ą́' bee naa yáhóósįįdii baidiyíínah índa asdzání bąąh áhásdįįdii nahalingo yínííł nanináhígíí doo béénílniih da doo .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of shame , for you will be ashamed of shame , for you will be ashamed of you . You will be ashamed of your brother , and you will remember what you do .
GOLD:	“ Fear not ; you will no longer live in shame.Do n't be afraid ; there is no more disgrace for you.You will no longer remember the shame of your youthand the sorrows of widowhood .

ID:	5437
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Ádá hadíídzih ; biniyéii yéego bee hadíídzih , ní Jéíkab biNanit'a'í nilíinii .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ Speak to Jacob , your king , Jacob ! ”
GOLD:	“ Present the case for your idols , ” says the Lord. “ Let them show what they can do , ” says the King of Israel .

ID:	5438
INPUT:	T'áá ádzaagóó yisháałgo áshiilaago nishiizhnizh índa shinaagi doo naagháhígóó áshiilaa .
PRED:	He blocked my way with me , and he drew me into a pit .
GOLD:	He has dragged me off the path and torn me in pieces , leaving me helpless and devastated .

ID:	5439
INPUT:	Áko nááda'iiłniihii éí tsits'aa' dílzinii Bóhólníihii bibee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii t'áá bá haz'ą́ąjį' wóniidi ts'ídá aláahgo diyingo haz'ánígi diyingo naal'a'í chérabim wolyéii bit'a' biyaajį' nideiz'ą́ .
PRED:	The Ark of the Lord was placed in front of the Ark of the Covenant . He placed the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant in front of the cherubim .
GOLD:	Then the priests carried the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant into the inner sanctuary of the Temple — the Most Holy Place — and placed it beneath the wings of the cherubim .

ID:	5440
INPUT:	Áko diné yíl'áhígíí ákót'éego saad bighą́ągo éí Férisii danilíinii deidiizts'ą́ą'go , aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Férisii danilíinii éí Jesus deidoołtsoł biniyé siláo adeis'a' .
PRED:	When the crowd heard that Jesus was teaching , the leading priests and Pharisees arrested Jesus to arrest him .
GOLD:	When the Pharisees heard that the crowds were whispering such things , they and the leading priests sent Temple guards to arrest Jesus .

ID:	5441
INPUT:	Díí doo yá'áshóonii dine'é shizaad doo t'áá k'ad deidiizts'ą́ą'ii , doo ádidahól'áágóó yildahii áádóó diyin dabidi'níinii yá nidaal'a'í áádóó yich'į' nidahałáii éí t'áadoo bee chonáádajoot'įįhígóó díí sis yíchxǫ'ígi ádajít'ée doo .
PRED:	This is what the wicked say to me : “ The gods of my people have not been defiled by worshiping the gods of my people , and those who refuse to worship idols .
GOLD:	These wicked people refuse to listen to me . They stubbornly follow their own desires and worship other gods . Therefore , they will become like this loincloth — good for nothing !

ID:	5442
INPUT:	Doodaii' łódígíí łahgo ánáánádzaago łigaii silį́į'go náá'iiłniihii bich'į' náázhdoodááł .
PRED:	“ If the priest finds that the priest is ceremonially clean , he must return to the priest .
GOLD:	However , if the open sores heal and turn white like the rest of the skin , the person must return to the priest

ID:	5443
INPUT:	ádíshní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God yá'ąąshdi honílóonii , nánooshkąąh ; ayóó át'éii áádóó t'áá íiyisí bits'ąą hasti'ii nílíinii , Diyin God éí bee aha'deet'áanii áádóó aa a'ááh hasin ayóó'ádanó'níigo bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii yik'eh dahół'íinii yá hasht'eyósinii nílíinii ,
PRED:	Then I said , “ O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , please come from heaven and obey all who fear him , O God , who lives in his unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Lord , God of heaven , the great and awesome God who keeps his covenant of unfailing love with those who love him and obey his commands ,

ID:	5444
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jézebel hane' yił naal'a'ígíí ła' Iiláíjah yich'į' ayííł'a'go ání , Yiską́ągo kóhoodzaago diné nisíníłtseed yę́ęgi át'éego doo ákóniishłaa ládą́ą́' shí ałdó' t'ah yówehgo shidiyin danilíinii ákódashidoolííł .
PRED:	One day Jesse sent this message to Jezebel : “ If you have been killed , you will be killed , and you will be killed by my enemies . ”
GOLD:	So Jezebel sent this message to Elijah : “ May the gods strike me and even kill me if by this time tomorrow I have not killed you just as you killed them . ”

ID:	5445
INPUT:	Abáíjah bíyoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' Jerobówam éí t'áadoo bidziil násdlį́į' da . Áádóó Bóhólníihii atíhoolaago dadziztsą́ .
PRED:	Abijah became very angry with Jeroboam , and the Lord had died .
GOLD:	So Jeroboam of Israel never regained his power during Abijah 's lifetime , and finally the Lord struck him down and he died .

ID:	5446
INPUT:	Áádóó Andrew éí bił hajíí'áázh Jesus bich'į' bił jiní'áázh , áko Jesus honééł'į́į'go áhodííniid , Jó , Sáíman , John biye' ánít'į́į́ lá . <unk> yinílyée doo ( éí Peter ałdó' wolyé , éí tsé jiníigo óolyé ) .
PRED:	When they arrived , Jesus told him , “ I saw Simon , ” he said , “ he is the son of Simon ( which means “ You are called the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	Then Andrew brought Simon to meet Jesus . Looking intently at Simon , Jesus said , “ Your name is Simon , son of John — but you will be called Cephas ” ( which means “ Peter ” ) .

ID:	5447
INPUT:	Méí<unk> , <unk> nath índa Éltiikan ; éí bikin dah naazhjaa'ígíí t'áá bił hastą́ągo kin hadaas'áhígíí Júdah dine'é bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	The descendants of Asher included the tribe of Asher , the tribe of Judah , and the surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Maarath , Beth-anoth , and Eltekon — six towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5448
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii binááł Néídab áádóó Abáíhu éí kǫ' doo dílzingóó náádziisnii'ígíí biniinaa t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ dzineezná .
PRED:	But Nadab and Abihu died in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	But Nadab and Abihu died when they burned before the Lord the wrong kind of fire , different than he had commanded .

ID:	5449
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii Ízrel biDiyin God kóní , Bóhólníihii éí nihokáá'góó nahałtingo ánáyiidlaajį' tóshjeeh yázhí bii' ak'áán doo ádoodįįł da , tóshjeeh yázhí bii' ak'ah nidi doo ádoodįįł da .
PRED:	For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will not destroy your flour with olive oil , but no one will be able to destroy it .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : There will always be flour and olive oil left in your containers until the time when the Lord sends rain and the crops grow again ! ”

ID:	5450
INPUT:	Áko Diyin God éí adinídínígíí yinééł'į́į'go bił yá'íít'ééh , áádóó adinídínígíí chahałheeł yił ałts'áyíínil .
PRED:	God saw what he had seen , and he looked at night . He looked at night and darkness .
GOLD:	And God saw that the light was good . Then he separated the light from the darkness .

ID:	5451
INPUT:	Nidi Maikéíyah ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii hiná ; ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii yee shich'į' haadzí'ígíí t'éí bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	But Micaiah replied , “ As surely as the Lord lives , I will say , ‘ The Lord will answer me . '
GOLD:	But Micaiah replied , “ As surely as the Lord lives , I will say only what the Lord tells me to say . ”

ID:	5452
INPUT:	Niye' bitsi' , doodaii' nitsi' bich'é'é éí doo t'áá łichí'ígo ádíílíił da , háálá t'áá jilchí'ígo éí t'áá ni łiníchí'ígo í'diinilyaago át'é .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your daughter or daughter or daughter , for you are your sister 's sister .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your granddaughter , whether she is your son 's daughter or your daughter 's daughter , for this would violate yourself .

ID:	5453
INPUT:	Éísa éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinanit'a'í nilį́įgo táá' náhááh góne' Béíyasha éí Néídab yiyiisxį́įgo yitsásk'eh góne' nináánít'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	Asa 's reign in Judah 's reign , during the third year of King Asa 's reign .
GOLD:	Baasha killed Nadab in the third year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , and he became the next king of Israel .

ID:	5454
INPUT:	Áko ádahodííniid , Nida'diitł'óołgo Filístiya dine'é bílák'ee dandidiit'ááł biniyé naa niikai . Áko Sámson éí diné áyidííniid , T'áá nihí doo dashidiyoołhééłgóó bee shich'į' ádee hadahididoohdzih .
PRED:	Then they said , “ Get up your hand and throw you into your hand , ” they said , “ and do n't be afraid ! ” So Samson replied , “ We will certainly swear to me ! ”
GOLD:	But the men of Judah told him , “ We have come to tie you up and hand you over to the Philistines. ” “ All right , ” Samson said . “ But promise that you wo n't kill me yourselves . ”

ID:	5455
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Yisnááh danohłį́įgo Jerúsalemdóó Bábilangóó anihi'doojaa'go shá bohoolyaii t'áá ánółtso ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says to all the captives he has exiled to Babylon from Jerusalem :

ID:	5456
INPUT:	Áko biiskání Bóhólníihii ádííniidígíí yi'iilaago Ííjip dine'é bilį́į́' ałtso daneezná , nidi Ízrel dine'é bilį́į́' t'ááłá'í nidi t'áadoo ła' daaztsą́ą da .
PRED:	The next day the next day the Lord commanded the people of Israel , but not one of the Egyptians died .
GOLD:	And the Lord did just as he had said . The next morning all the livestock of the Egyptians died , but the Israelites did n't lose a single animal .

ID:	5457
INPUT:	Áko diné t'áá ałtso éí k'os níyizgo níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'é'étiinjį' análdohígíí nídayiiltsééh bik'eh diné t'áá ałtso nídiijahgo t'ááłá'í nítínígo dabiníbaal bich'é'étiingi nidahałáa łeh .
PRED:	When the cloud was finished at the entrance of the Tabernacle , everyone stops at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	When the people saw the cloud standing at the entrance of the tent , they would stand and bow down in front of their own tents .

ID:	5458
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí náájiiłniihígíí łikání halchingo yishchą́ą'go Bóhólníihii bijéí biyi'di ádííniid , Diné haniinaa ni' doo hóyée'go bá hanáádeesdzih da , háálá diné t'áá áłchíní nilį́į́dę́ę́' bijéí bii'dę́ę́' doo yá'át'éehii bił ádaat'į́ ; hináanii nináneel'ą́ąjį' ásíłdįįdígi át'éego hináanii doo ánáádeeshdįįł da .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ I 'm a pleasing aroma to the Lord . He said , ‘ I will not destroy the hearts of the wicked , for I will not destroy your hearts . I will not destroy your hearts . ' ”
GOLD:	And the Lord was pleased with the aroma of the sacrifice and said to himself , “ I will never again curse the ground because of the human race , even though everything they think or imagine is bent toward evil from childhood . I will never again destroy all living things .

ID:	5459
INPUT:	Áko Júdas nináhodiní'ánígíí éí haz'ánígi bił bééhózin , háálá Jesus t'áá ahą́ą́h hódahooł'aahii ákwii bił níjíkah nít'éé' .
PRED:	Judas realized that Judas had arrested Jesus , for he knew what he had happened .
GOLD:	Judas , the betrayer , knew this place , because Jesus had often gone there with his disciples .

ID:	5460
INPUT:	Nidi Jerúsalem éí siláo bináshzhiizhgo daołtsą́ągo , ádooldįįłígíí t'áá áyídídę́ę́' hadziihgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	But when you see , you will know that you will know that you will know that you are coming .
GOLD:	“ And when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies , then you will know that the time of its destruction has arrived .

ID:	5461
INPUT:	Táá' yiskánídą́ą́' nitélii yóó'eekaígíí t'áadoo bąąh níni'í , háálá éí shó<unk> t'e' . Háí diné shį́įshą' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso yinízinii jílį́ ? Jó , éí t'áá ni áádóó nizhé'é bighandóó danilíinii ałdó' .
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that the hour of the year of the age of Israel ? For all the people of Israel are your father , and you are all your relatives .
GOLD:	And do n't worry about those donkeys that were lost three days ago , for they have been found . And I am here to tell you that you and your family are the focus of all Israel 's hopes . ”

ID:	5462
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Cases of Personal Injury

ID:	5463
INPUT:	háálá t'áá ałtso dahoołtsą́ągo hwéédaasdzííd . Nidi t'áá áko bich'į' hadzoodzíi'go ábijiní , Nihił dahózhǫ́ . Shíyee' ásht'į́ ; t'áadoo nídaałdzidí .
PRED:	For they were afraid of him , and they were afraid of him . But when they saw him , he said , “ Do n't be afraid of me ! ”
GOLD:	They were all terrified when they saw him.But Jesus spoke to them at once . “ Do n't be afraid , ” he said . “ Take courage ! I am here ! ”

ID:	5464
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí yidiizts'ą́ą'go ádííniid , Diné doo bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí azee' ííł'íní doo yich'į' dadikáah da , nidi bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he said to the people , “ There is no one to help the sick . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he said , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do . ”

ID:	5465
INPUT:	áádóó ał'ąą dine'é éí ayóó át'é ił nilíinii As<unk> wolyéii Samériya kin hadaas'áajį' niyiizh'eezhígíí áádóó náádaała' éí tooh nílíní e'e'aahjí kéédahat'ínígíí índa náádaała'
PRED:	And the people of Samaria built a great nation from Samaria , along with the rivers of Samaria , and some of the other kings of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	They also sent greetings from the rest of the people whom the great and noble Ashurbanipal had deported and relocated in Samaria and throughout the neighboring lands of the province west of the Euphrates River .

ID:	5466
INPUT:	Abínígo aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii Jesus deidiyoołhéełgo yaa nídaast'įįd ,
PRED:	The leading priests and the leading priests to kill Jesus .
GOLD:	Very early in the morning the leading priests and the elders of the people met again to lay plans for putting Jesus to death .

ID:	5467
INPUT:	Atídashił'íinii índa shi'ana'í danilíinii éí t'óó ahayóí , nidi bee hahíínídzíi'ii doo bits'áosha' át'ée da .
PRED:	My enemies are crushed , but I ca n't turn away from me .
GOLD:	Many persecute and trouble me , yet I have not swerved from your laws .

ID:	5468
INPUT:	Áko Saul áádóó haye' Jánathan índa diné hoł naakaígíí éí t'áá Bénjamin bikéyahgi Gíbiyah kin haal'áadi dah yinééł , nidi Filístiya dine'é éí Míkmash báhátisdi dah yinééł .
PRED:	So Saul and Jonathan joined his men in the land of Benjamin , and the men of Benjamin were camped at Gibeah .
GOLD:	Saul and Jonathan and the troops with them were staying at Geba in the land of Benjamin . The Philistines set up their camp at Micmash .

ID:	5469
INPUT:	Diyin God yá halne'ii kóníigo yee haadzíi'ii bohodoolnííł biniyé kót'éego Jesus na'nitin : Hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii bee hahideesdzih , nahasdzáán niit'ą́ą́dóó nidanil'in yę́ę bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ This is what the Scriptures say : I will teach you to understand the meaning of the world .
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet : “ I will speak to you in parables.I will explain things hidden since the creation of the world . ”

ID:	5470
INPUT:	Háálá díí naakigo haz'ánígíí t'áá íiyisí baa nitséskees . <unk> dooya'go Christ bił hojílǫ́ǫ laanaa nisin , háálá áájí íiyisí yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	For this is why I am about this , and it is better to drink . It is better to be better off than the Messiah .
GOLD:	I 'm torn between two desires : I long to go and be with Christ , which would be far better for me .

ID:	5471
INPUT:	She'asdzą́ą́ éí shiza' niłchxonígíí doo yiníłdzil da , áádóó shidine'é t'áá ła' bił háíjé'ígíí nidi , doo shit'áahjį' dadikáah da .
PRED:	I have given them my wife , but you are not my wife , but no one can enter me .
GOLD:	My breath is repulsive to my wife.I am rejected by my own family .

ID:	5472
INPUT:	Éí nihii' sizíinii dahináanii bitahgi nihaa áhályą́ áádóó doo dadiigeehgóó ánihósin .
PRED:	He will guard you in your unfailing love , and he will guard you in your presence .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	5473
INPUT:	Ákohgo Peter hach'į' dah diiyáago áháłní , Bóhólníihii , shik'is shich'į' bąąhági ánát'įįhgoshą' díkwíidi bá yóó'anídideesh'áałgo doo bik'ijį' séł'ą́ą da doo ? T'áá daats'í tsosts'idídi ?
PRED:	Then Peter went and said to him , “ Lord , why should I forgive my brother ? ”
GOLD:	Then Peter came to him and asked , “ Lord , how often should I forgive someone who sins against me ? Seven times ? ”

ID:	5474
INPUT:	Nidi álílee í'ooł'įįłgo na'adlo' yee nahałáii biyáázh danohłíinii , t'áá éí adiléii áádóó ałjiłnii ba'áłchíní danohłíinii , áháníjį' ninohkááh .
PRED:	But when you are speaking , you women who are skilled in prostitution , you women who are children and children .
GOLD:	“ But you — come here , you witches ' children , you offspring of adulterers and prostitutes !

ID:	5475
INPUT:	Haa nízáágóoshą' kót'éego yááłtih doo ? Haa nízáágóoshą' ayóó át'éego níyol nahalingo yáníłti' ?
PRED:	How long will you go ? How long will you speak like a wind ?
GOLD:	“ How long will you go on like this ? You sound like a blustering wind .

ID:	5476
INPUT:	Nibik'ehgo iináájí bik'idi'yiishtįįhgo áshíínísin . Áko t'óó bik'eda'ayóii ááníiłii baa yáshti' dooleeł .
PRED:	I want you to understand your commandments , and I will tell you what I say .
GOLD:	Help me understand the meaning of your commandments , and I will meditate on your wonderful deeds .

ID:	5477
INPUT:	<unk> azee' ííł'íní ayóó'óó'níinii índa Díímas ałdó' k'é nihiłní .
PRED:	Children , you are my darling , and you are my friends .
GOLD:	Luke , the beloved doctor , sends his greetings , and so does Demas .

ID:	5478
INPUT:	Doo hah háháchįįhii éí t'áá íiyisí ak'izhdi'yiitįįh , nidi t'áadoo hodina'í háháchįįhii éí doo áháyą' aláahgo áyiił'įįh .
PRED:	Evil people are crushed , but the anger of a fool is better than a fool .
GOLD:	People with understanding control their anger ; a hot temper shows great foolishness .

ID:	5479
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii yee nashineeztą́'ígíí éí bee nanihinítą́ą́' : jó , Jesus éí nináho'deet'ą́ągo , t'áá éí bitł'éé' Jesus bááh nízhdii'ą́
PRED:	For the Lord told me what he had done , for he took care of the bread of the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	For I pass on to you what I received from the Lord himself . On the night when he was betrayed , the Lord Jesus took some bread

ID:	5480
INPUT:	Dabiyooch'íidgo yádaałti' , áádóó binda'adlo'go nish'náájí yee yáádadidiilnih .
PRED:	They say , “ They are trying to tell lies ! ”
GOLD:	Their mouths are full of lies ; they swear to tell the truth , but they lie instead .

ID:	5481
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nik'é niná'ídláii éí Ízrel dine'é biDiyin nilíinii ání , T'áadoo nił yé'í ; Jéíkab ch'osh nahonílinii áádóó Ízrel dine'é hastóí danohłíinii , nihíká adeeshwoł .
PRED:	“ Do not be fooled by the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Do n't be afraid of Jacob , O Jacob , and I will help you .
GOLD:	Though you are a lowly worm , O Jacob , do n't be afraid , people of Israel , for I will help you.I am the Lord , your Redeemer.I am the Holy One of Israel . '

ID:	5482
INPUT:	Tsits'aa' dílzinii bikáa'gi diyingo naal'a'í be'elyaii naakigo bits'ádi'nílíidii , chérabim wolyéii , éí Diyin God aa a'ááh nízinii bił haz'ání bik'ijį' bit'a' dah yoołbałgo dah sizį́ . Nidi díí doo t'áá át'éegi baa hojólne' át'ée da .
PRED:	The Ark of the Ark of God , the two cherubim , and the wings of the cherubim are filled with the Holy Place . But we do n't see what we say . ”
GOLD:	Above the Ark were the cherubim of divine glory , whose wings stretched out over the Ark 's cover , the place of atonement . But we can not explain these things in detail now .

ID:	5483
INPUT:	Kin haal'áá léi'gi kéédahojit'į́į dooleeł biniyé t'áá k'éhézdon atiingóó honí'eezh .
PRED:	He led his way to a village to a village in the city .
GOLD:	He led them straight to safety , to a city where they could live .

ID:	5484
INPUT:	éí bąą t'óó náhodínéestsxisgo hwéédideeshchił .
PRED:	So I will release him away , and I will release him away .
GOLD:	So I will have him flogged , and then I will release him . ”

ID:	5485
INPUT:	Áádóó jó , Béthlehem kin shijaa'dę́ę́' Bó'az níyáago da'ayizhígíí áyidííniid , Bóhólníihii nihił hólǫ́ǫ doo . Áko áńdahodoo'niid , Bóhólníihii nik'ijidlí .
PRED:	When he arrived at Bethlehem in Bethlehem , he said to the Lord , “ May the Lord be blessed ! ” And the Lord said , “ blessed ! ”
GOLD:	While she was there , Boaz arrived from Bethlehem and greeted the harvesters . “ The Lord be with you ! ” he said. “ The Lord bless you ! ” the harvesters replied .

ID:	5486
INPUT:	éí tádiindóó ashdladiin béédááhaijį' níbaal bii' dahozdísinii góne' nidaalnishii t'ááłá'í nítínígo nidool'aałgo nidoolnish biniyé yah aheeskaígíí éí hééł nideiyéego
PRED:	He was thirty years old when he arrived at the entrance of the Tabernacle , he sent his men to prepare the work of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	All the men between thirty and fifty years of age who were eligible for service in the Tabernacle and for its transportation

ID:	5487
INPUT:	Áádóó áshíłní , Diné nílíinii , díísh yiniłtsą́ ? Júdah dine'é kwe'é t'áá íiyisí doo daaldinii baa nidajikaígíí da' t'įįhdígo át'éhígíísh biniinaa yaa nidaakaígíí yee kéyah bikáá'góó t'áá át'é t'áá na'níle'dii nilíinii nihinéést'e' áádóó shá náádahóółchįįd ? Áko shoo , bí<unk> jį' tsin bits'áoz'a' dah nídeidiiłjoł .
PRED:	“ Son of man , what are you doing ? ” he asked . “ What did the people of Judah have done for me ? Why did n't you see the land ? ” So they broke the Asherah poles into the land ?
GOLD:	“ Have you seen this , son of man ? ” he asked . “ Is it nothing to the people of Judah that they commit these detestable sins , leading the whole nation into violence , thumbing their noses at me , and provoking my anger ?

ID:	5488
INPUT:	Doo ádahalyáanii éí bee haz'áanii áádóó doo ákwii ádáát'įįdígíí biniinaa bich'į' nidahwiis'náá' .
PRED:	The lips of the wicked have sinned , and the wicked have sinned .
GOLD:	Some were fools ; they rebelledand suffered for their sins .

ID:	5489
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí díí saad t'áá ałtso Ízrel dine'é yich'į' yee yááłti'go ałch'į' ánáyiidlaa .
PRED:	So Moses gave these instructions to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	When Moses had finished reciting all these words to the people of Israel ,

ID:	5490
INPUT:	Áko doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó áhoot'éii áádóó nahagizgo yádaałti'ii yits'ą́ąjį' <unk> náa doo ,
PRED:	The wicked are wicked , and their evil schemes will rise from distant lands .
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from evil people , from those whose words are twisted .

ID:	5491
INPUT:	ch'il dadeeníinii índa hosh ałdó' nich'į' hááhinoot'į́į́ł ; dá'ák'ehdóó nidanise'ii niyą́ą doo .
PRED:	You will eat the fruit of your trees , and you will eat it from the wilderness .
GOLD:	It will grow thorns and thistles for you , though you will eat of its grains .

ID:	5492
INPUT:	áádóó nidaat'a'ii índa łóó' tónteel yii' naaldeehii , áádóó tónteel dahiníyį́į́góó yii' nídadikahii t'áá ałtso hódahółníih doo biniyé nihwííníłtį́ .
PRED:	You gave them authority to the fish in the sea , from the sea , from the sea , from all who fear him .
GOLD:	the birds in the sky , the fish in the sea , and everything that swims the ocean currents .

ID:	5493
INPUT:	Da'oodlání t'áadoo náhoniyésí yáti' yiniyé sodadilzin
PRED:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer
GOLD:	The Believers Pray for Courage

ID:	5494
INPUT:	Ákohgo índa Éran áádóó biye'ké éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'é'étiinjį' nihodíí'ishgo tó bee táádahodíígis ,
PRED:	Then Aaron and his sons will wash their sons and water from the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	5495
INPUT:	Shí ch'é'étiin nishłį́ ; t'áá háiida shí shee yah ííyáhígíí yisdádooltééł , áádóó yah anádááh índa ch'ínádáahgo hootsojį' anáhádáah dooleeł .
PRED:	“ I am the one who saves me , and everyone will come to meet me . Then everyone will return to the house of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I am the gate . Those who come in through me will be saved . They will come and go freely and will find good pastures .

ID:	5496
INPUT:	Áko halahkéí Jesus yich'į' i'ííł'a'go ání , Bóhólníihii , diné ayóó'ííní'nínígíí daatsaah .
PRED:	Then Jesus sent his young servant , “ Lord , you have loved us . ”
GOLD:	So the two sisters sent a message to Jesus telling him , “ Lord , your dear friend is very sick . ”

ID:	5497
INPUT:	Áko yaa nídaast'įįdgo , łeets'aa' íí ł'íní bił haz'ání hoolyéegi éí dé'éyóní danilíinii łeehe'níił dooleełgo biniyé kéyah nidayiisnii' .
PRED:	Then he burned the pagan altars and burned the pagan altars . He also brought the Ark of the Covenant of the Covenant .
GOLD:	After some discussion they finally decided to buy the potter 's field , and they made it into a cemetery for foreigners .

ID:	5498
INPUT:	Bíni'dii doo ákwii át'éii bá bídahiniidééh , áádóó t'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí doo yiih dadookah da .
PRED:	Let those who are righteous , and let us go into sin .
GOLD:	Pile their sins up high , and do n't let them go free .

ID:	5499
INPUT:	Áko ni bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso nich'į' dadéez'į́į́' , áko bóhonishníihii aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , háí nikéé'dóó bikáá'dóó nahó'áii yikáá' dah dínóodaałígíí bee bił hodíílnih .
PRED:	“ Son of man , I have seen the king of Israel , ” says the king of Israel . “ I will tell you the glory of the earth ! ”
GOLD:	And now , my lord the king , all Israel is waiting for you to announce who will become king after you .

ID:	5500
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii Éíman há nidaal'a'í hodahodeez'ą́ągo t'áá hó haghan góne' dahwiisxį́ .
PRED:	But King Ahab 's officials killed him and killed him in his palace .
GOLD:	Then Amon 's own officials conspired against him and assassinated him in his palace .

ID:	5501
INPUT:	Asdzání ánááhodoo'niid , Kwá'ásiní , tó baa hólne'ígíí ła' shaa níkaah , áko doo dibáá' náádeeshdleeł da , doo nidi kwe'é tó hánáshdáah da doo .
PRED:	“ Sir , ” the woman said , “ give me some of the water , but I will not find water for the water . ”
GOLD:	“ Please , sir , ” the woman said , “ give me this water ! Then I 'll never be thirsty again , and I wo n't have to come here to get water . ”

ID:	5502
INPUT:	Áko Mízpeh kin shijaa'dóó Ízrel dine'é ch'íheezhjéé' , áádóó Filístiya dine'é yikéé' nídiijée'go Béthkar haz'ánígíí biyaagóó deiníłtseed .
PRED:	The Israelites left Mizpah and camped at Mizpah at Mizpah , and they killed the Philistines .
GOLD:	The men of Israel chased them from Mizpah to a place below Beth-car , slaughtering them all along the way .

ID:	5503
INPUT:	Náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí ánínígi át'éego áádóó shash anoołchéłígi át'éego naat'áanii doo yá'áshóonii éí t'áadoo yee ák'idadóldziłígíí yinant'áa łeh .
PRED:	The lion will be like a lion , and no one will be able to rule like a lion .
GOLD:	A wicked ruler is as dangerous to the pooras a roaring lion or an attacking bear .

ID:	5504
INPUT:	Diné doo ádahalyáanii hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii yaa dahalnihgo éí naaljį́į́d nilíinii bijáád t'óó nahíínilígíí nahalin .
PRED:	The lips of the wise are like a blind man , like a blind man who had been like a blind donkey .
GOLD:	A proverb in the mouth of a foolis as useless as a paralyzed leg .

ID:	5505
INPUT:	Kodóó náásgóó t'ááká diné ła'da shich'į' ninááhoyółnáá' lágo , háálá shikáá'góó daasidgo naasháhígíí bee Bóhólníihii Jesus bíí' nishłį́įgo bééhózin .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone sleep with my eyes , for I am the Lord Jesus , the one who has given me .
GOLD:	From now on , do n't let anyone trouble me with these things . For I bear on my body the scars that show I belong to Jesus .

ID:	5506
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' danohłį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę nibéédahołníih dooleeł , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God náánihiisnii'go nihik'é niná'ídláago bąą díí jį́ díí kódaat'éhígíí nihich'į' bee haasdziih .
PRED:	You are slaves in the land of Egypt , so that the Lord your God is giving you today . That is why I am giving you today today .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in the land of Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you ! That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	5507
INPUT:	Diné nideiłtseedgo dił ats'ádaazlį́įgo ádeile'ii éí diné ba'át'e' ádinii yik'ee dadiniih , nidi diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii éí diné ba'át'e' ádinii yá atídaat'į́ .
PRED:	The violence makes the innocent die , but the poor are jealous of the innocent .
GOLD:	The bloodthirsty hate blameless people , but the upright seek to help them .

ID:	5508
INPUT:	Nihizhé'é dajílíinii t'óó kónígháníjį' t'áá hó daznízinígi át'éego t'áá hashkéego nidanihizneeztą́ą́' , nidi Diyin God diyingo yee át'éii bił ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iiz doo biniyé t'áá bí t'éiyá nihá yá'át'éehii biniyé t'áá hashkée nanihinitin .
PRED:	Our ancestors taught us to share in the authority of our ancestors , but we want to share the same way of God . We will teach us what we do .
GOLD:	For our earthly fathers disciplined us for a few years , doing the best they knew how . But God 's discipline is always good for us , so that we might share in his holiness .

ID:	5509
INPUT:	Sálaman bibee hódzą́ áádóó náás adeezlá
PRED:	Solomon Asks for Wisdom
GOLD:	Solomon 's Prosperity and Wisdom

ID:	5510
INPUT:	Héíran áádóó Kánii áádóó Ííden áádóó Ásher índa <unk> <unk> dahoolyéédę́ę́' dine'é éí ninaalyéhé biniyé nił ahaa nida'iilniih nít'éé' .
PRED:	Abram also gave birth to the Canaanites , Asher , Sidon , Sidon , and Sidon .
GOLD:	“ Haran , Canneh , Eden , Sheba , Asshur , and Kilmad came with their merchandise , too .

ID:	5511
INPUT:	Índa díí kin éí aláahdi át'éhígíí bik'ee t'óó bił adahayóigo yą́ą́h dah hidikáhígíí t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , Ha'át'íí lá biniyé Bóhólníihii díí kéyah áádóó díí kin kóyiilaa lá ?
PRED:	And this is what the Lord says : “ What is the one who has built this Temple ? ”
GOLD:	And though this Temple is impressive now , all who pass by will be appalled . They will ask , ‘ Why did the Lord do such terrible things to this land and to this Temple ? '

ID:	5512
INPUT:	Bee hool'iní bá yada'ii'áii áádóó áliv naazkaadii
PRED:	olive oil for the Priests
GOLD:	A Lampstand and Two Olive Trees

ID:	5513
INPUT:	Éí t'áá ałtso diné ak'idi'yiitįįhii bich'į' ííshjání danilį́ , índa ił ééhózin nishódayoołt'eehii bił t'áá da'áko .
PRED:	He taught all the people to understand the miraculous signs and knowledge .
GOLD:	My words are plain to anyone with understanding , clear to those with knowledge .

ID:	5514
INPUT:	Jó , bááh t'ááłá'í si'ánígíigi át'éego nihí t'óó ahonii'yói nidi , Christ bee ats'íís t'ááłá'íígíí daniidlį́ , háálá t'áá áníiltso éí bááh t'ááłá'íígíí ałts'ą́ą́' da'niilk'iizgo nídeiidį́į́h .
PRED:	For we have one piece of bread like one piece of bread , and it is only one piece of bread . We belong to Christ .
GOLD:	And though we are many , we all eat from one loaf of bread , showing that we are one body .

ID:	5515
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahdi jiníná , áko Bóhólníihii áníinii t'áadoo bik'eh dahojííł'įįd da , áádóó Tahápaniiz kin haal'áadi jiníná .
PRED:	They did not obey the Lord 's commands , but they followed the example of their ancestors in Egypt . They did not live in the city of Memphis .
GOLD:	The people refused to obey the voice of the Lord and went to Egypt , going as far as the city of Tahpanhes .

ID:	5516
INPUT:	Áádóó aYe' nihokáá' dine'é yisdáyiinííł dooleełgo aTaa' biníł'a'ígíí daníil'į́į́' , áko éí baa ch'ídahoyiit'aah .
PRED:	And we will see the Son of Man , and we will see the Son of Man .
GOLD:	Furthermore , we have seen with our own eyes and now testify that the Father sent his Son to be the Savior of the world .

ID:	5517
INPUT:	Áádóó kéyah Gáliliigi Kapérniyam kin haal'áhí góyaa jiníyá . Áko t'áá háá'áyį́į́h jį́ ná'oodleeł góne' nazh'nitin ,
PRED:	He went to Capernaum to Capernaum , where he was teaching in Galilee , where he was teaching .
GOLD:	Then Jesus went to Capernaum , a town in Galilee , and taught there in the synagogue every Sabbath day .

ID:	5518
INPUT:	Shitsi' t'ą́ą́' anáhítłíishii nílíinii , haash nízahgóó tádínáah doo ? Bóhólníihii nihokáa'gi t'ah doo ííléehii ániidíii ánááyiidlaa : éí asdzání ła' diné bidádínóolniił biniyé yikéé' nahaadá .
PRED:	“ Oh , my daughter , my daughter , my daughter , are there ? ” says the Lord . “ There is no one like a new woman in the field . ”
GOLD:	How long will you wander , my wayward daughter ? For the Lord will cause something new to happen — Israel will embrace her God . ”

ID:	5519
INPUT:	Níneveh dine'é yę́ę ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi díí k'ad ahoolchíłígíí yá nidahodoo'áałgo yee deidoozįįł , háálá Jónah éí Diyin God bizaad yaa hoolne'ígíí binahjį' łahgo át'éego Diyin God yich'į' tsíńdadeezkéezgo dayoosdląądgo ádił nida'iiszí'ígíí yits'áhaaskai , nidi jó'akon , Jónah yiláahgo ayóó át'éii éí kǫ́ǫ́ naaghá .
PRED:	“ The day of Nineveh will bring judgment on judgment day , for the people of Nineveh have heard that Jonah had repented of their sins , for they have repented of their sins and turn to God .
GOLD:	The people of Nineveh will also stand up against this generation on judgment day and condemn it , for they repented of their sins at the preaching of Jonah . Now someone greater than Jonah is here — but you refuse to repent .

ID:	5520
INPUT:	Áko doo da'oo'íinii éí da'oo'į́į dooleeł áádóó bijédaahkałii da'didoots'į́į́ł .
PRED:	Listen to those who hear their eyes and hear their eyes .
GOLD:	And when he comes , he will open the eyes of the blindand unplug the ears of the deaf .

ID:	5521
INPUT:	Bich'į' ádííniidgo áádóó shich'į' haadzíi'go , ákondi shíists'ą́ą́' nít'é'ígíí doo wooshdlą́ą da doo .
PRED:	Then he spoke to me and said , “ I ca n't believe me . ”
GOLD:	And even if I summoned him and he responded , I 'm not sure he would listen to me .

ID:	5522
INPUT:	Náá'áłdó' Josáíyah éí Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii yee Bóhólníihii yich'į' nahasá , áko átsé nídízííd binih dį́į́ts'áadah yoołkááł góne' atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii dibé yázhí nideistseed .
PRED:	So Josiah went to Jerusalem at the Passover celebration and joined them at the Passover celebration , where the Lord had killed the Passover meal .
GOLD:	Then Josiah announced that the Passover of the Lord would be celebrated in Jerusalem , and so the Passover lamb was slaughtered on the fourteenth day of the first month .

ID:	5523
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bee háánílyį́į́h , áádóó ha'íínílníigo binahjį' áhodíínílzée'go biba' sínídá ; diné t'áá ałtsoní boosánígíí éí doo yá'át'ééhgóó nahagizgo t'áadoo biniinaa ádił náhodílchiłí .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the Lord 's Sabbath , for he is a wicked man who watches over all the evil things you have done .
GOLD:	Be still in the presence of the Lord , and wait patiently for him to act.Do n't worry about evil people who prosperor fret about their wicked schemes .

ID:	5524
INPUT:	T'áá ákót'éego ałdó' yá'át'éehgo ó'oo'níiłii t'áadoo bahat'aadí daat'į́ , azhą́ doo t'áadoo bahat'aadí ákódaat'į́į da nidi , doo nazhnił'in le' át'ée da .
PRED:	Do n't worry about what is right and right , but they do n't know what is right .
GOLD:	In the same way , the good deeds of some people are obvious . And the good deeds done in secret will someday come to light .

ID:	5525
INPUT:	áko índa doo bik'ee shił yéé'góó yáshti' doo , nidi shiyi'di doo ákóhoot'ée da .
PRED:	So I speak to me , but I ca n't let me speak .
GOLD:	Then I could speak to him without fear , but I can not do that in my own strength .

ID:	5526
INPUT:	Íífreiyim dine'é da'oołch'į́dígíí bii' hadooldoh , índa Júdah dine'é bi'ana'í ábi'disdįįd doo ; Íífreiyim dine'é éí Júdah dine'é doo nááyoołch'į́įd da doo índa Júdah dine'é éí Íífreiyim dine'é doo yíni' náánéís'ą́ą da doo .
PRED:	Ephraim , Ephraim , Judah , and Judah will be destroyed , and Judah will be destroyed , and Judah will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then at last the jealousy between Israel and Judah will end.They will not be rivals anymore .

ID:	5527
INPUT:	T'áá ákwe'é sooké danihidííniidgo éí t'áá ákwe'é siikée doo , índa doo ákóde bich'į' diit'ash da .
PRED:	And if you do this , we will be able to be our father , and we will stand here . ”
GOLD:	If they say to us , ‘ Stay where you are or we 'll kill you , ' then we will stop and not go up to them .

ID:	5528
INPUT:	Háálá Ámalek dine'é áádóó Kéínan dine'é nihidáahdi nidaakai áádóó diltłish yee nihił nidazdiyoołhał ; jó , Bóhólníihii bits'ą́ąjį' noojé'ígíí biniinaa Bóhólníihii doo nihił hólǫ́ǫ da .
PRED:	For the Amalekites and the Canaanites living in the wilderness , but the Lord will not destroy you with the sword .
GOLD:	When you face the Amalekites and Canaanites in battle , you will be slaughtered . The Lord will abandon you because you have abandoned the Lord . ”

ID:	5529
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii kóní , Néínídzáago hadaałt'é ánándeeshdlíiłgo shidááhdóó yidíízįįł . T'óó baa'ihii bitahdę́ę́' ílíinii bits'áínínilgo yáshti'ígi át'éego shá yáníłti' doo . Bí naa náhidookah daats'í , nidi ni éí ts'ídá doo bididíínáał da .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I will show you what you have done . I will do to you , O Lord , and you will never see what you have done . ”
GOLD:	This is how the Lord responds : “ If you return to me , I will restore youso you can continue to serve me.If you speak good words rather than worthless ones , you will be my spokesman.You must influence them ; do not let them influence you !

ID:	5530
INPUT:	Jó , ha'a'aahjí jiilgishgo e'e'aahjį' nidi tsé'naa bee i'didla'ígi át'éego , Diné Silį́į'ii doogááł .
PRED:	The east wind will come to the west , but the Son of Man will be raised like the Son of Man .
GOLD:	For as the lightning flashes in the east and shines to the west , so it will be when the Son of Man comes .

ID:	5531
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné ła' díí na'nitin doo jiniizį́'ígíí éí diné doo jinízinii doo éí át'ée da , nidi Diyin God doo jiniizį́į́'góó át'é . Jó , Diyin God t'áá bí biNíłch'i Diyinii nihaidii'aah .
PRED:	But if you have not been circumcised , it is not not a person who has not been rejected by God 's Spirit , but we are not God 's Spirit .
GOLD:	Therefore , anyone who refuses to live by these rules is not disobeying human teaching but is rejecting God , who gives his Holy Spirit to you .

ID:	5532
INPUT:	Áman dine'é éí Ízrel dine'é yide ádahósin
PRED:	Victory over Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Jair Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	5533
INPUT:	Áko diné t'óó nitsíkeesgo doo yáłti'góó biniyé níyáhígíí daats'í Bóhólníihii iiniizį́į́' , nízingo sizį́ .
PRED:	As they were speaking to the people , they tried to understand what the Lord had said .
GOLD:	The servant watched her in silence , wondering whether or not the Lord had given him success in his mission .

ID:	5534
INPUT:	Háálá shízhi' dayózhíigo t'áá ádzaii nihił dahalne' . Doo dahóół'aad da , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	For this message came to me from the Lord : “ The Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	because they are telling you lies in my name . I have not sent them , ” says the Lord .

ID:	5535
INPUT:	Náá'ákóne' Diyin God ánáádoo'niid , Dahináago táyi' naaldeehii t'óó adahayói le' , índa nahasdzáán bikáá' wódahgo tsídii nidaat'a' doo .
PRED:	Then God said , “ Let the living beings say , ‘ May the living beings be planted in the earth . '
GOLD:	Then God said , “ Let the waters swarm with fish and other life . Let the skies be filled with birds of every kind . ”

ID:	5536
INPUT:	Nidi shaa ahí'iildee'go ákwe'é dadziizį'go t'éiyá shizaad bee shidine'é bił dahojoolne' doo nít'éé' , áádóó doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó dahináanii índa doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó ádaat'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' dah nídabizhdiiłkai doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	But they stood and stood at my command and told me what was evil and evil spirits had done . Then they left their evil practices and evil practices .
GOLD:	If they had stood before me and listened to me , they would have spoken my words , and they would have turned my peoplefrom their evil ways and deeds .

ID:	5537
INPUT:	Háálá yáshti' baa nídiisdzáádóó nidishghaash ; nidishghaashgo doo ts'ííd ánihi'didoolníił da áádóó ałtso ánihi'didooldįįł , dishní , háálá Bóhólníihii bizaad biniinaa shá bíighah shá nidahałt'i'go shaa nídiikai , áádóó shąąh nidayiiłhaał .
PRED:	For I tell you , ‘ I tell you what is going to happen to you , ' says the Lord. “ The Lord has spoken to me , for I am innocent .
GOLD:	When I speak , the words burst out. “ Violence and destruction ! ” I shout.So these messages from the Lordhave made me a household joke .

ID:	5538
INPUT:	ał'ąą dine'é bitahgóó ahonííłkaad áádóó kédaayahgóó tadahodi'nooskaad ; bee ádajít'éii índa ádajíít'įįdígíí bik'ehgo haa nídasist'įįd .
PRED:	I chased them out of the nations and scattered them among the nations . I did what they had done .
GOLD:	I scattered them to many lands to punish them for the evil way they had lived .

ID:	5539
INPUT:	Éí bąą Íílai ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii bich'į' bee ádee hadeesdzíi'go ádííniid , Ádił nida'ayoosíi'go éí didlidgo nááhániihii índa nááhániihii bee doo nihąąh nahjį' kólyaagóó ahool'áa doo .
PRED:	So Eli said to Eli , “ The descendants of Eli has made a solemn oath that the blood of the people of Israel will be defiled by the sin offering of sin . ”
GOLD:	So I have vowed that the sins of Eli and his sons will never be forgiven by sacrifices or offerings . ”

ID:	5540
INPUT:	Háálá nihi'ana'í bits'ąą nihaa ádahalyą́ą doo biniyé aláahgo naat'áanii éí siláo nidaabaahii áádóó łį́į́' yee anada'ał'íinii bíídéeshkiłígíí baa yánísin nít'éé' , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' yádeiilti'go ádabidii'niid , NihiDiyin God éí yá'át'éehii biniyé há dabidéez'į́į'ii t'áá ałtso yik'i dah doolnih , nidi yóó'adabidii'aahii t'áá ałtso yich'į' bibee adziilii áádóó t'óó báhádzidgo hashké nídzingo atí'éł'íinii yee yik'ijį' nilį́ .
PRED:	For we are afraid of our enemies , the commander of our enemies , and they are afraid of our enemies , for we have rebelled against the king 's fierce anger . But we will be ashamed of our God . ”
GOLD:	For I was ashamed to ask the king for soldiers and horsemen to accompany us and protect us from enemies along the way . After all , we had told the king , “ Our God 's hand of protection is on all who worship him , but his fierce anger rages against those who abandon him . ”

ID:	5541
INPUT:	Diné naalnishii áłch'į́į́dígo ayą́ągo , doodaii' lą'í ayą́ągo łikango ná'iilwosh , nidi t'áá ałtsoní bee hólóonii éí yąą doo hazhó'ó ałhosh da .
PRED:	A little person is a small pit , but a little girl can not sleep with good fruit .
GOLD:	People who work hard sleep well , whether they eat little or much . But the rich seldom get a good night 's sleep .

ID:	5542
INPUT:	Éíbel bi'oodlą' bee Diyin God yich'į' nááyiisnii'ígíí éí Kéin nááyiisnii'ígíí t'ah biláhígi át'éego t'áá nídoolyéełgo nááyiisnii' . Éí bee Diyin God ts'ídá t'áá ákogi ájít'é , níigo yee há haadzíí' , háálá Éíbel náádziisnii'ii Diyin God há bił yílįįd . Azhą́ dadziztsą́ą nidi hwe'oodlą' bee t'ahdii yájíłti' .
PRED:	It was by faith that God raised up the gift of Cain . But if he had been unfaithful to Cain , he said , “ If God has been healed , he has been unfaithful to God , he has been healed of his faith . He has been unfaithful to God . ”
GOLD:	It was by faith that Abel brought a more acceptable offering to God than Cain did . Abel 's offering gave evidence that he was a righteous man , and God showed his approval of his gifts . Although Abel is long dead , he still speaks to us by his example of faith .

ID:	5543
INPUT:	Éí bijį́įdi baa nidasoohkaii shich'į' ádił nidaałteehgo ádił nida'iyoołzí'ígíí t'áá ałtso doo nihił baa yádahasin da doo , háálá nihiníí'dóó bee ádaa dadzíínóhdlíii nahjį' kódeeshłííł , áádóó shidził diyinii biniinaa t'áadoo ła' ádaa hodzódlíigo aghá'ádooł'áhí da dooleeł .
PRED:	But you will be ashamed of my sins , for you will be ashamed of your sins , for you will not be ashamed of all your sins , for I will make you strong in your presence .
GOLD:	On that day you will no longer need to be ashamed , for you will no longer be rebels against me.I will remove all proud and arrogant people from among you.There will be no more haughtiness on my holy mountain .

ID:	5544
INPUT:	áko Jesus ádeidííniid , Díí ádaanínígíísh dints'a' ? Áko Jesus áhodííniid , Aoo' , da' kóhá'nínígíísh t'ah doo dayínółta' da ? Áłchíní yázhí índa awéé't'ahdii da'ałt'o<unk> ha'niih t'áá ákogi át'éiiyee yádaałti'go íinilaa .
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ Are you saying this ? ” “ Yes , ” he asked . “ Yes , ” they replied . “ Yes , ” they replied , “ we do n't understand what is right ? ”
GOLD:	They asked Jesus , “ Do you hear what these children are saying ? ” “ Yes , ” Jesus replied . “ Have n't you ever read the Scriptures ? For they say , ‘ You have taught children and infants to give you praise . ' ”

ID:	5545
INPUT:	Oo'áłígíí biyaagi ni'ííníłdįįd bijį́įjį' t'áadoo nánídlínígóó níyoołkáałgo neidiní'ánígíí biyi' nił hózhǫ́ǫgo ne'asdzą́ą́ ayóó'ííní'níinii bił hiníná , háálá oo'áłígíí biyaagi hinínánígíí áádóó binishínílnishii bits'ą́ą́dóó níí' dooleełii át'é .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of all days until the days of your youth you have defiled yourself in the days of your wife , for your wife is given to your wife .
GOLD:	Live happily with the woman you love through all the meaningless days of life that God has given you under the sun . The wife God gives you is your reward for all your earthly toil .

ID:	5546
INPUT:	Mó'ab éí t'áá tsíłkéí nilį́į́dą́ą́' t'óó ałk'i dahisłáago hoolzhiizh ; t'áá hasht'edíít'e' nít'éé' t'áadoo nahaasghan da , índa t'áadoo yisnááhgóó naayáa da ; éí bąą t'ahdii t'áá ákóhálniih , t'ahdii t'áá ákóhálchin .
PRED:	So Moab stayed until he had been killed . But when he had been killed , he did n't let anyone go back to his home . So he did what was happening .
GOLD:	“ From his earliest history , Moab has lived in peace , never going into exile.He is like wine that has been allowed to settle.He has not been poured from flask to flask , and he is now fragrant and smooth .

ID:	5547
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , shahastóí danohłíinii , nihich'į' bee ák'i hadideesdzihígíí shá dadoohts'į́į́h !
PRED:	Listen to my dear brothers and sisters , listen to my plea .
GOLD:	“ Brothers and esteemed fathers , ” Paul said , “ listen to me as I offer my defense . ”

ID:	5548
INPUT:	Béínai ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii hastą́ądi neeznádiindóó ba'aan dízdiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	The descendants of Bani
GOLD:	The family of Bani642

ID:	5549
INPUT:	éí háni'dii naat'á éé' nizhóníii aláahgo naat'áanii yiih nádááh nít'éé' yę́ę dazhdoojih áádóó łį́į́' nabiyéé nít'éé' yę́ę dazhdoolóós índa binaat'á ch'ah bá nídazhdoo'ááł ,
PRED:	Let the king bring his clothes to the king , and bring his crown to the king .
GOLD:	he should bring out one of the king 's own royal robes , as well as a horse that the king himself has ridden — one with a royal emblem on its head .

ID:	5550
INPUT:	Éí bąą awéé' bí'nahii ashchį́įjį' nahjį' nihodidoo'ááł , áádóó bik'isóó daadzíi'ii Ízrel dine'é yich'į' t'ą́ą́' kónéidoodlííł .
PRED:	Therefore , the child will give birth to the child of the tribe of Israel , and the people of Israel will return to them .
GOLD:	The people of Israel will be abandoned to their enemiesuntil the woman in labor gives birth.Then at last his fellow countrymenwill return from exile to their own land .

ID:	5551
INPUT:	Jó , díí nízaadę́ę́' ninádahidookah áádóó shoo , díí náhookǫs áádóó e'e'aahdę́ę́' índa Sáínim kéyahdę́ę́' éí ninádahidookah .
PRED:	Look , these people will come from distant distant lands , and the east will come from the east of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	5552
INPUT:	Áádóó hódahooł'aahii ábizhdííniid , Bąąhági áhodooníiłgo bee na'íhontaah ts'ídá t'áádóo nídí áánííł , nidi haniinaa áhooníiłii , éí doo hojooba' ájíníi da !
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ What sorrow awaits those who do n't worry about the evil things you do . ”
GOLD:	One day Jesus said to his disciples , “ There will always be temptations to sin , but what sorrow awaits the person who does the tempting !

ID:	5553
INPUT:	Béíyal-héímangi Sálaman bich'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'á áádóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áhígíí ła' yaa ádahalyą́ą dooleełgo yeidiní'ą́ . Éí t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'ááłáhídi mííl béésh łigaii hak'eh níjaa'go aneest'ą' bik'é bich'į' nidajiilée doo .
PRED:	In fact , I will give you the vineyards of Sheba and vineyards and olive groves . There will be one piece of silver and gold for each year .
GOLD:	Solomon has a vineyard at Baal-hamon , which he leases out to tenant farmers.Each of them pays a thousand pieces of silverfor harvesting its fruit .

ID:	5554
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii , Táá' yiską́ągo shaa náhidoohkah , hałníigo há nihoní'ánígíí bik'ehgo táá' yiską́ągo Jerobówam áádóó dine'é t'áá át'é Riihobówam yaa haaskai .
PRED:	Then the king told me , “ Get up for three days . He will go to the third day of Jeroboam and Jeroboam .
GOLD:	Three days later Jeroboam and all the people returned to hear Rehoboam 's decision , just as the king had ordered .

ID:	5555
INPUT:	Díí éí adinídíín yik'ijį' nidaalteehii ła' ádaat'į́ ; éí bik'ehgo dahonít'i'ígíí doo yéédahósin daáádóó doo yik'eh hidikáah da .
PRED:	These are the light of the light of the light , and they do n't know what is right .
GOLD:	“ Wicked people rebel against the light.They refuse to acknowledge its waysor stay in its paths .

ID:	5556
INPUT:	Kéyah haa dideesh'áałgo hach'į' bee ádee hadeesdzíi'ii biih hóó'eezhgo wódahgo deílk'idii t'áá ałtso índa tsin díłch'ilgo naazkaadii dayiiłtsą́ągo ákwii nááhidoonihii náádayiisnii' ; ákwii Bóhólníihii bee bá dahozhdoołchįįłii náádajiisnii' ; ákwii tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii náádajiisnii' índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii yadajiinil .
PRED:	I will bring them into the land I swore to bring them into the mountains and hills , and they will burn incense in the land of the Lord . They will offer sacrifices and liquid offerings and liquid offerings and liquid offerings .
GOLD:	for when I brought them into the land I had promised them , they offered sacrifices on every high hill and under every green tree they saw ! They roused my fury as they offered up sacrifices to their gods . They brought their perfumes and incense and poured out their liquid offerings to them .

ID:	5557
INPUT:	Áádóó áliv tsin naazkaadii bineest'ą' bąąh nidahołhaałgo bikéédę́ę́' t'áadoo bąąh nináádahołhaałí ; éí dé'éyóní áádóó áłchíní bizhé'é ádaadinii índa sáanii bąąh ádahasdįįdii bá át'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Do n't eat your fruit trees from your flocks and olive oil , and your ancestors will never eat the foreigners living among the orphans .
GOLD:	When you beat the olives from your olive trees , do n't go over the boughs twice . Leave the remaining olives for the foreigners , orphans , and widows .

ID:	5558
INPUT:	Jó , diné t'áadoo bee bik'íhót'ahígóó naagháii éí Diyin God doo yóó'abididoo'áał da , índa doo yá'áshónígi ádaat'ínígíí Diyin God ts'ídá doo háká adoolwoł da .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone be afraid of God , for he will not abandon the wicked .
GOLD:	“ But look , God will not reject a person of integrity , nor will he lend a hand to the wicked .

ID:	5559
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Peter Denies Jesus

ID:	5560
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii Ahazawííras bee bóhólnííh bił nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá át'é Jew dine'é hakin hadaas'áagi hodadiilkaalii nidazdoołtsił biniyé áłah dzizlį́į́' . Áko doo ła'da hodiilkaal da ; jó , t'óó hak'e'íyé'ígi át'éego diné bik'idiyaa dajílį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	King Xerxes was trying to kill all the Jews in the provinces of King Xerxes , and they were afraid of the Jews .
GOLD:	The Jews gathered in their cities throughout all the king 's provinces to attack anyone who tried to harm them . But no one could make a stand against them , for everyone was afraid of them .

ID:	5561
INPUT:	kónígháníjį' hojílǫ́
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	( Psalms 90–106 )

ID:	5562
INPUT:	Nidi bí áádóó bá nidaal'a'í índa bikéyah bikáá'góó diné kéédahat'íinii Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah éí Bóhólníihii bizaad yee yá yáłti'go t'áadoo deidiizts'ą́ą' da .
PRED:	But Zedekiah and his officials did not listen to Jeremiah . He refused to listen to Jeremiah from the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	But neither King Zedekiah nor his attendants nor the people who were left in the land listened to what the Lord said through Jeremiah .

ID:	5563
INPUT:	Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' nináhodiyeesh'ish , áádóó Asíriya kéyahdę́ę́' áłah ánáhodeeshdlííł . Áko kéyah Gíliyad áádóó Lébananjį' náhodeesh'ish índa kéyah doo hohóoghah da hodooleeł .
PRED:	I will bring them out of Egypt , and I will bring them down from Egypt to Egypt . I will bring them down to the mountains of Egypt , and I will bring them down to the Lebanon .
GOLD:	I will bring them back from Egyptand gather them from Assyria.I will resettle them in Gilead and Lebanonuntil there is no more room for them all .

ID:	5564
INPUT:	háálá aláahgo naat'áanii dabighan yóó'adidoot'ááł ; kin haal'áagi kéédahat'íinii yóó'ahidoonééł ; bine' na'adzi'ii bá nahaz'ánígóó áádóó kin yadaa'áhígóó hool'áágóó naaldlooshii dabighan doo ; ákwii télii ałchinii bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo índa dibé da'ałchozh doo .
PRED:	For the kings of the city will disappear , and your people will die in the streets of the city will be filled with violence .
GOLD:	The palace and the city will be deserted , and busy towns will be empty.Wild donkeys will frolic and flocks will grazein the empty forts and watchtowers

ID:	5565
INPUT:	Dadine'é nihik'eh dahół'į́įgo nihídahółníihgo áyiilaa ; ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nahaz'áanii nihiyaa ayíínilgo bik'i dadiil'eez .
PRED:	He has made us stubborn and rebellious nations , and he has placed us on every side of the nations .
GOLD:	He subdues the nations before us , putting our enemies beneath our feet .

ID:	5566
INPUT:	Éí hoogááłdę́ę́' diné t'áadoo ła' bił ííshjání ályaa da , nidi k'ad daal'aadii dadiyinii áádóó Diyin God yá dahalne'ii Níłch'i Diyinii bee Diyin God bił yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	That is why the Scriptures say , “ You have not been revealed to the Holy Spirit and the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	God did not reveal it to previous generations , but now by his Spirit he has revealed it to his holy apostles and prophets .

ID:	5567
INPUT:	Nidi nihí éí Ízrel dine'é bilą́ąjį' anaa' biniyé hasht'e'ádadidiilnííł ; kéyah daabíí' dooleełíjį' bił niniikaigo kéyahgi kéédahat'ínígíí biniinaa kin hadaas'á ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'in góne' nihada'áłchíní kéédahat'į́į doo .
PRED:	But the Israelites went to fight against the land of Israel , and they will live in their land . They will live in distant lands , and they will live in distant lands .
GOLD:	Then we will arm ourselves and lead our fellow Israelites into battle until we have brought them safely to their land . Meanwhile , our families will stay in the fortified towns we build here , so they will be safe from any attacks by the local people .

ID:	5568
INPUT:	Dził Hórebgi óola doolyį́į'go béégashii yáázh yééda'iidlaago yich'į' nidahasá .
PRED:	When he saw the calf he had appeared to them , he worshiped them .
GOLD:	The people made a calf at Mount Sinai ; they bowed before an image made of gold .

ID:	5569
INPUT:	Héshban yinílyéii , Rábah nichago ák'idiit'aah , háálá Éí'ai kin haal'á hoolchxǫ'go ályaa . Rábahdóó atsi'ké danohłíinii , yéego daohcha ; tł'oh yishbizh bee áká daołzisgo atínídadinohdleehgo kin haal'á binaa ahééda'astł'inígíí bine'dę́ę́' ałnááhohjah , háálá Málkam wolyéii áádóó binááda'iiłniihii índa bá nidaal'a'í naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá yił bi'disnáágóó dadooleeł .
PRED:	Then he went to Rabbah , for he destroyed the town of Gibeon . He destroyed his sons and daughters , dressed in burlap and mourning . Then he went down to the city of Gibeon , and he will invite them to the other priests , and they will be killed .
GOLD:	“ Cry out , O Heshbon , for the town of Ai is destroyed.Weep , O people of Rabbah ! Put on your clothes of mourning.Weep and wail , hiding in the hedges , for your god Molech , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands .

ID:	5570
INPUT:	Áádóó Job ánáádoo'niidgo ání ,
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	5571
INPUT:	Nidi kin haal'áagi asdzání dahodísinii áádóó ił danilíinii índa diné alááh dahideezíinii éí Paul áádóó Bárnabas atídoolnííł biniyé Jew dine'é hadahoneeshchaad , áko bikéyahdóó ch'ídahoneeshchą́ą́' .
PRED:	But some women who were in the city of the Jews and teachers of religious law , Barnabas and Barnabas and Barnabas were baptized in Antioch of Syria .
GOLD:	Then the Jews stirred up the influential religious women and the leaders of the city , and they incited a mob against Paul and Barnabas and ran them out of town .

ID:	5572
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nich'į' ná'iinishkąąh , háálá honoojíígóó kǫ' naanídzoosxihgo tł'oh deítsoígíí ałtso adahideezk'ą́ą́' , índa kéyahgóó tsin naazkaadii ałtso dadíílid .
PRED:	“ O Lord , ” says the Lord , “ for I am sending the fire to devour the trees and the trees .
GOLD:	Lord , help us ! The fire has consumed the wilderness pastures , and flames have burned up all the trees .

ID:	5573
INPUT:	Áthniyel éí Kúshan-rishathéíyim yits'ą́ąjį' Ízrel dine'é yisdáyíínil
PRED:	Othniel Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Othniel Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	5574
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí báhóóchįįdgo wáin dajidlánídóó náhidiitahgo bighan binaagi hootso haz'ą́ą́ góne' ííyá , nidi Héíman éí Esther bich'į' hwe'iina' baa ná'iizhdookąął biniyé jiizį' , háálá aláahgo naat'áanii binahjį' doo yá'át'éehii bá ninázhnítłizhgo baa ákozniizį́į́' .
PRED:	When the king heard that he was filled with wine and wine , he went to the palace of Esther 's palace and gave it to Esther . When she finds it , she would be able to pay back to the king .
GOLD:	Then the king jumped to his feet in a rage and went out into the palace garden.Haman , however , stayed behind to plead for his life with Queen Esther , for he knew that the king intended to kill him .

ID:	5575
INPUT:	Áko nihikéyahgi ana'í nihich'į' nahwiiłnáago bik'ijį' anaa' ádaahłéehgo nízaadgóó éí dilní didííłts'į́įłgo bee i'dííłnih , áko Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł nihéédahodoonihgo nihi'ana'í bits' ą́ąjį' yisdádoohkah .
PRED:	“ Listen to your enemies , ” says the Lord your enemies . “ Listen to us , O Lord your God , and let us go to fight against us .
GOLD:	“ When you arrive in your own land and go to war against your enemies who attack you , sound the alarm with the trumpets . Then the Lord your God will remember you and rescue you from your enemies .

ID:	5576
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó bidił t'éí t'áadoo daohsání ; łeeshtahjį' tó yaadzídígi át'éego ni'jį' yadahoohsíid doo .
PRED:	You must not drink the blood of the blood of the ground until you have seen it .
GOLD:	But you must not consume the blood . You must pour it out on the ground like water .

ID:	5577
INPUT:	Díí Bóhólníihii bich'į' hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh baa náhwiilzhíishgo nídeit'aahígíí éí baa nídahwiilzhish góne' baa ch'éédahoht'áah doo .
PRED:	“ On the Sabbath day of the Lord 's festivals , you will be holy to the Lord 's holy assembly .
GOLD:	“ In addition to the Sabbath , these are the Lord 's appointed festivals , the official days for holy assembly that are to be celebrated at their proper times each year .

ID:	5578
INPUT:	Nidi a'ohgo ádaat'éii nahasdzáán daabíí' dooleeł , áádóó t'áá ałtsoní bee hasht'ehodít'é baa bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo .
PRED:	But the humble will rejoice , and the earth will rejoice in everything he has done .
GOLD:	The lowly will possess the landand will live in peace and prosperity .

ID:	5579
INPUT:	Éí bąą shidine'é t'áadoo hoł éédahoozingóó biniinaa t'óó naalte' dazhdooleeł , áádóó diné bił danilíinii dichin bi'niighą́ą́' áádóó bidine'é deíl'áhígíí dibáá' bi'niighą́ą́' .
PRED:	So the people of my people did n't let them die because of their slaves . They were hungry and thirsty .
GOLD:	So my people will go into exile far awaybecause they do not know me.Those who are great and honored will starve , and the common people will die of thirst .

ID:	5580
INPUT:	Nidi bí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí yee ádee haadzíi'ii át'éego , doodaii' t'áá bí ninéidiní'ą́ągo nááyiisnii'ii át'éego t'áá nááyiisnii' bijį́ doodį́į́ł , áádóó bíí'ohígíí biiskání ałdó' doodį́į́ł .
PRED:	But if he has sworn this offering , he must prepare his vow and offer it to the next day , then we will eat it and eat it .
GOLD:	“ If you bring an offering to fulfill a vow or as a voluntary offering , the meat must be eaten on the same day the sacrifice is offered , but whatever is left over may be eaten on the second day .

ID:	5581
INPUT:	Diltłish bee , dichin bee , naałniih bee atíhásh'į́į doo , áádóó hóyée'go bá hada'iisdzíi'ii dajílį́į doo , áádóó diné hak'ee t'óó bił adahayói doo , áádóó honiinaa diné , Tłehee yéi' , daaníi doo índa há nidahałt'i'go hą́ą́h nídadikah doo biniyé nihokáá'góó bee ídahólnííh nahaz'ą́ą́góó t'áá át'é bitahjį' adahonííłkaadígóó diné hak'ee áńdaadįįhgo ádeeshłííł ,
PRED:	I will destroy them with famine , famine , famine , and disease will be destroyed , and disease will be destroyed . I will make them an object of horror and destruction .
GOLD:	Yes , I will pursue them with war , famine , and disease , and I will scatter them around the world . In every nation where I send them , I will make them an object of damnation , horror , contempt , and mockery .

ID:	5582
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áá bí ádá chánahgo diné dadiyinii danohłį́įgo ánihidoolííł ; jó , ákót'éego nihich'į' yee ádee hadoodzíí' ; Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii bik'eh dahonoł'į́įgo áádóó bik'eh deínóhkáahgo chánah danohłį́į doo .
PRED:	For the Lord your God is giving you a solemn oath . You must be careful to obey the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ If you obey the commands of the Lord your God and walk in his ways , the Lord will establish you as his holy people as he swore he would do .

ID:	5583
INPUT:	Ooljéé' nahalingo hool'áágóó bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii hasht'eilyaa doo . Éí yá'ąąshdi t'áá aaníígóó halne'ígíí nahalingo bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii niłdzilgo si'ą́ą doo . Síilah .
PRED:	Your throne will be as high as his throne , and your throne will be honored forever . Interlude
GOLD:	It will be as eternal as the moon , my faithful witness in the sky ! ” Interlude

ID:	5584
INPUT:	Áko hahastiin Elkéínah áhodííniid , Bidíí'nít'óodjį' t'áá ni nił yá'át'éhígi át'éego ánílééh , nidi Bóhólníihii t'áá bí t'éí bizaad chánah íidoolííł . Áko Hánnah hayáázh <unk> díít'óodjį' t'áá ákwe'é bi'jiiłt'o' nít'éé' .
PRED:	Then Elkanah said to Elkanah , “ If you are willing , do n't let us go to the Lord 's command , you would have sex with her son . ” So Hannah did as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	“ Whatever you think is best , ” Elkanah agreed . “ Stay here for now , and may the Lord help you keep your promise. ” So she stayed home and nursed the boy until he was weaned .

ID:	5585
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii Diyin God éí Jónah yik'ijį' adee' na'atł'o'ii hainíísą́ ; éí bee Jónah bik'ijį' chaha'oh doo , áko doo hach'į' nahwii'náa da doo . Áko Jónah éí ch'ilígíí t'áá íiyisí yaa bił hózhǫ́ .
PRED:	The Sovereign Lord your God gave Jonah a blessing for Jonah , and he will live in terror . He will be filled with weeping and filled with grief .
GOLD:	And the Lord God arranged for a leafy plant to grow there , and soon it spread its broad leaves over Jonah 's head , shading him from the sun . This eased his discomfort , and Jonah was very grateful for the plant .

ID:	5586
INPUT:	Áko asdzání áádóó áłchíní t'áadoo wólta'í dinéhígíí t'áá bízhánígo dį́įdi mííl da'ííyą́ą́' lá .
PRED:	So the woman 's men did n't eat anything from the town .
GOLD:	There were 4,000 men who were fed that day , in addition to all the women and children .

ID:	5587
INPUT:	Diné náás daazlį́į'ii dahóyą́ , áádóó diné lą'í dabiiskáanii lą'ígóó ak'idadi'yiitįįh .
PRED:	Some people are wise , and many people are trying to understand the same way .
GOLD:	Wisdom belongs to the aged , and understanding to the old .

ID:	5588
INPUT:	Diyin God yee ayóó át'éego ayóó ábóodziilii bee danihidziil ánihiilaago t'áá ałtsojį' hada'íínółní áádóó nízaadgóó dziilí bee hada'íínółníigo nihił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo biniyé sodiilzin .
PRED:	God has made us strong in his mighty power , and you will be filled with strength and strength .
GOLD:	We also pray that you will be strengthened with all his glorious power so you will have all the endurance and patience you need . May you be filled with joy ,

ID:	5589
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Éran ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii nááda'iiłniihii éí kin hadaas'áago dah nídadziltsogóó kéédahat'ínígíí ła' diné dabi'dééji'ígíí éí nááda'iiłniihii bada'áłchíní bitahdę́ę́' dinéhígíí áádóó Líívai dine'é dayéélta'ígíí bik'ehgo t'áá át'é ch'iyáán bitaa nídajijih nít'éé' .
PRED:	These were the priests who returned from the line of Aaron and Levites who lived in charge of the Levites . They gave them all to their families and Levites who had been taken from their homes .
GOLD:	As for the priests , the descendants of Aaron , who were living in the open villages around the towns , men were appointed by name to distribute portions to every male among the priests and to all the Levites listed in the genealogical records .

ID:	5590
INPUT:	Ał'ąą át'éego índa doo bééhózingóó na'nitin danilíinii t'áadoo yóó'adanihinii'áhí . Diyin God bee ajooba' hwe'oodlą' bitsxe'go áyiił'įįhjí yá'át'ééh , t'áadoo le'é daadą́ągo bee nida'nitinii t'áadoo yá'át'éehgo hodahideezyįįd da .
PRED:	Do n't be fooled by worshiping other gods , for you have not abandoned the faith of God . This is what you have done for you . It is better to be better off than you .
GOLD:	So do not be attracted by strange , new ideas . Your strength comes from God 's grace , not from rules about food , which do n't help those who follow them .

ID:	5591
INPUT:	Áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii Jerúsalemdę́ę́' yíkaígíí ádaaní , Béíyalzííbab hwii' hólǫ́ǫ́ lá , áko níłch'i bida'iiníziinii binanit'a'í bee níłch'i bida'iiníziinii ayi'dę́ę́' hahizhniłkaad lá .
PRED:	They said to the teachers of religious law , “ He is able to cast out demons because he has cast out demons . He has cast out demons . ”
GOLD:	But the teachers of religious law who had arrived from Jerusalem said , “ He 's possessed by Satan , the prince of demons . That 's where he gets the power to cast out demons . ”

ID:	5592
INPUT:	Áko Éran t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' binááhaigo Dził Hor bighą́ą'di daaztsą́ .
PRED:	So Aaron lived another 82 years , and he died .
GOLD:	Aaron was 123 years old when he died there on Mount Hor .

ID:	5593
INPUT:	Éí bąą Mó'ab dine'é chaał hahoyiiníih doo ; t'ááłá'í jinítínígo Mó'ab kéyahgi dajicha doo , áádóó Ker-háraseth kin haal'áádóó t'áadoo náhódle'ígóó ch'il na'atł'o'ii ahídiiłjée'ii yaa daacha .
PRED:	“ Therefore , Moab will cry out , and Moab will cry out to Moab , and Moab will disappear .
GOLD:	The entire land of Moab weeps.Yes , everyone in Moab mournsfor the cakes of raisins from Kir-hareseth.They are all gone now .

ID:	5594
INPUT:	Díidíígíí binahjį' Páílat ts'ídá hwéédideeshchił niizį́į́' , nidi Jew dine'é hadadeeshghaazhgo ádaaní , Díí diné béédííníchid ládą́ą́' doo Síízar bik'is nílį́į da doo ; t'áá háiida ła' aláahgo naat'áanii ízh'díl'ínígíí éí Síízar bits'ą́ą́jí jílį́ .
PRED:	This is why Pilate wanted to release Pilate to release the Jewish leaders , but he said to Pilate , “ Do n't be afraid of Caesar , ” he said . “ Anyone who belongs to Caesar . ”
GOLD:	Then Pilate tried to release him , but the Jewish leaders shouted , “ If you release this man , you are no ‘ friend of Caesar . ' Anyone who declares himself a king is a rebel against Caesar . ”

ID:	5595
INPUT:	Bi'ana'í danilíinii bigaan nish'náájí dabidziilgo íinilaa . Bi'ana'í t'áá ałtso t'áá íiyisí bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo íinilaa .
PRED:	He has made his powerful arm for his enemies ; he has filled his enemies with joy .
GOLD:	You have strengthened his enemiesand made them all rejoice .

ID:	5596
INPUT:	Áko diné yíl'áhígíí , T'áadoo ádóhníní , dahałníigo hach'adahashké , nidi t'óó nówehda hanáázhdoolghaazhgo ájíní , Bóhólníihii , David biYe' nílíinii , nihaa jiiníbaah !
PRED:	But the crowd said , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't let the wicked fall into a rage , but the Son of David , have mercy on him !
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the crowd yelled at them.But they only shouted louder , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	5597
INPUT:	Nít'éé' bee ídahólníihii t'áá át'é kédaayahgóó Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bida'ana'í yich'į' naazbaa'ígíí yaa dahodiizts'ą́ą'go Diyin God yik'ee bił yéé' dahazlį́į́' .
PRED:	When the people of Israel heard the Lord 's message , the God of Israel heard that they were afraid of their enemies .
GOLD:	When all the surrounding kingdoms heard that the Lord himself had fought against the enemies of Israel , the fear of God came over them .

ID:	5598
INPUT:	Azhą́ naakidi mííl nááhaigóó jiináa nidi , yá'ádaat'éehii t'áadoo bee ák'idzisdla'góogo haláahgo hanályį́į́h . Da' doósh t'áá ałtso t'ááłáhíjį' ahikáah da ?
PRED:	But if he had a thousand years old age , he does n't have any interest on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	He might live a thousand years twice over but still not find contentment . And since he must die like everyone else — well , what 's the use ?

ID:	5599
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é biDiyin God Bóhólníihii kóní , Júdah kéyahdóó dabi'disnáago dah bi'diijaa' ígíí díí fig yá'ádaat'éhígíí nahalingo baa ákodínéesįįł . Éí bá yá'ádaat'éeh dooleeł biniyé kodóó Kaldíyadę́ę́' dine'é bikéyahgóó dahóół'aad .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The land of Judah will be taken away from the land of Judah , says : I will bring disaster upon the land of Judah and the Babylonians .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : The good figs represent the exiles I sent from Judah to the land of the Babylonians .

ID:	5600
INPUT:	Kót'éego Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Nébukadnézzar doonéełgo , Ííjip dine'é yik'eh dadidoodleeł , níigo Bóhólníihii éí Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah yich'į' haadzíi'go ání :
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon sent this message to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon : “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave the prophet Jeremiah this message about King Nebuchadnezzar 's plans to attack Egypt .

ID:	5601
INPUT:	Da'oodlání kót'éego ádaaníił doo
PRED:	Instructions for the Church in Christ
GOLD:	Do What Is Good

ID:	5602
INPUT:	Áádóó ni índa asdzání bił ałk'ee diní'niihgo ádeeshłííł ; na'áłchíní índa éí ba'áłchíní yił ałk'ee dadi'niihgo ádeeshłííł ; éí nitsiits'iin yidoołjish ; ni éí bikétal dííłjish .
PRED:	And I will make you proud and your children with your children , and you will crush them with your heads . I will destroy them with your heads . ”
GOLD:	And I will cause hostility between you and the woman , and between your offspring and her offspring.He will strike your head , and you will strike his heel . ”

ID:	5603
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haa dajít'ée doo , hó'ní
PRED:	A Message about the Lord ,
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5604
INPUT:	Éíyee' yádiłhił biláahdi hólóonii óolyé ; nishą' éí ha'át'íí bíninil'ą́ ? Áádóó ch'į́įdiitah bilááh góyaa nidi ayóó át'é ; nishą' , ha'át'éego nił bééhózin doo ?
PRED:	“ What is the most important things of the heavens ? Why do you know that the grave is in the grave ? ”
GOLD:	Such knowledge is higher than the heavens — and who are you ? It is deeper than the underworld — what do you know ?

ID:	5605
INPUT:	Áádóó tsosts'id jį́ bich'į' hoolzhishgo Diyin God ałtso nijishnish , índa tsosts'id jį́ azlį́į'go ałtso nijishnishígíí bits'ą́ą́dóó háájoolyį́į́' .
PRED:	On the seventh day I gave birth to God for seven days and for seven days .
GOLD:	On the seventh day God had finished his work of creation , so he rested from all his work .

ID:	5606
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii áádóó Jiihóíyada éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin yindadoolnishígíí yeinínil , áko tsé deitł'inígíí índa kin ádeił'íní éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédeidoodlííł biniyé shóyoost'e' , áádóó ałdó' béésh índa béésh łitsoii yindaalnishígíí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin hasht'éédeił'į́į doo biniyé shóyoost'e' .
PRED:	The king assigned them to Jehoiada the Temple of the Lord , and he assigned them to the Temple of the Lord . He also assigned them to supervise the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The king and Jehoiada gave the money to the construction supervisors , who hired masons and carpenters to restore the Temple of the Lord . They also hired metalworkers , who made articles of iron and bronze for the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	5607
INPUT:	Kót'éego dóola yázhí , doodaii' deenásts'aa' , doodaii' dibé yázhí , doodaii' tł'ízí yázhí t'ááłá'í nítínígo ákónál'įįh doo .
PRED:	“ If a young bull or a young bull or a lamb or a lamb or a lamb or a lamb .
GOLD:	“ Each sacrifice of a bull , ram , lamb , or young goat should be prepared in this way .

ID:	5608
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jóseph ádííniid , Bida'azis bii' tł'oh naadą́ą́' hadadołbin , áádóó dabibéeso t'óó biih nídahidoohnił , áádóó yist'éí yikiin náákah dooleełígíí bá ádadoohłííł . Áko ákódajiilaa .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to Joseph , “ Put your money in burlap and put it in burlap . ” So they did as they did . So they did as they did .
GOLD:	Joseph then ordered his servants to fill the men 's sacks with grain , but he also gave secret instructions to return each brother 's payment at the top of his sack . He also gave them supplies for their journey home .

ID:	5609
INPUT:	Áko éí diné nahagizgo inaha'á yiniyé néeshch'il , áádóó éí bidaa' náyiits<unk> go doo yá'áshóonii bee bohoolnííł .
PRED:	“ I will give you the wicked , and he will give them the wicked .
GOLD:	With narrowed eyes , people plot evil ; with a smirk , they plan their mischief .

ID:	5610
INPUT:	Shidine'é danilíinii éí áłchíní hach'į' nidahwiiłná áádóó sáanii ałdó' hwee ádídahólnííh . Shidine'é danohłíinii , nihindanit'a'í t'áá áhoodzaagóó danihí'éésh áádóó bik'ehgo dayínóhkáahii nihits'ą́ą́' nidayiishchxǫ' .
PRED:	“ You have destroyed my people , who have destroyed me and destroyed them . You have destroyed their kings and destroyed them .
GOLD:	Childish leaders oppress my people , and women rule over them.O my people , your leaders mislead you ; they send you down the wrong road .

ID:	5611
INPUT:	Ádam bits'ą́ą́dóó adideezhchíinii
PRED:	Descendants of Adam
GOLD:	The Descendants of Adam

ID:	5612
INPUT:	Nídii'nééh ; jó , díí nídadéét'i'ii át'é ; nihí éí nił dahoniidlǫ́ǫgo nizhónígo chánah nílį́įgo ádíínííł .
PRED:	“ Get up , ” they said , “ for you are the source of your names .
GOLD:	Get up , for it is your duty to tell us how to proceed in setting things straight . We are behind you , so be strong and take action . ”

ID:	5613
INPUT:	David éí Jésii biye' nilíinii bisodizin kojį' nidahaazt'i' .
PRED:	David son of Jesse began to pray for his son David .
GOLD:	( This ends the prayers of David son of Jesse . )

ID:	5614
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Bábilan dine'é atíidoolííł
PRED:	A Message about Babylon
GOLD:	A Hymn of Praise to the

ID:	5615
INPUT:	doodaii' yóó'eeldéelii nízhdiiláago biniinaa hayooch'íidgo t'áá ádzaagóó ádee hazdiidziihgo díí doo ákǫ́ǫ́ át'éii t'áá ałtso háiida áyoolíiłgo éí yee ádił ni'iilzíhígíigi át'éego ádił adzisiihgo
PRED:	“ You must not commit adultery . If you have a solemn oath , you must not commit adultery with all your sins .
GOLD:	or you find lost property and lie about it , or you lie while swearing to tell the truth , or you commit any other such sin .

ID:	5616
INPUT:	Áko béésh bee diné bił niizhníłhaalgo éí diné jiisxíinii jílį́ ; diné jiisxíinii ts'ídá hodi'yoolyéłí .
PRED:	And if someone kills another person and kills another person and kills another person , it must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ But if someone strikes and kills another person with a piece of iron , it is murder , and the murderer must be executed .

ID:	5617
INPUT:	Nidi shikéyahgóó shik'éí bich'į' díínááł ; áadi índa shiye' Áízak be'asdzą́ą́ dooleełígíí bá nídidííłtééł .
PRED:	“ But go to my relatives and my family , where you will marry my wife . ”
GOLD:	Go instead to my homeland , to my relatives , and find a wife there for my son Isaac . ”

ID:	5618
INPUT:	Dine'é shich'į' nidaalteehii t'áá bí nitsídaakeesii bik'ehgo doo yá'át'ééh áhoot'éégóó deíkáahii shá bíighah bich'į' dah deeshnih ;
PRED:	Do n't let my people oppress me ; teach me what is right .
GOLD:	All day long I opened my arms to a rebellious people.But they follow their own evil pathsand their own crooked schemes .

ID:	5619
INPUT:	Éí bijéí t'áá ákogi át'éego yaa áhályą́ą́ nít'éé' , áádóó bíla' yee doo bił nahontł'agóó yá yigááł nít'éé' .
PRED:	He protects the godly hearts of the wicked , and he protects those who follow them .
GOLD:	He cared for them with a true heartand led them with skillful hands .

ID:	5620
INPUT:	Éí bąą hoda'ana'í bílák'ee hodííní'ą́ągo ti'dahoyoosnii' , áádóó hach'į' nidahwii'náago hoolzhish yę́ędą́ą́' nídanookąąhgo yá'ąąshdę́ę́' dahodisíníts'ą́ą́' , áádóó lą'ígóó aa a'ááh nínízinii bik'ehgo yisdáda'iiníiłii haa dadííní'ą́ ; éí hoda'ana'í bits'ą́ąjį' yisdádahwiiznil .
PRED:	Therefore , do n't be afraid of your enemies until the day of trouble is near , for your enemies have saved them from heaven and saved them from heaven .
GOLD:	So you handed them over to their enemies , who made them suffer . But in their time of trouble they cried to you , and you heard them from heaven . In your great mercy , you sent them liberators who rescued them from their enemies .

ID:	5621
INPUT:	bikáá' náá'iiniihí óola bee ályaii áádóó ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́įhii áádóó tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii índa níbaal bii' hodílzinii bich'é'étiingi dáádiníbaalígíí ;
PRED:	He overlaid the incense with gold , the incense ; the curtain of the Tabernacle , the curtain at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	the gold altar ; the anointing oil and fragrant incense ; the curtain for the entrance of the sacred tent ;

ID:	5622
INPUT:	Nidaal'a'í hada'ídées'į́į'go binanit'a'í nádzáago biidoołtséłígíí , éí bik'idahojidlí ; t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , Bí áká doolzisgo bikáá' adání yich'į' dah yidínóołbįįłgo yiyaa nidi'yookááł .
PRED:	He will see the kings of the guard , and he will look down on the rocks of the sky . He will sit down on the ground , and he will bow down to the ground .
GOLD:	The servants who are ready and waiting for his return will be rewarded . I tell you the truth , he himself will seat them , put on an apron , and serve them as they sit and eat !

ID:	5623
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi át'é shá bidíníniidii yídin danilíinii éí bíni'dii yéego bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo ádaaníi le' ; t'áá aaníí , bíni' áłahjį' kódaaníi doo , Bóhólníihii ayóó át'éii nilį́ ; bá naal'a'í yá'át'éehgo dah ooléłígíí bił nihooshǫǫh !
PRED:	Let me sing for joy , O Lord , for they will be filled with joy , for they will receive no joy for their enemies .
GOLD:	But give great joy to those who came to my defense.Let them continually say , “ Great is the Lord , who delights in blessing his servant with peace ! ”

ID:	5624
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é éí Diyin God yééhósinígíí yee yaa haniih
PRED:	God 's Anger at Sin
GOLD:	Weeping in Jerusalem

ID:	5625
INPUT:	nihí doo Mózes át'į́ yę́ęgi ádeiit'į́į da , jó , éí hanii' bits'ádi'nílíidgo , doo bits'ádi'nílíid da yileełígíí ádin silį́į'jį' Ízrel dine'é doo yik'i dadooghał da jinízingo bik'íníjíłtih nít'éé' .
PRED:	But Moses did n't make us right with us , for there was no resurrection of the heavens of Israel . He did n't let the people of Israel look at his feet .
GOLD:	We are not like Moses , who put a veil over his face so the people of Israel would not see the glory , even though it was destined to fade away .

ID:	5626
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Jesus bee shił chohoo'į́įgo t'óó hodíína'go Timothy nihich'į' deesh'aał nisin , áádóó aadę́ę́' nádzáago ádanoht'éegi shił bénáhoosdzingo shił náhodooshǫǫł .
PRED:	May the Lord be revealed to Timothy , and I will send you into the chains of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	If the Lord Jesus is willing , I hope to send Timothy to you soon for a visit . Then he can cheer me up by telling me how you are getting along .

ID:	5627
INPUT:	T'áadoo ni<unk> dléłígóogo ha'át'íishą' biniyé nitsásk'eh niyaa hai'aah doo ?
PRED:	“ Do n't let me listen to your eyes ? Why do you care for us ?
GOLD:	If you ca n't pay it , even your bed will be snatched from under you .

ID:	5628
INPUT:	Áko ni , diné náánáła' neinitinii nílíinii , da' niísh t'áá ni doo niná'ádidíníítįįł da ? Doo azhni'įįh da , diníigo diné bił hólne'ii , t'áá ni daats'í aní'įįhgo ádíní ?
PRED:	“ Son of man , why are you talking about your own people ? Do you teach the truth ? Do you understand what you say ? ”
GOLD:	Well then , if you teach others , why do n't you teach yourself ? You tell others not to steal , but do you steal ?

ID:	5629
INPUT:	Éí doodago , kin biyaadę́ę́' haastł'inígíí hajíítł'ingo ch'ééh ájííł'įįdgo , dahoníł'ínígíí t'áá ałtso há nidahałt'i'go
PRED:	He did what was happening to the walls of the wall , and he did what was happening to him .
GOLD:	Otherwise , you might complete only the foundation before running out of money , and then everyone would laugh at you .

ID:	5630
INPUT:	Tó yaadziidii nahonishłin ; shits'in t'áá át'é ahádahaazwod ; ak'ah neesk'ihii dííłhį́'ígi át'éego shijéí niseedzá ;
PRED:	Your bones are like water ; your bones are like a clay pot .
GOLD:	My life is poured out like water , and all my bones are out of joint.My heart is like wax , melting within me .

ID:	5631
INPUT:	Áádóó yóó'adashizdeez'ą́ągo diyin dabidi'níinii bich'į' łikání halchinii dazhdííłidgo índa t'áá hó dahála' bee bindajishnishii bich'į' nidahojiłáago doo yá'áshónígi ádajíít'įįdígíí biniinaa bee atíhodeeshłíiłii hak'ijį' bee hadeesdzih .
PRED:	Then they will burn their idols in the worship of idols , worshiping the idols of their gods . They will say to them , ‘ I will answer them by worshiping idols . ' ”
GOLD:	I will pronounce judgmenton my people for all their evil — for deserting me and burning incense to other gods.Yes , they worship idols made with their own hands !

ID:	5632
INPUT:	Shidá'ák'ehgi níyá , shilah índa bá'deeshxehii nílíinii , mir éí spáis shee hólóonii bił áłah íishłaa . Shitsés'ná bitł'izh bits'a' t'áá bił yíyą́ą́' ; shiwáin áádóó abe' yishdlą́ą́' . Da'ohsą́ , shik'isóó danohłíinii ; ídlą́ , ayóó'óósh'níinii , łą́ągo ahíkaah .
PRED:	I have given my greetings to my sister , my sister , my sister , my sister , fragrant fragrant fragrant fragrant incense and honey . I am filled with milk and honey . I am filled with milk and honey .
GOLD:	I have entered my garden , my treasure , my bride ! I gather myrrh with my spicesand eat honeycomb with my honey.I drink wine with my milk.Oh , lover and beloved , eat and drink ! Yes , drink deeply of your love !

ID:	5633
INPUT:	Áko Saul éí David áyidííniid , Shiye' David nílíinii , nik'ihojidlíi doo , ayóó ádaat'éii t'óó ahayóí áálíił doo áádóó ałdó' ak'eh dinídlį́į dooleeł . Ákohgo David dah nídiidzá , áádóó Saul ałdó' bikéyahgóó anáádzá .
PRED:	Then David said to David , “ May your son David be blessed , my son David and bless him . Then he returned to his own land and returned to the land of Saul .
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed. ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	5634
INPUT:	Sáíman , ( náánáła' yízhí yee hóózhi'go Peter yinílyée doo , hodííniid ) índa yił háá'áázh Andrew índa James áádóó John áádóó Philip áádóó Barthálemew
PRED:	Simon ( called the name of Simon ( which means “ named Peter ) , and Andrew ( which means “ Philip ) , Philip , Philip , and John ( son of Alphaeus ) .
GOLD:	Simon ( whom he named Peter ) , Andrew ( Peter 's brother ) , James , John , Philip , Bartholomew ,

ID:	5635
INPUT:	Áádóó Ábner éí Bénjamin dine'é ałdó' yich'į' yee hahaasdzíí' , índa Ábner éí Hííbran kin haal'áagi David ałdó' yaa níyáago yich'į' yee hahaasdzíí' ; éí Ízrel dine'é bił yá'ádaat'éehii áádóó Bénjamin dine'é bił yá'ádaat'éehii t'áá át'é yee yił nahasne' .
PRED:	Then Abner told the men of Benjamin , “ As surely as Abner and Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Abner also spoke with the men of Benjamin . Then he went to Hebron to tell David that all the people of Israel and Benjamin had agreed to support him .

ID:	5636
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar áhodííniid , Shéídrak , Mííshak áádóó Abédniigo , t'áásh aaníí shidiyin danilíinii doo bá nidaał'a' da índa óola e'elyaii biisį'ii doo bich'į' nidahohłáa da ?
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar said , “ Look , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , and Abednego that you can worship the gods of God .
GOLD:	Nebuchadnezzar said to them , “ Is it true , Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego , that you refuse to serve my gods or to worship the gold statue I have set up ?

ID:	5637
INPUT:	Ákohgo Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel áádóó diné neeznált'éego yił yíkaígíí nídiijée'go Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í éí Shéífan biye' Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah éí Júdah kéyahgi nant'áago áyiilaa yę́ę diltłish yee dayiisxį́ .
PRED:	So Ishmael and his men killed them . They killed Gedaliah son of Ahikam son of Ahikam and killed Gedaliah son of Ahikam son of Shaphan .
GOLD:	Ishmael and his ten men suddenly jumped up , drew their swords , and killed Gedaliah , whom the king of Babylon had appointed governor .

ID:	5638
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bá naal'a'í ti'hooznii'ii
PRED:	Paul 's Many Wives
GOLD:	The

ID:	5639
INPUT:	T'áá áníiltso dibé nahalingo yóó'adahiikááh ; t'ááłá'í niitínígo t'áá nihí daniidzingóó ahiikááh , índa doo ákwii ádeiit'įįdii t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii hak'iidii'ą́ .
PRED:	We will turn away from our flocks of sheep , and we will be completely destroyed . We will be completely destroyed by the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	All of us , like sheep , have strayed away.We have left God 's paths to follow our own.Yet the Lord laid on himthe sins of us all .

ID:	5640
INPUT:	Ákót'éego Mó'ab dine'é binanit'a'í danilíinii dah nídiikaigo Béílak yaa nákaigo ádaaní , Béílam éí doo nihił nihideeshkah da , nihiłní .
PRED:	So Balak 's officials went to Balak and told Balak , “ I will not go to Balak . ”
GOLD:	So the Moabite officials returned to King Balak and reported , “ Balaam refused to come with us . ”

ID:	5641
INPUT:	Áko Gérshan dine'é nilíinii bizhé'é éí ba'áłchíní yá aląąjį' sizínígíí Léíyel biye' Iiláíyasaf wolyé .
PRED:	The Gershonite clans of the clans of the clans of the tribe of Levi went to meet the father of Bilhah , the leader of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	The leader of the Gershonite clans was Eliasaph son of Lael .

ID:	5642
INPUT:	Kin bii' sohodizin áńdoolníłígíí bee diné bi'ílnii'
PRED:	The
GOLD:	A Call to Rebuild the Temple

ID:	5643
INPUT:	Áko ni , diné nílíinii , Ízrel dine'é bidził naaznilígíí bich'į' handziihgo ábidiní , Ízrel dine'é bidził nohłíinii , Bóhólníihii áníinii dadoohts'į́į́h :
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to the mountains of Israel , O mountains of Israel ,
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy to Israel 's mountains . Give them this message : O mountains of Israel , hear the word of the Lord !

ID:	5644
INPUT:	Áko háíghal , nít'éé' shoo , diné léi' éí áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii éé' yee hadít'éego <unk> dę́ę́' óola sis yee ákászaazgo sizį́ .
PRED:	Then I saw a man who was standing beside the linen linen cloth . As he stood beside the linen robe , he stood beside the linen sash .
GOLD:	I looked up and saw a man dressed in linen clothing , with a belt of pure gold around his waist .

ID:	5645
INPUT:	Áádóó k'adę́ę nihozhneeł'ąąhgo asdzání haa ádahalyánígíí ádahałní , T'áadoo nił yé'í , háálá ashkii shíníłchį́ . Nidi t'áadoo háádzoodzíí'góó t'óó nahonizhníł'ąąd .
PRED:	“ Do n't worry about it , ” she said . “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't worry about this boy ! ” But the boy did n't get a boy 's hand .
GOLD:	She died in childbirth , but before she passed away the midwives tried to encourage her . “ Do n't be afraid , ” they said . “ You have a baby boy ! ” But she did not answer or pay attention to them .

ID:	5646
INPUT:	ábididííniił , Jánathan bighandi doo dadeestsaał da , áko doo ákǫ́ǫ́ náshidííł'aał da , dishníigo aláahgo naat'áanii bich'į' ádaa ná'iisiskan .
PRED:	“ Do n't let me die , ” Jonathan replied . “ I 'm not sending you to die . ”
GOLD:	If this happens , just tell them you begged me not to send you back to Jonathan 's dungeon , for fear you would die there . ”

ID:	5647
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , T'ah abíínídą́ą́' nídidíí'nahgo Féro bidááhdę́ę́' nidíínááł , áko ábididííniił , Hííbrew dine'é biBóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shidine'é béé'níłnííh , áko shich'į' nidahałáa doo .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in front of Pharaoh 's presence before Pharaoh , and say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Go and worship my people . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	5648
INPUT:	Éí nihidine'é yę́ę na'adlo' yee atídayííł'įįdgo danihizhé'é yę́ę bada'áłchíní yázhí dadínóonééł biniyé t'áákáajį' ch'ídahohjááh , deiłníigo .
PRED:	“ You have rejected our ancestors , ” they told them . “ Do n't let them die ! ”
GOLD:	This king exploited our people and oppressed them , forcing parents to abandon their newborn babies so they would die .

ID:	5649
INPUT:	Áko béésh łitsoii íí'áa dooígíí áyiilaa , áádóó bílátah dah doo'niłígíí bá naneesdizígíí bąąh pámgrenit aneest'ą' béé'ályaago yił yik'ídeisti' ; łahjí dah si'ą́ą dooígíí ałdó' ákót'éego yá ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He made the bronze rings and attached them to the top of the capitals on the top of the pomegranates .
GOLD:	He also encircled the latticework with two rows of pomegranates to decorate the capitals over the pillars .

ID:	5650
INPUT:	Áádóó dayiiłtsood , háálá bee baa hwiidínóot'įįłii t'ah doo bee hoł dahane' da .
PRED:	And they did n't believe him because they did n't believe him .
GOLD:	They held him in custody because they did not know what to do with him .

ID:	5651
INPUT:	Ákwe'é yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' hatah honiigaiigo dadziztsą́ , áko táádeizgizgo ná'ádeídi nideistį́ .
PRED:	On the third day he was white , and he healed the white , and he healed them .
GOLD:	About this time she became ill and died . Her body was washed for burial and laid in an upstairs room .

ID:	5652
INPUT:	Diné binda'adlo'go indahagizii yąąh nahwiiłkaad , áko yindaalnishii doo bee bada'ídeeł da .
PRED:	You are skilled by the humble , and they will never be skilled in the dust .
GOLD:	He frustrates the plans of schemersso the work of their hands will not succeed .

ID:	5653
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii bitsi'ké índa diné t'áá ałtso Mízpahgi daadziihgo siláo binanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan éí Aháíkam biye' Gedaláíyah bee bóhólníihgo áyiilaii Nethanáíyah biye' Íshmeiyel éí yisnáago Áman dine'é bitahgóó iiníí łkaad .
PRED:	Then Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and all the other sons of Gedaliah son of Gedaliah , who was put to Gedaliah son of Hananiah , who was put to death .
GOLD:	Then Ishmael made captives of the king 's daughters and the other people who had been left under Gedaliah 's care in Mizpah by Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard . Taking them with him , he started back toward the land of Ammon .

ID:	5654
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí Béíshan kéyah biyi' bíí' dooígíí yeidiní'ą́ , nidi Manáseh dine'é łahjį' ałníí'dóóígíí éí dabik'is bikédaayah bitahgi Jórdan tooh e'e'aahjígo bíí' dooígíí Jáshowa beidiní'ą́ . Áádóó dahaghangóó Jáshowa hwéé'iisnii'go hak'ijisdli' ,
PRED:	So Moses gave the rest of the tribe of Manasseh to the tribe of Manasseh in the middle of the Jordan River . Then Joshua blessed the tribes of Manasseh , and he blessed them in the middle of the Jordan . Then Joshua blessed Joshua and blessed them .
GOLD:	Moses had given the land of Bashan , east of the Jordan River , to the half-tribe of Manasseh . ( The other half of the tribe was given land west of the Jordan . ) As Joshua sent them away and blessed them ,

ID:	5655
INPUT:	Éí bąą ni'ana'í nilíinii dichin nilį́įgo ba'dííłtsoł ; dibáá' nilį́įgo tó baa dííkááł , háálá ákónít'į́įgo bitsiit'áagi tsííd lą'í yéinitsi doo .
PRED:	Do n't let your enemies be hungry , for you will have no water for many days .
GOLD:	Instead , “ If your enemies are hungry , feed them.If they are thirsty , give them something to drink.In doing this , you will heapburning coals of shame on their heads . ”

ID:	5656
INPUT:	Áko táadi azlį́į́' góne' siláo yinanit'a'í nilíinii ashdladiingo bisiláo yił anáábi'diis'a' . Áko díí ashdladiin siláo binanit'a'í ákóde haayáago Iiláíjah bidáahjį' nitsizhdinígo'go níjookąąhgo ábijiní , Diyin God yá naal'a'í nílíinii , nánooshkąąh , bíni'dii she'iina' índa díí ashdladiingo siláo bida'iina' ná nidaal'a'í nił nilį́į le' .
PRED:	So the captain of the guard , the commander of the guard , and the commander of the guard came to him and bowed low before him . Then he said , “ Please let me be your servants , O God ! ”
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	5657
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham haghangi há naal'a'í alą́ąjį'ígíí hwee hólóonii yaa áhályánígíí ábizhdííniid , T'áá shǫǫdí , shitsoosk'id biyaa adílnííh .
PRED:	And Abraham said to his servant Abraham , “ Please let me be my servant . Please let my sister be disgraced . ”
GOLD:	One day Abraham said to his oldest servant , the man in charge of his household , “ Take an oath by putting your hand under my thigh .

ID:	5658
INPUT:	Nidi ni éí nits'ąą hasti' doo nít'éé' ! Náháchįįhgo háishą' nidááhdóó yidoozįįł ?
PRED:	But who can not stand before you ? Who will stand before you ?
GOLD:	No wonder you are greatly feared ! Who can stand before you when your anger explodes ?

ID:	5659
INPUT:	Áko Jesus bimá áyidííniid , Asdzání , shíísh haa shidíílíiłgo shaa nánít'į́ ? Baa nideeshaałígíí t'ah doo shá baa hoolzhíish da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I am the woman , my mother , my mother . Why do n't you look for me ? ”
GOLD:	“ Dear woman , that 's not our problem , ” Jesus replied . “ My time has not yet come . ”

ID:	5660
INPUT:	Íífreiyim biyooch'íidgo áníinii áádóó ade áhósinii biniinaa bi'deesteh
PRED:	A Warning against Israel and Israel
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5661
INPUT:	nidi kót'éego bá ádoohłííł , áko t'áá dahináa doo áádóó doo dadínóonéeł da ; aláahgo diyingo nidaalyéhígíí yich'į' nídadikahgo Éran áádóó biye'ké ákóne' yah anákahgo Kóhath dine'é t'áá ałtso bindajil'a' dooígíí índa dabiyéel dooígíí ałdó' yich'į' ninádei'nił doo ,
PRED:	“ Do not let them die , and you will die in the presence of the Most Holy Place . They will go to the Most Holy Place , and they will return to the priests , and they will serve him .
GOLD:	This is what you must do so they will live and not die when they approach the most sacred objects . Aaron and his sons must always go in with them and assign a specific duty or load to each person .

ID:	5662
INPUT:	Áko Bénjamin dine'é ádadííniid , Átséédą́ą́' yę́ęgi át'éego yóó'adahineezhchą́ą́' . Nidi Ízrel dine'é ádaaní , Kin haal'áádóó da'nítiingóó yóó'adahodíníit'ah biniyé dadíníichééł .
PRED:	The men of Benjamin replied , “ As surely as the men of Benjamin had fled to the town of Israel . But the people of Israel fled from the town . ”
GOLD:	Then the warriors of Benjamin shouted , “ We 're defeating them as we did before ! ” But the Israelites had planned in advance to run away so that the men of Benjamin would chase them along the roads and be drawn away from the town .

ID:	5663
INPUT:	Bił dah nídi'diilnihgo náádahaniihii dílzinígíí t'áá át'é éí Ízrel dine'é Bóhólníihii yaa deidiyii'aahígíí niye'ké índa nitsi'ké bił nihaa diní'ą́ ; éí ahóyéel'áágóó bee nihoní'áanii át'é ; áshįįh bee aha'deet'áanii ahóyéel'áágóó Bóhólníihii binááł ni áádóó na'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii nihich'į' bee nihodiní'ą́ .
PRED:	“ You have built a sacred offering to the Lord , the people of Israel , and they have given you a permanent law for the Lord . You have given us a permanent law to you forever and ever .
GOLD:	Yes , I am giving you all these holy offerings that the people of Israel bring to the Lord . They are for you and your sons and daughters , to be eaten as your permanent share . This is an eternal and unbreakable covenant between the Lord and you , and it also applies to your descendants . ”

ID:	5664
INPUT:	Kwe'é da'oodlání áłah nádleehígi ne'ayóó'ó'ó'ni' yee naa dahalne' . Éí náásgóó deíkááhgóó chodayooł'į́į dooleełígíí bee bíká anánílwo'go Diyin God baa bił hózhǫ́ǫ doo biniyé ánít'į́ .
PRED:	Pray for the church in the church in the church , and trust in those who love God 's love .
GOLD:	They have told the church here of your loving friendship . Please continue providing for such teachers in a manner that pleases God .

ID:	5665
INPUT:	Áko nihí doo kwe'é dashinooł'a' da , nidi Diyin God át'į́ , áko Féro bizhé'é nishłį́įgo índa bighan t'áá át'é áádóó Ííjip kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' binanisht'áago áshiilaa .
PRED:	So you sent me to say , ‘ I am not here in Egypt , and I did everything I did . '
GOLD:	So it was God who sent me here , not you ! And he is the one who made me an adviser to Pharaoh — the manager of his entire palace and the governor of all Egypt .

ID:	5666
INPUT:	ashdla'ígíí <unk> niks , hastánígíí sárdiyas , tsosts'idígíí <unk> so<unk> , tseebíígíí béril , náhást'éígíí tópaz , neeznánígíí <unk> <unk> , ła'ts'áadahígíí jéísinth , naakits'áadahígíí ámethist .
PRED:	The first row of gemstones to contain two rows of gemstones on the first day . The first row will contain a red carnelian , an emerald . It will be a twelve pieces of twelve pieces of twelve pieces .
GOLD:	the fifth onyx , the sixth carnelian , the seventh chrysolite , the eighth beryl , the ninth topaz , the tenth chrysoprase , the eleventh jacinth , the twelfth amethyst .

ID:	5667
INPUT:	Ákwii yoołkááł yę́ędą́ą́' John Tó Yee Asį́įhii , Judíya kéyah honoojíidi níyáago halne'go kóní ,
PRED:	About that time John the Baptist began preaching the Baptist in Judea , and he said ,
GOLD:	In those days John the Baptist came to the Judean wilderness and began preaching . His message was ,

ID:	5668
INPUT:	Biye' alą́ąjį' naagháhígíí dá'ák'ehdi naaghá , nít'éé' áádę́ę́' hooghanjį' náádáałgo , dilní índa da'azhishgo yidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	When he heard his son , he returned from his home and returned to his home .
GOLD:	“ Meanwhile , the older son was in the fields working . When he returned home , he heard music and dancing in the house ,

ID:	5669
INPUT:	áko ákǫ́ǫ́ i'ííł'a'go awáalyaadi John bitsiits'iin k'élne' ,
PRED:	Then he sent this message to John in prison .
GOLD:	So John was beheaded in the prison ,

ID:	5670
INPUT:	Nihá nihonít'i' , nihá nihodoot'ihígíí baa hoolzhiizh ; nihik'ijį' ídlį́įgo hanihidilzíidgo nihik'i hwiidooleeł , jó'akon .
PRED:	We have been judged for us , and we will be judged in the world . We will be judged in the world .
GOLD:	The end has come.It has finally arrived.Your final doom is waiting !

ID:	5671
INPUT:	T'áadoo ha'át'íhída nihida'diił'áhí , nidi ahééh danohsingo t'áá ałtsojį' sodizin índa ná'ookąąh bee deínóhkeedígíí Diyin God bił béédahonohsin le' .
PRED:	Do n't be kind of praise , but I want to pray for God and to give thanks to God .
GOLD:	Do n't worry about anything ; instead , pray about everything . Tell God what you need , and thank him for all he has done .

ID:	5672
INPUT:	Éíhaz dahazhé'é yę́ę bitahjį' ajiiłhaazhgo Jerúsalem kin haal'áhígi yóó'ádahoolaa , nidi Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í danilínígíí dabitséní'ootséél góne' éí doo nidahastį́į da . Áádóó haye' Heziikáíyah éí hatsásk'ehgi nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	When Ahaz died , he buried his ancestors in Jerusalem , he was buried in the City of King Ahaz of Israel . He reigned in the tomb of King Hezekiah 's son Hezekiah . Then Hezekiah became the next king .
GOLD:	When Ahaz died , he was buried in Jerusalem but not in the royal cemetery of the kings of Judah . Then his son Hezekiah became the next king .

ID:	5673
INPUT:	Bíla' nishtł'ají yee shitsiiyah déesnii' áádóó bigaan nish'náájí yee shináznii' .
PRED:	He built my hands on his right hand and his right hand .
GOLD:	His left arm is under my head , and his right arm embraces me .

ID:	5674
INPUT:	Nidi Peter áháłní , Azhą́ t'áá ádzíłtso t'ą́ą́' anázhníídee' nidi , shí éí ts'ídá doo t'ą́ą́' anídeeshtłish da .
PRED:	But Peter replied , “ But I will not go back to the ground . ”
GOLD:	Peter said to him , “ Even if everyone else deserts you , I never will . ”

ID:	5675
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shijéí bee doo ádaa hash'niih da , índa doo ádaa jííníshdlíigo naasháa da . Ayóó ádaat'éii doo ła'deeshłíiłii doo beinísht'į́į da .
PRED:	I will thank the Lord , and I will not boast about my heart . I will not be proud and proud .
GOLD:	Lord , my heart is not proud ; my eyes are not haughty.I do n't concern myself with matters too greator too awesome for me to grasp .

ID:	5676
INPUT:	Éí bąą k'ad Bóhólníihii bizaad yísíníłts'ą́ą́' . Shą́ą́' , ádíní , Ízrel dine'é t'áadoo bik'ijį' yáníłti'go hólne'í , índa Áízak ba'áłchíní t'áadoo bik'ijį' saad hidiiłtáahgo hólne'í .
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from the Lord : Do n't you remember what the Lord says : Do n't be afraid of your descendants , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	Now then , listen to this message from the Lord : “ You say , ‘ Do n't prophesy against Israel.Stop preaching against my people . '

ID:	5677
INPUT:	Jó , dine'é ła' doo béédahonohsinii hágo dabididohniił , áádóó dadine'é doo nihéédahósinii Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God áádóó Ízrel dine'é biDiyin nilíinii binahjį' nihaa hidookah , háálá éí ayóó ádanoht'éego ánihiilaa .
PRED:	“ You will say , ‘ You will say , ‘ You will know that the Lord your God has made us holy . ' ”
GOLD:	You also will command nations you do not know , and peoples unknown to you will come running to obey , because I , the Lord your God , the Holy One of Israel , have made you glorious . ”

ID:	5678
INPUT:	Nidi hazhé'é yiyiisxínígíí ba'áłchíní éí t'áadoo nidzistseed da ; Mózes binaaltsoos biyi' bee haz'áanii t'áá bee ak'e'ashchínígíí biyi' Bóhólníihii haadzíí' kóníigo , Azhé'é danilíinii áłchíní biniinaa doo nidootsił da , doodaii' áłchíní bizhé'é biniinaa doo nidootsił da , nidi diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo ádił nidadziisíhígíí biniinaa nidaho'ditseed doo .
PRED:	But when Moses killed his father 's parents , he commanded Moses , “ Do n't let them die in the Book of the Law of the Law of the Lord 's parents , but they will be killed , but they will be killed . ”
GOLD:	However , he did not kill the children of the assassins , for he obeyed the command of the Lord as written by Moses in the Book of the Law : “ Parents must not be put to death for the sins of their children , nor children for the sins of their parents . Those deserving to die must be put to death for their own crimes . ”

ID:	5679
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii t'áá yee shich'į' haadzí'ígi át'éego dah diiyáago Yufréítiiz tooh nílínígíí bíighahdi nídíł'į́į́' .
PRED:	So the Lord did as the Lord commanded me .
GOLD:	So I went and hid it by the Euphrates as the Lord had instructed me .

ID:	5680
INPUT:	Díí doo nihainísht'į́įgo ádíshníi da , háálá t'áá íídą́ą́' ánihidííniid , Łá'í daniidlį́įgo nii'néełgo , doodaii' dahinii'náago nihijéí bii' dahonohłǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	I am saying , ‘ I am sending you out , for I am sending you out of the town , and you are living in our hearts . '
GOLD:	I 'm not saying this to condemn you . I said before that you are in our hearts , and we live or die together with you .

ID:	5681
INPUT:	Jó , shidiyingo naal'a'í nihilą́ąjį' yigáałgo Ámor dine'é áádóó Hét dine'é áádóó Píírez dine'é áádóó Kéínan dine'é áádóó Háíva dine'é índa Jííbas dine'é yich'į' nihidoo'ish , áko éí ádahodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	“ Look , the angel of the Hittites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	For my angel will go before you and bring you into the land of the Amorites , Hittites , Perizzites , Canaanites , Hivites , and Jebusites , so you may live there . And I will destroy them completely .

ID:	5682
INPUT:	Áádóó e'e'áahgo náá'iiniih baa hoolzhiizhgo shi'éé' áádóó shi'éénééz nehéłdládígíí t'ahdii bee áká síszaazgo t'óó shił ahayóigo sídáhídóó nídiish'na' , áko nitsidinígo'go Bóhólníihii shiDiyin God bich'į' dah didiishnii' .
PRED:	I was in the evening when I was in the evening of the evening , I tore my clothes in the evening . I put my cloak in the presence of the Lord my God .
GOLD:	At the time of the sacrifice , I stood up from where I had sat in mourning with my clothes torn . I fell to my knees and lifted my hands to the Lord my God .

ID:	5683
INPUT:	Júdah kéyah éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin silį́į́' áádóó Ízrel dine'é éí bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii silį́į́' .
PRED:	Judah grew up in the Temple of the Lord , and the kingdom of Judah became king .
GOLD:	the land of Judah became God 's sanctuary , and Israel became his kingdom .

ID:	5684
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii hiná ; éí shitsé niłdzilii nilį́įgo baa ha'niih le' , áádóó Diyin God yisdáshíłtéehii ayóó át'éii nilį́į le' ;
PRED:	Let me praise the Lord , the Rock of my salvation , and may God be saved .
GOLD:	The Lord lives ! Praise to my Rock ! May the God of my salvation be exalted !

ID:	5685
INPUT:	Áádóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaaígíí t'áá át'é índa tsin dootł'izh naazkaadii t'áá át'é dabiyaagóó ákǫ́ǫ́ eda'alyaii bich'į' nahadlá bá nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He made pagan shrines for all the pagan shrines and under every green tree .
GOLD:	They set up sacred pillars and Asherah poles at the top of every hill and under every green tree .

ID:	5686
INPUT:	Diné bijéí yee hóyáanii éí bik'eh ó'oo'níiłii shóidoołt'eeł , nidi diné doo áhályą́ą́góó yáłti'ii éí t'áadoo biniyéhí da jidooleeł .
PRED:	Wise words are wise , but fools are foolish , but fools are foolish .
GOLD:	The wise are glad to be instructed , but babbling fools fall flat on their faces .

ID:	5687
INPUT:	Da' diné shik'ee diniihii atílyaaígíísh bąą shił nihoozhǫǫhínda doo yá'át'éhígi ábi'diilyaagoósh baa ts'íigo lą́ą niizį́į́' ?
PRED:	Are you afraid of me ? Do you afraid of my enemies ? Are you afraid of destruction ?
GOLD:	“ Have I ever rejoiced when disaster struck my enemies , or become excited when harm came their way ?

ID:	5688
INPUT:	Tsé'édǫ́'ii bee atí'ályaaígíí
PRED:	A Plague of flies
GOLD:	A Plague of Gnats

ID:	5689
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é atíbi'diilyaa nidi t'áadoo yits'ą́ą́dóó ídahooł'ą́ą' da
PRED:	Israel 's Journey to Israel
GOLD:	's Chosen Servant

ID:	5690
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é aadę́ę́' yinéełgo biniinaa tsintah haz'ą́ áádóó bits'ádaoz'a' yóó'adoot'ánígi át'éego éí yoołkáa łdi bidziilgo bikin hadaas'áhígíí yóó'adeididoo'ááł áádóó bikéyah t'áadoo násdlį́'ígóó haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	I will send you out of the land of Israel out of the land of Israel . Then you will be buried in your own land , and your land will be completely destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Their largest cities will be like a deserted forest , like the land the Hivites and Amorites abandonedwhen the Israelites came here so long ago.It will be utterly desolate .

ID:	5691
INPUT:	Féstas kéyahgi níyáádóó táá' yiską́ągo Sesaríyadóó Jerúsalem góde ííyá .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Festus went to Caesarea and stayed in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Three days after Festus arrived in Caesarea to take over his new responsibilities , he left for Jerusalem ,

ID:	5692
INPUT:	Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó índa Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi da'nítiingóó yaa nidaakaígíísh doo yíní'į́į da ?
PRED:	“ Do you see the towns of Judah and Jerusalem ? Do you see the streets of Judah ?
GOLD:	Do n't you see what they are doing throughout the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem ?

ID:	5693
INPUT:	Béeso tálent wolyéhígíí binahjį' hane' bee ak'idi'dootį́įłii
PRED:	Parable of the money
GOLD:	Parable of the Three Servants

ID:	5694
INPUT:	Éigi át'éego nii' sizíinii bá hódzą́ nił bééhózin doo , hódzą́ bik'ííníyáago náás ná honít'i' doo , áádóó nił chohoo'íinii doo nahjį' kódoolníił da .
PRED:	You know what you are doing , and you will find wisdom to find wisdom , and you will have no hope to enjoy it .
GOLD:	In the same way , wisdom is sweet to your soul.If you find it , you will have a bright future , and your hopes will not be cut short .

ID:	5695
INPUT:	Kóbididííniił , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Kin haal'áagi diné nideiłtseedgo bidił danílį́įgo ádeile'ii índa eda'alyaii ádá ádeile'go yee nida'ádiilchxǫǫhii éí atíhodi'doolníłígíí bik'íhodoolzhishgo át'é .
PRED:	“ Say to the people , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of the town is a god of a town and a god of murder . ' ”
GOLD:	and give her this message from the Sovereign Lord : O city of murderers , doomed and damned — city of idols , filthy and foul —

ID:	5696
INPUT:	Jó , doo ákwii ánít' éhígíí yee' ákót'éego yániiłti'índa diné binídahwéedǫ́ǫsii yádaałti'ígi át'éego yáshti' dooleeł nínízingo nihidí'aah .
PRED:	Look , I am like a fool ; I am like a shepherd who judges you .
GOLD:	Your sins are telling your mouth what to say.Your words are based on clever deception .

ID:	5697
INPUT:	Ákohgo kin haal'á bidáń'dítį́įhgi diné áłah silį́'ígíí t'áá ałtso áádóó hastóí ałdó' ádaaní , Oo'íinii lá daniidlį́ ni . Bóhólníihii éí asdzání nighan góne' yah adoogáłígíí díí yá íidoolííł : Réíchel áádóó Líyah éí t'áá áłah Ízrel dine'é k'ee'ąą yiyííłąądígi át'éego ná áyóle' . Éfata haz'ą́ągi ít'į́į doo áádóó Béthlehemgi ts'ídá néého'dílzin doo .
PRED:	So all the people who were standing in the city gate , including the elders of the town , and all the people of Israel are looking for the Lord 's home . The people of Israel are gone , and they will be gone to Bethlehem . ”
GOLD:	Then the elders and all the people standing in the gate replied , “ We are witnesses ! May the Lord make this woman who is coming into your home like Rachel and Leah , from whom all the nation of Israel descended ! May you prosper in Ephrathah and be famous in Bethlehem .

ID:	5698
INPUT:	Áko haníbaal nizh'nínil yę́ęgi kéyah ła' nidziis'nii' ; Shííkem bizhé'é Héímor wolyéii baa nidziis'nii' ; éí neeznádiin béeso bik'é nizhnínil .
PRED:	So Jacob bought his father 's camp at Shechem , and he sold his money to his father . He sold his money for thirty years .
GOLD:	Jacob bought the plot of land where he camped from the family of Hamor , the father of Shechem , for 100 pieces of silver .

ID:	5699
INPUT:	Éí Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii bee baa dahwii'niih , áádóó Diyin God honáłt'éego diné ájiilaaígíí ałdó' bee dayíníidziih .
PRED:	All glory to God , the Father of God , and he will also be like a human spirit .
GOLD:	Sometimes it praises our Lord and Father , and sometimes it curses those who have been made in the image of God .

ID:	5700
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God éí naanish bee ída'azįįdgo íidoolíiłgo nidaałnish doo áádóó nihits'ą́ą́dóó nidahachíihii áádóó nihilį́į́' nidahachíihii índa nihidáda'ak'ehdóó aneest'ą' bilááh náádleełgo yee nihik'ijidlíi doo ; jó , Bóhólníihii éí yá'át'éehii bee náás náádahodeezt'i'ii biniyé nihaa bił ninááhoozhǫǫh doo ; danihizhé'é yę́ę yaa bił nihoozhǫǫh nít'éé' yę́ęgi ádoonííł .
PRED:	And may the Lord your God 's work , for he has given you the work of the Lord your God and your ancestors . He will bless you and enjoy the fruit of your ancestors , and he will bless you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord your God will then make you successful in everything you do . He will give you many children and numerous livestock , and he will cause your fields to produce abundant harvests , for the Lord will again delight in being good to you as he was to your ancestors .

ID:	5701
INPUT:	Dah doohnééh ho'doo'niid
PRED:	The Temple Destroyed
GOLD:	Moses Sees the

ID:	5702
INPUT:	Haa nízáágóoshą' doo ákót'éégóó nidahoyoh'aah doo , áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii nihił nilį́į doo ? Síilah .
PRED:	How long will you continue to judge the wicked ? Will you accuse the wicked of the wicked ? Interlude
GOLD:	“ How long will you hand down unjust decisionsby favoring the wicked ? Interlude

ID:	5703
INPUT:	Jó , naalte' doo hool'áágóó a'ałk'ee sidáa da , nidi aYe' t'éiyá hool'áágóó hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Look , the slave who lives forever , but the Son of the Son of Man is the Son of Man .
GOLD:	A slave is not a permanent member of the family , but a son is part of the family forever .

ID:	5704
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Éran ííłní , Dabikéyah doo ła' nihíí' da doo , doodaii' bitahdóóígíí doo ła' nihíí' da doo , Ízrel dine'é bitahgi shí nihíí' nishłį́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Aaron , “ Do not belong to the land of Israel , or I am giving you as a special possession . I am among the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Aaron , “ You priests will receive no allotment of land or share of property among the people of Israel . I am your share and your allotment .

ID:	5705
INPUT:	Heziikáíyah éí Aizéíyah ííłní , Bóhólníihii náshidoołdzihígíí áádóó táá' yiską́ągo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góde deesháałgo ha'át'íísh bee bééhózin doo .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to Hezekiah , “ Lord , what will we do to rebuild the Temple of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Hezekiah had said to Isaiah , “ What sign will the Lord give to prove that he will heal me and that I will go to the Temple of the Lord three days from now ? ”

ID:	5706
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ádííniid , Bóhólníihii Diyin God nílíinii ! Ha'át'íí lá ahayóí lá . Áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii lá ádabiłní , Diltłish doo deidoołtséeł da , índa dichin doo nihaa doołnih da , nidi díí nihił haz'ą́ągi bee ach'į' hózhóonii nihaa dideesh'ááł , daaní , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ What is what the Sovereign Lord says : What will you see ? ” And the Lord said , “ I will never again again again see what I will do to you ! I will give you the land of war and famine . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , their prophets are telling them , ‘ All is well — no war or famine will come . The Lord will surely send you peace . ' ”

ID:	5707
INPUT:	Ákódahoodzaago łah jį́įgo nináázh'nítingo , ákwii Férisii danilíinii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii , éí Gáliliidi índa Judíya kéyahdi kin hadaas'áhídę́ę́' t'áá ałtso índa Jerúsalemdę́ę́' neheeskaigo naháaztą́ą́ lá , áádóó Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii bee náázhdi'doołááł biniyé hoł hólǫ́ .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the festival , during the festival , the Pharisees and teachers of religious law came from Galilee , and the teachers of religious law came from Galilee to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	One day while Jesus was teaching , some Pharisees and teachers of religious law were sitting nearby . ( It seemed that these men showed up from every village in all Galilee and Judea , as well as from Jerusalem . ) And the Lord 's healing power was strongly with Jesus .

ID:	5708
INPUT:	Nidi kin haal'áágóó t'ą́ą́' nídínídzáago Ábsalam ábididííniił , Aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , ná naal'a'í nishłį́į doo ; t'áá nizhé'é yá naal'a'í nishłį́ yę́ęgi át'éego k'ad ni ałdó' ná naal'a'í nishłį́į doo . Ákohgo Ahíthofel kót'é nínígíí doo idééłníi da shá ádíílííł .
PRED:	But when Absalom returned to the city , he said to Absalom , “ I am your servant Absalom . I am your servant , and you are your servant Ahithophel . I am your servant Ahithophel . ”
GOLD:	Return to Jerusalem and tell Absalom , ‘ I will now be your adviser , O king , just as I was your father 's adviser in the past . ' Then you can frustrate and counter Ahithophel 's advice .

ID:	5709
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God nihíká ádííniidgo bíká nihił chodahoo'ínígíí , índa ak'ihojidlí ayóó át'éii hodiyį́į́' bíí' dadooleełígíí nihił béédahodoozįįł biniyé nihijéí bii' nihił ííshją́ą́ ánihósin dooleełgo nihá sodiszin .
PRED:	And God called you to us , and we will know that we are faithful to God 's holy ones and his faithful love .
GOLD:	I pray that your hearts will be flooded with light so that you can understand the confident hope he has given to those he called — his holy people who are his rich and glorious inheritance .

ID:	5710
INPUT:	Nidi bee shidi'doolzįhígíí shá hólǫ́ , áko dooládó' lá bíighah adooleełjį' ádił ninisdzíił da !
PRED:	But if I am telling you about my bitter cup , then I ca n't have forgotten my blood .
GOLD:	I have a terrible baptism of suffering ahead of me , and I am under a heavy burden until it is accomplished .

ID:	5711
INPUT:	Josáíyah nant'áago tseebííts'áadah yihah góne' díí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii bee hoo'a' .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of Josiah 's reign , he sent this Passover celebration .
GOLD:	This Passover was celebrated in the eighteenth year of Josiah 's reign .

ID:	5712
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii bídayéełkaah bijį́ yá'ąąshiidę́ę́' Diyin God éí bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii chánah íidoolíiłii ts'ídá doo <unk> xǫǫh át'ée da doo . Ts'ídá doo ła'da bee hóhólníih da doo ; díí bee óhólníihgo bił dah nidahaz'áanii ałtso bił nihoníyáa doo , nidi éí bee óhólníihgo bił haz'áanii hool'áágóó hólǫ́ǫ doo .
PRED:	“ On that day the king of Heaven 's reign will be able to enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven . He will never forget the kingdom of Heaven 's kingdom . He will never be able to live forever .
GOLD:	“ During the reigns of those kings , the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed or conquered . It will crush all these kingdoms into nothingness , and it will stand forever .

ID:	5713
INPUT:	Hidínááhgóó t'áá ałtsojį' t'áá bí t'éí baa ákonínízingo yá'át'éehgo dahonít'i' góó niyoo<unk> doo .
PRED:	When you go to life , you will see what is right .
GOLD:	Seek his will in all you do , and he will show you which path to take .

ID:	5714
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' Jew dine'é aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii Páílat ádeidííniid , Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í t'áadoo bee ak'ená'ílchíhí , nidi , Díí diné t'áá bí ání , Jew dine'é Aláahgo biNanit'a'í nishłį́ , níigo bee ak'e'íłchí .
PRED:	The leading priests said to Pilate , “ I am writing this letter to King Pilate of the Jews , ” they replied . “ I am the king of the Jews . I am the king of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	Then the leading priests objected and said to Pilate , “ Change it from ‘ The King of the Jews ' to ‘ He said , I am King of the Jews . ' ”

ID:	5715
INPUT:	Diné ła' éí t'áá ha'át'íhída neeznáá daníjaa'ígíí éí t'ááłá'ígo shijaa' Bóhólníihii yaa néidii'aahígíí éí , Nááhideesh'nih , nízingo éí ashdla' aháádzooígíí t'ááłá'í yínéidoozohgo Bóhólníihii yaa néidii'aahii bą́ą́h ílínígíí ninéidoodlééł .
PRED:	“ If you present a person to the Lord , the priest must pay the money to the Lord , and I will pay it to the priest . ”
GOLD:	If you want to buy back the Lord 's tenth of the grain or fruit , you must pay its value , plus 20 percent .

ID:	5716
INPUT:	áko aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii índa bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii t'áá ałtso áłah áyiilaago háadi Christ doochíłígíí yína'ídééłkid .
PRED:	Then the leading priests and teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law will ask for this question about Christ .
GOLD:	He called a meeting of the leading priests and teachers of religious law and asked , “ Where is the Messiah supposed to be born ? ”

ID:	5717
INPUT:	Chahałheełdiísh t'óó bik'eda'ayóigo áálíłígíí béédahózin doo ? Hoyoo'néehgo haz'ą́ągiísh t'áá ákogi ánít'éhígíí bééhózin doo ?
PRED:	Are you going to see the miraculous signs and wonders ? Are you going to become righteous ?
GOLD:	Can the darkness speak of your wonderful deeds ? Can anyone in the land of forgetfulness talk about your righteousness ?

ID:	5718
INPUT:	Áádóó Diyin God éí Júdah dine'é bitahgóó t'áá ła' bijéí yee tsídeideeskéezgo áyiilaa , áko aláahgo naat'áanii índa naat'áanii danilíinii yich'į' yee haadzí'ígíí Bóhólníihii bizaad k'ehgo ádaadzaa .
PRED:	And I did what the Lord had commanded them , and the kings of Judah did what was saying .
GOLD:	At the same time , God 's hand was on the people in the land of Judah , giving them all one heart to obey the orders of the king and his officials , who were following the word of the Lord .

ID:	5719
INPUT:	ííłní , Shí ałdó' éí bee óhólníihii shaa dinoh'aah , áko t'áá háiida bik'i dah dahidishníihgo Níłch'i Diyinii biih dahwiileeh doo .
PRED:	Then he said , “ I tell you the Spirit , and anyone who will enter me will enter the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	“ Let me have this power , too , ” he exclaimed , “ so that when I lay my hands on people , they will receive the Holy Spirit ! ”

ID:	5720
INPUT:	Áádóó ch'é'étiin éí tsosts'idts'áadah ké silá ákóhoníłtéél áádóó ch'é'étiingi ni'dóó níléí wódahjį' nineel'áníjį' tseebíidi ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ánízah ; t'áá ałch'ijí ákót'é áádóó hodiyingo haz'ání góne' nááseego yí'nééł'ąąd , nít'éé' hastą́diindóó ba'aan tseebíí ké silá ákónízah , naaniigo éí tádiindóó ba'aan dį́į́' ké silá ákóhoníłtéél .
PRED:	The entrance of the gateway passage was 871/2 feet long , and it was 871/2 feet long . The inner courtyard was 871/2 feet long , and the Holy Place was 871/2 feet long .
GOLD:	The doorway was 171/2 feet wide , and the walls on each side of it were 83/4 feet long . The sanctuary itself was 70 feet long and 35 feet wide .

ID:	5721
INPUT:	Éí nahasdzáán t'ah doo álnééhdą́ą́' Diyin God hak'i diilnii' , áádóó nihoolzhíísh t'ah doo baa yíłkaahgóó nihá yit'íní áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	Before the earth was formed before God , the time of the earth was near .
GOLD:	God chose him as your ransom long before the world began , but now in these last days he has been revealed for your sake .

ID:	5722
INPUT:	éí shádi'áahjigo hahoodzogo Akrábim báhátis , Zin honoojíígóó hodeesdzo áádóó Kéídesh-barníyají shádi'ááh góde índa Hézran kin shijaa' bíighahgóó , Ádar haz'áníjį' índa <unk> haz'áníjį' hodeesdzo ,
PRED:	From there the boundary left the south of Zin as far as far as far as the border of Canaan . From there I went to Kadesh-barnea to Kadesh-barnea ,
GOLD:	ran south of Scorpion Pass into the wilderness of Zin , and then went south of Kadesh-barnea to Hezron . Then it went up to Addar , where it turned toward Karka .

ID:	5723
INPUT:	Aró'er kin shijaa'góoda , <unk> haz'ánígóoda , Éshtiimowa kin haal'áágóoda ,
PRED:	Jattir , Jattir ,
GOLD:	Aroer , Siphmoth , Eshtemoa ,

ID:	5724
INPUT:	Diné bíní si'áanii doo bił ałch'odíí'niił da áádóó diné bánáháchįįhii t'áadoo béédiilwo'í .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the law , and do n't be afraid of the wicked .
GOLD:	Do n't befriend angry peopleor associate with hot-tempered people ,

ID:	5725
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'á binaagi ahééhool'áhídóó bínáádí'nííł'ąął ; ha'a'aahjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' ; shádi'áahjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' ; e'e'aahjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' ; náhookǫsjigo táadi mííl ké silá áhonízahjį' bídadí'nííł'ąął , áko éí ałníi'gi kin haal'áa dooleeł . Díí kin hadaas'áago binaagi dahootsooígíí daabíí' dooleeł .
PRED:	“ Get up from the town of the city . On the east side of the east side of the east side of the Jordan River , and it will be observed from the east side of the north side of the north side of the Jordan River . ”
GOLD:	Measure off 3,000 feet outside the town walls in every direction — east , south , west , north — with the town at the center . This area will serve as the larger pastureland for the towns .

ID:	5726
INPUT:	áádóó béésh łigaii hazhnitáhígi át'éego áádóó yódí nées'į́į'ii házdéez'į́'ígi át'éego hánít'į́įgo ,
PRED:	They are like silver , and they are too hard for them .
GOLD:	Search for them as you would for silver ; seek them like hidden treasures .

ID:	5727
INPUT:	Nít'éé' jó'akon , éí kóníigo hadoolghaazh , Haashą' nihíléehgo ánít'į́ , Jesus , Diyin God biYe' nílíinii ? Atínihidi'doolníłígíí t'ah doo baa hoolzhíish da nidiísh atínihidíílíiłgo biniyé yíníyá ?
PRED:	When he cried out , “ What do you want ? ” And when the Son of God came to Jesus , he said , “ O God , do n't you do this ? ”
GOLD:	They began screaming at him , “ Why are you interfering with us , Son of God ? Have you come here to torture us before God 's appointed time ? ”

ID:	5728
INPUT:	Áko Béílak éí Béílam ííłní , Haa lá shííníł'įįd ? Shą́ą́' shida'ana'í bidíníídzįįł biniyé níká i'ííł'a' , nidi shoo , t'óó bik'ijiisínídli' .
PRED:	Balaam asked Balak , “ Why did you want me to curse my enemies ? ”
GOLD:	Then King Balak demanded of Balaam , “ What have you done to me ? I brought you to curse my enemies . Instead , you have blessed them ! ”

ID:	5729
INPUT:	Béthlehem kin shijaa'dóó diné neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin táá' .
PRED:	The citizens of Bethlehem
GOLD:	The people of Bethlehem123

ID:	5730
INPUT:	Nihokáá' dine'é dabijoołáii índa doo dandzinii índa doo bił da'ólta'ii Diyin God náyiilááh , áko éí bee ha'át'íhída t'áá ákónéehee ádaat'éii át'éego baa nitsáhákeesii t'áadoo nánídlínígóó bee bééhodoozįįł .
PRED:	But those who fear God will be put to the world , and those who do what is right . And those who do what is right .
GOLD:	God chose things despised by the world , things counted as nothing at all , and used them to bring to nothing what the world considers important .

ID:	5731
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Díí saad bee ak'e'íłchí ; ni áádóó Ízrel dine'é díí saad bik'ehgo nihił ahadadi'nisht'ą́ .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Write this letter to Moses and the people of Israel . This is what I am saying .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Write down all these instructions , for they represent the terms of the covenant I am making with you and with Israel . ”

ID:	5732
INPUT:	Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'íinii áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó kéédahat'íinii índa kǫ́ǫ́ aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii índa naat'áanii danilíinii kéédahojit'ínígóó t'áá díí jį́įdi át'éhígi át'éego hóyée'go há ha'oodzíi'ii ałtso áho'disdįįd doo , áádóó diné bik'ee t'óó bił adahayóigo , Tłehee yéi' , daaníigo yą́ą́h nidadikah doo , índa doo naagháhígóó hwiidoo'aał biniyé dahodiyeeshdlį́į́ł ,
PRED:	I will make Jerusalem an object of horror , the kings of Judah , the kings of Judah , the kings of Judah , and their cities will be destroyed , and their cities will be destroyed .
GOLD:	I went to Jerusalem and the other towns of Judah , and their kings and officials drank from the cup . From that day until this , they have been a desolate ruin , an object of horror , contempt , and cursing .

ID:	5733
INPUT:	Éí yidiiską́ą́góó naałniih bee bąąh dahaz'ą́ągo baa'ihii jílį́į dooleeł ; doo bi'díídee'ii jílį́ ; t'áá sahdii haghan doo ; níbaal haal'á bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi haghan doo .
PRED:	On that day the plague will be ceremonially unclean , and it will be ceremonially unclean . It will be ceremonially unclean for the camp .
GOLD:	As long as the serious disease lasts , they will be ceremonially unclean . They must live in isolation in their place outside the camp .

ID:	5734
INPUT:	Áko booshk'iizhjígo yah adahwiisdzą́ągo wóne'í nahaz'ánígíí éí náásee'go lók'aa' bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsoígi ákódahonízah áádóó naaniigo éí ałdó' ákódahoníłtéél índa éí hooghan bita'gi t'áá bíni' nahaz'ánígóó ádahonízahígíí éí tseebíí ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ákódahonízah . Ch'é'étiin siláii wóyahdi bízhnééł'ąądgo t'áá áłah lók'aa' bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsoígi ákóníłtéél .
PRED:	The entry room was 30 feet high , 30 feet wide , and 30 feet high . The entry room was 101/2 feet wide , and the gateway passage was 101/2 feet high .
GOLD:	There were guard alcoves on each side built into the gateway passage . Each of these alcoves was 101/2 feet square , with a distance between them of 83/4 feet along the passage wall . The gateway 's inner threshold , which led to the entry room at the inner end of the gateway passage , was 101/2 feet front to back .

ID:	5735
INPUT:	Christ be'iina' nihá ninéidiní'ánígíí bąą Diyin God bibee ayóó'ó'ó'ni' baa ákodaniidzį́į́' , áko nihí ałdó' Christ bee nihik'isóó danilíinii bá nihe'iina' ninádahidiit'aah doo .
PRED:	So Christ has given us his life because of our faith , so that we will continue to live with God 's mercy , and we will continue to live in Christ 's death .
GOLD:	We know what real love is because Jesus gave up his life for us . So we also ought to give up our lives for our brothers and sisters .

ID:	5736
INPUT:	Wót'áahdi atsá naat'a'ígíí , áádóó tsé'éłkáá'góó tł'iish naa'na'ígíí , áádóó tónteel bikáá'góó na'a'eełígíí , áádóó diné éí ch'ikę́ę́h yił ahiniidzįįhígíí .
PRED:	It was the first of the sea , a poisonous snake , the sea , and the woman who was sitting in the sea , the woman who was standing in the sea .
GOLD:	how an eagle glides through the sky , how a snake slithers on a rock , how a ship navigates the ocean , how a man loves a woman .

ID:	5737
INPUT:	Yínííł ił hózhǫ́ nídoodleeł
PRED:	A Promise of joy
GOLD:	Sadness Will Be Turned to Joy

ID:	5738
INPUT:	Nihijéí tł'áahdi Níłch'i Diyinii t'áá bí nihiníłch'i ííłní , Diyin God ba'áłchíní danohłį́ .
PRED:	But in your hearts , “ You are the Spirit of God . You are the children of God .
GOLD:	For his Spirit joins with our spirit to affirm that we are God 's children .

ID:	5739
INPUT:	Háálá díí diné Daniel ts'ídá aláahgo haniihii éí baa na'iisgeelgo ááhyiłnínígíí yik'idi'yiitįįhgo áádóó hane' bee éé'deetįįhii yaa halne' índa t'áá íiyisí nidantł'ago deít'éehii k'ééyoołdǫǫł ; éí Bélteshazar ałdó' wolyé . Áko k'ad Daniel , Hágo , bidiní ; éí ááhyiłníinii nił ííshją́ą́ íidoolííł .
PRED:	For Daniel , Daniel , had made a new covenant with the people who had made in burlap and new moon , new moon , and new moon , and scarlet thread . Then he said , “ This is what the Lord says : You will happen to you ! ”
GOLD:	This man Daniel , whom the king named Belteshazzar , has exceptional ability and is filled with divine knowledge and understanding . He can interpret dreams , explain riddles , and solve difficult problems . Call for Daniel , and he will tell you what the writing means . ”

ID:	5740
INPUT:	Nidi dooda jidííniid kójíníigo , Baa nánít'ínígíí doo shił bééhózin da , doo nidi nik'i'diishtįįh da . Áko tł'óó'góó chaha'oh dah sikáníjį' ch'ízhníyá , nít'éé' naa'ahóóhai biką'í ádííniid .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ I 've never been sure that I could n't understand the night , but I could n't stop the night . ”
GOLD:	But Peter denied it . “ I do n't know what you 're talking about , ” he said , and he went out into the entryway . Just then , a rooster crowed .

ID:	5741
INPUT:	Háálá aTaa' yee át'éii t'áá ałtso Jesus hwii' hólónígíí éí aTaa' bił hóshǫ́ .
PRED:	For the Father has given everything through Jesus Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	For God in all his fullnesswas pleased to live in Christ ,

ID:	5742
INPUT:	Tííman nílíinii , kin haal'á nitahdóó diné dabidziilii nani'eeshígíí biyadahodidoolyis , áko Íísa bidziłdóóígíí t'ááłá'í jinítínígo nidahodi'dootsiłgo ádazhdoodįįł .
PRED:	“ Son of Hilkiah , listen to this message from the tribe of Caleb : The people of Seir will be killed by their enemies .
GOLD:	The mightiest warriors of Temanwill be terrified , and everyone on the mountains of Edomwill be cut down in the slaughter .

ID:	5743
INPUT:	áádóó t'áá nihíla' bee yéego nideiilnishgo t'áá nihí ák'inideiildzil . Danihódziihii bá sodadiilzin ; atídanihi'dil'į́įgo hada'ííníilní ;
PRED:	We are confident in our hands , and we want us to pray for us . We are confident in our hands .
GOLD:	We work wearily with our own hands to earn our living . We bless those who curse us . We are patient with those who abuse us .

ID:	5744
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í áłt'ąą la' díí bee haa hane' dohníigo ádadoohníi doo , Dooládó' ade íinízinii yę́ę t'áadoo násdlį́'í da , hashké nídzin yę́ę t'áadoo násdlį́'í da !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the king of Babylon ! Do n't you think of your enemies , ‘ Do n't let us stop sinning ! '
GOLD:	you will taunt the king of Babylon . You will say , “ The mighty man has been destroyed.Yes , your insolence is ended .

ID:	5745
INPUT:	Díí bee nihonish'aah : éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá háiida , doodaii' bináá'iiłniihii áádóó Líívai dine'é éí shóhólníihgo haz'ą́ągi kéédahat'íinii t'áá bí ádeinízingo Jerúsalem kin haal'áágóó deeshááł , danízinígíí ákǫ́ǫ́ nił dookah .
PRED:	“ Give these instructions to the priests and the Levites who belong to the priests , the priests , the Levites , and the Levites will go to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ I decree that any of the people of Israel in my kingdom , including the priests and Levites , may volunteer to return to Jerusalem with you .

ID:	5746
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii Sálaman bił hóóne'go Jó'ab éí Bóhólníihii biníbaal bii' hodílzinii yich'į' anííchą́ą́' , áádóó , shoo , bikáá' náá'iiniihí yíighahgi sizį́ . Nít'éé' Sálaman éí Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah ákǫ́ǫ́ ayííł'a'go ííłní , Nílááh , bił andeełgo síłhé .
PRED:	When King Solomon heard what the Lord had told him , “ I saw the Ark of the Lord 's Tabernacle , ” he told him . “ Go and sleep with you , ” he said . “ Go down to the altar . ”
GOLD:	When this was reported to King Solomon , he sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada to execute him .

ID:	5747
INPUT:	Diné ła'da hwe'asdzą́ą́ naakigo ła' ayóó'ájó'níigo áádóó ła' jijoołáago , áko ayóó'ájó'nínígíí áádóó jijoołáhígíí t'áá áłah há ashchį́įgo áádóó haye' alą́ąjį' há yizhchíinii éí jijoołáhígíí biyáázh nilį́įgo ,
PRED:	“ If a man who loved his wife , he loved one of his wife and loved other , and he loved one of his son and his son .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has two wives , but he loves one and not the other , and both have given him sons . And suppose the firstborn son is the son of the wife he does not love .

ID:	5748
INPUT:	Áko Mózes éí diné yich'į' haadzíi'go ání , Nihitahdóó ła' anaa' biniyé hasht'e'ádadidoołníiłgo bíni' Mídiyan dine'é yich'į' nídahididoobahgo Bóhólníihii yá k'éédeididoodlííł .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the people , “ Get up and prepare your army against the Midianites . ”
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ Choose some men , and arm them to fight the Lord 's war of revenge against Midian .

ID:	5749
INPUT:	Áádóó siláo yinééł yists'ą́ą'go tsin múlberri yíl'áhígíí bílátahgóó bii' hodiists'ą́ą'go bikéé' hidoohkah , áko Bóhólníihii nihilą́ąjį' hooleełgo Filístiya bisiláo yinéełii neidoołtsił .
PRED:	When you hear the noise of the Jordan , you will attack them , and the Lord will attack them . ”
GOLD:	When you hear a sound like marching feet in the tops of the poplar trees , be on the alert ! That will be the signal that the Lord is moving ahead of you to strike down the Philistine army . ”

ID:	5750
INPUT:	áadi índa danihizhé'é yę́ę éí kéyah hool'áádę́ę́' ahóyéel'áágóó baa diní'ánígi kééhoht'į́į dooleełgo nihaa dideesh'ááł .
PRED:	I will give you the land of your ancestors , and I will live forever .
GOLD:	Then I will let you stay in this land that I gave to your ancestors to keep forever .

ID:	5751
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii yáłti'ígíí nahalingo saad nináyii'níłígíí bąąJob t'áá nabíhodi'nitaahgo daotsa' laanaa nisin .
PRED:	The words of the wicked are like Job 's words , but Job 's better off like a person to die .
GOLD:	Job , you deserve the maximum penaltyfor the wicked way you have talked .

ID:	5752
INPUT:	Éí k'os biníí'dóó ha'át'íí shį́į́ dahináanii nahalingo dį́lt'éego ałdó' haakai . Kódanoolnih ; diné nidahalin .
PRED:	These four angels were like a cloud of a cloud , and they were like four men .
GOLD:	From the center of the cloud came four living beings that looked human ,

ID:	5753
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Asíriya dine'é atíidoolííł
PRED:	A Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Blessings for the

ID:	5754
INPUT:	K'éé'dídléehii yéego naalnishii t'éiyá nídaneest'áanii bí áłtsé choidooł'įįł .
PRED:	“ If you eat the animal that has the first crops of the field , it must not eat it .
GOLD:	And hardworking farmers should be the first to enjoy the fruit of their labor .

ID:	5755
INPUT:	Nída'oolch'ihgóó tł'oh naadą́ą́' hadadeezbin doo ; bii' da'aljizhí biyi'dę́ę́' wáin ániidíii áádóó ak'ah ániidíii wó'ądaazlį́į doo .
PRED:	You will eat the grain of grain , and you will be accompanied by the grain of grain and olive oil .
GOLD:	The threshing floors will again be piled high with grain , and the presses will overflow with new wine and olive oil .

ID:	5756
INPUT:	Sǫ' dajiiłtsą́ągo t'áá íiyisí bąą hoł dahóózhǫǫd ,
PRED:	When they saw him , he was very glad , and he was very glad .
GOLD:	When they saw the star , they were filled with joy !

ID:	5757
INPUT:	Háálá danihi'doolzį́'ígíí bee hoł yóó'ádanihi'diilyaa ; t'áá éí ałdó' binahjį' dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' Diyin God nááhodiisáii áyoolíiłii deinohdlą́ągo baa dadzíínóhłíhígíí binahjį' hoł náádanihidi'yiiljéé' .
PRED:	For you have been raised from the dead , because you have been raised from the dead , God has raised from the dead .
GOLD:	For you were buried with Christ when you were baptized . And with him you were raised to new life because you trusted the mighty power of God , who raised Christ from the dead .

ID:	5758
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' Táberah nahós'a'gi áádóó Másah nahós'a'gi índa Kíbrath-hatéí'avah nahós'a'gi Bóhólníihii bádahoshoołchįįdgo hashké nídabinoołdzįįh nít'éé' .
PRED:	After that , the Israelites served the Lord in the land of Canaan and in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	“ You also made the Lord angry at Taberah , Massah , and Kibroth-hattaavah .

ID:	5759
INPUT:	Ákondi t'áadoosti'ee yáłti'go naaghá , nidi doo ádabijiníní da ! Naat'áanii dajílíinii daats'í díí t'áá aaníí Christ át'į́įgo hoł béédahoozin .
PRED:	But when he was speaking , he said , “ We do n't know that Christ is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	But here he is , speaking in public , and they say nothing to him . Could our leaders possibly believe that he is the Messiah ?

ID:	5760
INPUT:	Kéídeshdóó dah náádii'náago Íídam kéyah nihoodzogi Dził Hor si'ánígi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	He left Kadesh and camped at Kadesh .
GOLD:	They left Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor , at the border of Edom .

ID:	5761
INPUT:	Áko Éran ninájíl'aah bik'eh éé' bijánil bąąh yoo' achaaí bąąh sinilígíí diits'a' doo biniyé biih níjídáahgo hodiyingo haz'ání góne' Bóhólníihii binááł yah aníjídááh áádóó ch'ééjiidááh , ákótéego doo dazdootsaał da .
PRED:	Then Aaron called the robe to the robe in the middle of the robe , the robe of the Lord 's robe in front of the Holy Place . He said , “ The Lord will die in front of you . ”
GOLD:	Aaron will wear this robe whenever he ministers before the Lord , and the bells will tinkle as he goes in and out of the Lord 's presence in the Holy Place . If he wears it , he will not die .

ID:	5762
INPUT:	T'áá na'níle'dii hahodi'yoolghan ; ni'jį' ahodi'yoolghan ; ha'a'aahdę́ę́' deeyolgo haneest'ą' ałtso yisgan ; hats'áoz'a' dabidziilii yiyiizti'go daniiłna'go ałtso adahideezk'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	Let their homes be torn down from the east of the east side of the east of the east , and they burned their branches .
GOLD:	But the vine was uprooted in furyand thrown down to the ground.The desert wind dried up its fruitand tore off its strong branches , so that it witheredand was destroyed by fire .

ID:	5763
INPUT:	Índa diné ła'da wáin ániidíígíí tó abid hadaastihii doo yiih yikaah da ; ákódziidzaago wáin éí tó abid deidoołdoh , áko wáin éí yóó'íína' doo , índa tó abid éí t'áá ádzaaí dadooleeł , nidi wáin ániidíígíí tó abid ádaaniidíígíí biih yikááh .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone drink wine into the wine of wine , wine , wine , wine , wine , wine , wine , wine , and wine will disappear . ”
GOLD:	“ And no one puts new wine into old wineskins . For the wine would burst the wineskins , and the wine and the skins would both be lost . New wine calls for new wineskins . ”

ID:	5764
INPUT:	Da' díísh doo bee nich'į' haasdzíi' da ? Nidziilgo í'díí'nílzin áádóó chánah í'díí'nílzin ; t'áadoo náníldzidí , doodaii' t'áadoo ádił nisindáhí , háálá Bóhólníihii niDiyin God éí t'áá hidínááhgóó nił hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Do n't you be afraid ? Do n't be afraid ? Do n't be afraid of them or be afraid , for the Lord your God is with you .
GOLD:	This is my command — be strong and courageous ! Do not be afraid or discouraged . For the Lord your God is with you wherever you go . ”

ID:	5765
INPUT:	Ha'éé' dadzizgisii hoł dahózhǫ́ . Éí iiná tsin sikaadii baa dahizhdookahgo , áádóó kin haal'áagi ch'é'étiin góne' yah adahizhdookahgo bee há nahaz'ą́ .
PRED:	Those who sleep with him will be put into a tree , and they will enter the city of refuge .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who wash their robes . They will be permitted to enter through the gates of the city and eat the fruit from the tree of life .

ID:	5766
INPUT:	Áádóó Abáíjam éí dabizhé'é yę́ę ada'iishxaazhígi át'éego i'jííłhaazhgo David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi yóó'áho'diilyaa , áko haye' Éísa hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii náánásdlį́į́' .
PRED:	When Jeroboam died , he was buried in the City of David , and his son David became the next king .
GOLD:	When Abijam died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Asa became the next king .

ID:	5767
INPUT:	éí níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'é'étiingi náádi'yoołnihgo Bóhólníihii bich'į' néidiyoołnihii t'áadoo niyílósí nááyiisnii'go éí bidine'é bits'ą́ąjį' bidi'yoolyééł .
PRED:	The Lord will cut off his finger in front of the Tabernacle , and he will be cut off from the community .
GOLD:	but does not bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle to offer it to the Lord , that person will be cut off from the community .

ID:	5768
INPUT:	Asdzání éí diné ła' bił neezhtéezhgo hwíígąsh háána'go éí t'áá ájíłah nizhdoobeeł , áko i'íí'ą́ąjį' doo ho'didéeh da doo .
PRED:	“ If a man has sexual intercourse with a woman , you must remain defiled until evening , and you will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	After a man and a woman have sexual intercourse , they must each bathe in water , and they will remain unclean until the next evening .

ID:	5769
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é áádóó Kaldíya dine'é t'áá ałtso áádóó Pííkad dine'é áádóó Shówa dine'é áádóó Kówa dine'é índa Asíriya dine'é t'áá ałtso éí tsíłkéí bídin hóyée'ii , agháago naat'áanii danilíinii índa hashkééjí naat'ááh danilíinii , t'áá ałtso bídahólníihii áádóó łį́į́' yee nidaabaahii éí t'áá ałtso łį́į́' bił nihidoojah .
PRED:	“ The Babylonians will attack the Babylonians , ” says the Lord . “ The Philistines have no more warriors , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and all the other warriors will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For the Babylonians will come with all the Chaldeans from Pekod and Shoa and Koa . And all the Assyrians will come with them — handsome young captains , commanders , chariot officers , and other high-ranking officers , all riding their horses .

ID:	5770
INPUT:	Áko haa bił dahóózhǫǫdgo tsinaa'eeł yiih dahast'e'go , t'áá áko kéyah bich'į' da'jíł'eełígíí baa da'dzis'éél .
PRED:	When they arrested him , they threw the ship into the boat and brought them back to the land of Cyprus .
GOLD:	Then they were eager to let him in the boat , and immediately they arrived at their destination !

ID:	5771
INPUT:	Háálá , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , ninaanish bee shił hózhǫ́ǫgo áshiinilaa . Níla' bee íinilaaígíí baa shił hózhǫ́ǫgo hashtaał .
PRED:	For you have made me happy , O Lord , for I will sing your joy .
GOLD:	You thrill me , Lord , with all you have done for me ! I sing for joy because of what you have done .

ID:	5772
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihitahdóó dabi'disnánígíí Záíyanjį' néiní'eezhgo t'óó baa nidasiigeel nahalin silį́į́' .
PRED:	“ The Lord is like a shepherd of my people , like a dream .
GOLD:	When the Lord brought back his exiles to Jerusalem , it was like a dream !

ID:	5773
INPUT:	Diltłish bee nidaaztseedii bitah dazhdínóonééł ; diltłish baa ho'deet'ą́ ; hodine'é t'óó ahayóí deíl'áhígíí t'áá hoł nahjį' kóbi'dilnééh .
PRED:	The sword of the sword will die ; the sword will be killed by the sword of many lands .
GOLD:	The Egyptians will fall with the many who have died by the sword , for the sword is drawn against them . Egypt and its hordes will be dragged away to their judgment .

ID:	5774
INPUT:	T'áá hazhó'ó <unk> t'éiyá bił séké . Mark baa díínáałgo áádę́ę́' bił díí'ash , háálá shá naal'a'go t'áá íiyisí choo'į́ .
PRED:	“ Get up and leave me , for he is willing to leave me . ”
GOLD:	Only Luke is with me . Bring Mark with you when you come , for he will be helpful to me in my ministry .

ID:	5775
INPUT:	T'áá háiida daz'diits'a'ii Níłch'i Diyinii éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii kwííłníigo yee yił halne'ígíí háni'dii dajíists'ą́ą́' ! T'áá ak'eh deesdlį́'ígíí mána nanil'inii ła' haa deeshnił , áádóó tsé łigaii haa deesh'ááł , bikáa'gi yízhí ániidíii bik'iisdzohgo éí doo ła' hoł bééhóziní da , nidi baa yít'ánígíí t'éiyá .
PRED:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit of the church and understand what he said . I will tell you what I am saying , and I will do with you . ”
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . To everyone who is victorious I will give some of the manna that has been hidden away in heaven . And I will give to each one a white stone , and on the stone will be engraved a new name that no one understands except the one who receives it .

ID:	5776
INPUT:	Ła' diné bibąąhági ádaat'éii t'áadoo bahat'aadí daat'į́ , áko éí ánihwiit'aahjį' dabí'éésh , nidi ła' bibąąhági ádaat'éii doo hah deiltséeh da .
PRED:	Do n't let the wicked say , “ Do n't let the wicked fall into sin , and there is no sin . ”
GOLD:	Remember , the sins of some people are obvious , leading them to certain judgment . But there are others whose sins will not be revealed until later .

ID:	5777
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bidiyingo naal'a'í éí Bókim haz'ánígi honíle'
PRED:	The angel of the Lord
GOLD:	The

ID:	5778
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ání , Ts'ídá t'áá aaníí Bóhólníihii niDiyin God hiná ; ákót'éego ts'ídá t'áá aaníí łees'áán shee ádin , nidi ak'áán yílá bee haajaa' bíighahgo t'éiyá tóshjeeh yázhí bii' , ak'ah ałdó' <unk> į́į́dí tóshjeeh yázhí bii' ; jó , chizh naakigo náháshłááh , áko yah adeesháałgo łees'áán ádeeshłííł ; shiyáázh áádóó shí éí dii<unk> go áádóó díníi'nééł .
PRED:	“ As surely as the Lord your God says , ‘ As surely as I live , I have no part of the loaves of flour , but I will take it into the basket of flour and two quarts of olive oil . ' ”
GOLD:	But she said , “ I swear by the Lord your God that I do n't have a single piece of bread in the house . And I have only a handful of flour left in the jar and a little cooking oil in the bottom of the jug . I was just gathering a few sticks to cook this last meal , and then my son and I will die . ”

ID:	5779
INPUT:	átséédą́ą́' hahastiin nít'é'ígíí bighandóó ch'íhoníł'a'ígíí doo bił ahaa nínáázhdoot'ash da , háálá ákóhát'į́įgo Bóhólníihii bił t'óó baa'ih ; ázhdoolchxǫ'dóó bik'ijį'go ákót'é . Áko kéyah bikáá' doo ádił ni'iidzííh ádoohłíił da ; jó , éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God nihaidiní'ánígíí ádíí' ádadoohłíiłii át'é .
PRED:	“ You must not go out to the house of the Lord . If you are defiled , it will be defiled , for the Lord your God is ceremonially unclean because you are defiled by the sins of the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	the first husband may not marry her again , for she has been defiled . That would be detestable to the Lord . You must not bring guilt upon the land the Lord your God is giving you as a special possession .

ID:	5780
INPUT:	Tsosts'id góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Dan dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin .
PRED:	On the third year of the tribe of Dan , the tribe of Dan 's tribe .
GOLD:	The seventh allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Dan .

ID:	5781
INPUT:	Tsin naazkaadii aláahgo yinant'áa dooígíí ak'ah yik'i yadeidooził biniyé dah diikaigo áliv tsin ádeididooniił , Nihinanít'áa dooleeł .
PRED:	The kings of the trees will come to the king , and the olive oil will be our king .
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	5782
INPUT:	Nihí , áłtsé Christ baa dadziisiidli'ígíí , Diyin God yee ayóó át'éii baa dahwii'niih dooleełgo nihik'i diilnii' .
PRED:	May God 's grace be upon us , and we will praise you in our troubles .
GOLD:	God 's purpose was that we Jews who were the first to trust in Christ would bring praise and glory to God .

ID:	5783
INPUT:	Diyin God áádóó Bóhólníihii Jesus Christ , éí dahináanii índa daneeznáanii yaa nídóot'įįłii binááł , áádóó Jesus yidooltséłígíí índa bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii binahjį' ándishní ,
PRED:	And I tell you the Lord Jesus Christ , the living God of the dead and the dead will be preached in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	I solemnly urge you in the presence of God and Christ Jesus , who will someday judge the living and the dead when he comes to set up his Kingdom :

ID:	5784
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ;
PRED:	He brought a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , which equals twenty pounds of choice flour moistened with olive oil . This is the sanctuary shekel , which equals twenty gerahs .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	5785
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é éí diltłish bee atíbi'diilyaago diné nidaatseedii naa ahineezdee'go áádóó diné t'óó ahayóí dah ho'diijaa'go índa kin bee danił dzilgo bitł'ááh nídaastł'inii táá<unk> xǫ'go Iithiyópiya dine'é haa yínííł danilį́įgo haa daachxa doo .
PRED:	The sword of Egypt will be killed by the sword of Egypt , and many people will be taken into exile . They will be filled with terror , and there will be no longer desolate .
GOLD:	A sword will come against Egypt , and those who are slaughtered will cover the ground.Its wealth will be carried awayand its foundations destroyed.The land of Ethiopia will be ravished .

ID:	5786
INPUT:	Dził Záíyangi yínííł danilíinii łeeshch'iih bitsásk'ehgi nizhóníii áádóó yínííł bitsásk'ehgi ak'ah bee ił hózhóonii índa ąąh nahóókaadii bitsásk'ehgi aa ha'niih yee hadadít'éego baa dideesh'ááł , áko tsin naazkaadii t'áá ákogi át'éii Bóhólníihii k'iidííláhígíí dabidi'níi doo ; éí baa dahojiniih doo biniyé ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will make the dust of Jerusalem 's Armies , the place of ashes , the fragrant oil , the fragrant incense , and the fragrant incense . I will praise the Lord for your people , and I will make them holy .
GOLD:	To all who mourn in Israel , he will give a crown of beauty for ashes , a joyous blessing instead of mourning , festive praise instead of despair.In their righteousness , they will be like great oaksthat the Lord has planted for his own glory .

ID:	5787
INPUT:	Shí ánísht'éhígi ádanoht'éego shí ałdó' t'áá nihígi át'éego yáshti' doogo át'é ; nihich'į' shitsii' néishgha'go saad nihik'ijį' yéideestsihgo át'é .
PRED:	I am sending you to be like this , just as I am telling you , and I will speak to you as I am with you .
GOLD:	I could say the same things if you were in my place.I could spout off criticism and shake my head at you .

ID:	5788
INPUT:	Áko kéyahdóó kéédahat'ínígíí éí aláahgo naat'áanii Éíman yindahaz'ánígíí a łtso nideistseed , ákohgo haye' Josáíyah hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo naat'áanii ádayiilaa .
PRED:	He killed all the kings of the land of King Joash , and he killed his son Josiah .
GOLD:	But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King Amon , and they made his son Josiah the next king .

ID:	5789
INPUT:	Áko Ííjipdóó óola áádóó béésh łigaii índa naalye'é da'ílíinii t'áá át'é yidoołnééł . Áko Líbiya dine'é índa Iithiyópiya dine'é bá nidaal'a'í danilį́į dooleeł .
PRED:	The Philistines will be plundered , silver , silver , gold , and all the wealth of Ethiopia will be plundered .
GOLD:	He will gain control over the gold , silver , and treasures of Egypt , and the Libyans and Ethiopians will be his servants .

ID:	5790
INPUT:	Ásaa' bii' béésh łigaii bąąh hadilyį́hí béésh łigaii bá át'é , áádóó déédíljah góne' óola bii' dilyį́hí óola bá át'é , nidi Bóhólníihii éí ajéí nayínítaah .
PRED:	The silver is used for silver , and the silver is as gold , but the Lord 's heart is pure gold .
GOLD:	Fire tests the purity of silver and gold , but the Lord tests the heart .

ID:	5791
INPUT:	nihí nihe'oodlą' binahjį' Diyin God bibee adziilii bee nihaa ádahayą́ągo yisdánihidoo'nilgo niiníłką́ądi yit'íní ánihidi'doolníiłgo hasht'enihi'dólzin .
PRED:	And you are confident in the faith of God , but you will be saved because of the power of God 's salvation .
GOLD:	And through your faith , God is protecting you by his power until you receive this salvation , which is ready to be revealed on the last day for all to see .

ID:	5792
INPUT:	T'áá ákwíí bíní t'ááłá'í nítínígo łį́į́' bá ninájíłjoł áádóó łį́į́' bá niná'jíjihígi ádaat'éé nít'éé' . Áko t'áá ákwíí bíní t'ááłá'í nítínígo łį́į́' ání nahalingo yił kéédahat'íinii be'asdzą́ą́ yich'į' ádaaníí nít'éé' .
PRED:	He called his horses for each of his horses , and each of her horses were like a horse .
GOLD:	They are well-fed , lusty stallions , each neighing for his neighbor 's wife .

ID:	5793
INPUT:	Nidi Bó'az ánáhodoo'niid , Nahastiin daaztsą́ą́dóó wóshdę́ę́' bizháá'áád nílíní t'áá át'é bá íinidzaaígíí bee shił hóóne' . Nizhé'é áádóó nimá índa nikéyah bits'ą́ą́' dah diniyáago doo ééhonísingi yíníyáá lá .
PRED:	But Boaz said to her husband , “ I am going to tell you what I am going to marry your mother and mother 's mother . But I did n't know what I am going to do . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , I know , ” Boaz replied . “ But I also know about everything you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband . I have heard how you left your father and mother and your own land to live here among complete strangers .

ID:	5794
INPUT:	Diyin God bidine'é doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ádabi'dil'ínígíí bitahjí jílį́į dooleełgo nizhdiní'ą́ , Féro bighandi t'óó kónígháníjį' nidi bąąhági át'éii ił honeełniígíí éí doo yiniizį́į' da .
PRED:	For God has given you a new place among the people of Egypt . He has made a new wife in the middle of Pharaoh 's home , but there is no part in the middle of Pharaoh 's home .
GOLD:	He chose to share the oppression of God 's people instead of enjoying the fleeting pleasures of sin .

ID:	5795
INPUT:	Jóseph hazhé'é ábizhdííniid , Doo ákót'ée da , shizhé'é , dííyee' alą́ąjį' yizhchį́ ; éidígo nish'náájí bee bitsii't'áagi dah dílnííh .
PRED:	Joseph replied , “ You are not my father , my father , and you are the oldest son of Joseph .
GOLD:	“ No , my father , ” he said . “ This one is the firstborn . Put your right hand on his head . ”

ID:	5796
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand

ID:	5797
INPUT:	Éí bąągo t'áá át'é adinídíín bee nits'íís bił hool'ingo t'áadoo łahjį' bił chahałheełí , t'áá bee hool'iní i'dííłdláadgo ná adiníłdínígi át'éego t'áá át'é adinídíin dooleeł .
PRED:	The light of the light will be light , and the light will be snuffed out in darkness , like a light light light .
GOLD:	If you are filled with light , with no dark corners , then your whole life will be radiant , as though a floodlight were filling you with light . ”

ID:	5798
INPUT:	Éí naat'áanii hoo'áałii ákǫ́ǫ́ nídídáahgo áadi shinááł ná'ádį́įh doo ; naat'áanii nilíinii yah a'atiin góne' yah adoogááł áádóó nihééhédáahgo éí chaha'oh haz'ání góne' ch'ééhédáah doo .
PRED:	“ Get up and eat it at the place where you eat , where the king will enter the courtyard . Then he will go to the place where he enters the courtyard .
GOLD:	Only the prince himself may sit inside this gateway to feast in the Lord 's presence . But he may come and go only through the entry room of the gateway . ”

ID:	5799
INPUT:	Áádóó Béílak éí Béílam ííłní , Ts'ídá doo bidíníídzįįł da . Ts'ídá doo bik'ijiidíídliił da .
PRED:	Balaam said to Balak , “ You will never be blessed . ”
GOLD:	Then Balak said to Balaam , “ Fine , but if you wo n't curse them , at least do n't bless them ! ”

ID:	5800
INPUT:	Áko ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ naazínígíí éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go , Díí diné Iiláíjah yíká ání , dadííniid .
PRED:	When they heard this , Elijah said to Elijah , “ Elijah is your request . ”
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	5801
INPUT:	Abáíjam nant'áá nít'éé'
PRED:	Abijah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Abijam Rules in Judah

ID:	5802
INPUT:	Doo yá'ádaashóonii , shi'ana'í danilíinii índa shidadiilkaalii , éí naaldlooshii nidahalingo dashidoolghał biniyé shaatįįh yínáago dadeezgo'go naa'aníídee' .
PRED:	My enemies have rebelled against me , and my enemies have rebelled against me like animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	When evil people come to devour me , when my enemies and foes attack me , they will stumble and fall .

ID:	5803
INPUT:	Tł'ée'go shił áhoodzaago , shoo , Diné Silį́į'ii nahalingo yá'ąąshdę́ę́' k'os bił yildohgo áádóó As'ahdę́ę́' Bíyoołkááł wolyéii yich'į' yigáałgo áádóó yił yaadaaskaigo yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	When the Son of Man returns , I saw the Son of Man coming down from heaven , a cloud coming down from heaven and a long time .
GOLD:	As my vision continued that night , I saw someone like a son of man coming with the clouds of heaven . He approached the Ancient One and was led into his presence .

ID:	5804
INPUT:	Áádóó álílee ádaat'éii áádóó áhooníiłii Ííjip dine'é bitahgi aláahgo naat'áanii Féro wolyéii áádóó bikéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' áyííł'įįdígíí ,
PRED:	Pharaoh and all the people of Egypt , just as the king of Egypt had commanded Pharaoh .
GOLD:	They did n't see the miraculous signs and wonders he performed in Egypt against Pharaoh and all his land .

ID:	5805
INPUT:	T'áadoo bahat'aadí ałjiłnii nilį́įgo áádóó t'áá łichí'ígo naagháago , t'áá hádí doo niizį́'ígi át'éego hó ałdó' doo honiizį́į' da .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of your sister , and you will not be a prostitute .
GOLD:	“ In the same way , I became disgusted with Oholibah and rejected her , just as I had rejected her sister , because she flaunted herself before them and gave herself to satisfy their lusts .

ID:	5806
INPUT:	Ákót'éego hadine'é bitahgóó ha'áłchíní éí doo hodílzin k'ehgo át'éii doo danilį́į́góó ahoolchíił doo ; jó , shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii jidiyingo áhwíínísin .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel will be holy , for I am the Lord . I will bless you from generation to generation .
GOLD:	so that he will not dishonor his descendants among his clan , for I am the Lord who makes him holy . ”

ID:	5807
INPUT:	Aye' éí bizhé'é bił nilį́ , índa naal'a'í éí binanit'a'í bił nilį́ . Áko aTaa' nishłį́įgo bee nihił nishłíiniishą' háájí ? Áádóó nihiNanit'a'í nishłį́įgo bee shits'ąąh hasti'iishą' háájí ? nihiłní t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii . Náá'iiłniihii danohłíinii , shízhi' daah'įįd . Nidi ádadohní , Haash yit'éego nízhi' deiit'įįd ?
PRED:	“ You are my father , your servant , my servant , and I am the one who said , ‘ What is your name ? ' And why do you say , ‘ What is your name ? Why do you call me ? ” But the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says to the priests : “ A son honors his father , and a servant respects his master . If I am your father and master , where are the honor and respect I deserve ? You have shown contempt for my name ! “ But you ask , ‘ How have we ever shown contempt for your name ? '

ID:	5808
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God binááł ninádahakahgo Bóhólníihii t'áá bí náhodidoo'áłígi ninádaha<unk> go , díí bee haz'áanii éí Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso bich'į' nídeínółtahgo dayíists'ą́ą' doo .
PRED:	All the Israelites will listen to the Lord your God in the presence of the Lord your God , and they will listen to all the Israelites .
GOLD:	you must read this Book of Instruction to all the people of Israel when they assemble before the Lord your God at the place he chooses .

ID:	5809
INPUT:	Hoda'ana'í ałdó' hade ádahósingo biyaa jizhjaa'go áho'diilyaa .
PRED:	They were afraid of their enemies , and they were afraid of their enemies .
GOLD:	Their enemies crushed themand brought them under their cruel power .

ID:	5810
INPUT:	Áádóó hool'áádę́ę́' ahóyéel'áágóó hasht'eyiilaa ; bee haz'áanii ts'ídá doo bił yóó'ahodoogáałii áyiilaa .
PRED:	He made peace from forever and ever ! He made his instructions for his regulations .
GOLD:	He set them in place forever and ever.His decree will never be revoked .

ID:	5811
INPUT:	Kintahgóó dah da'diitiindóó t'áá ałtso wódahgo nahaz'ánígíí íinilaago áádóó níighahgóó dahidiikáhígíí bich'į' ádí'iinilkąąhígíí bee índa íłjiłgo t'óó tsé'édinda í'diinilyaaígíí bee ayóó áníínílnin yę́ę doo ni'dóldingóó í'diinilyaa .
PRED:	You will cry out to the city of the city , to the city of Jerusalem , and you will be filled with weeping and corruption .
GOLD:	On every street corner you defiled your beauty , offering your body to every passerby in an endless stream of prostitution .

ID:	5812
INPUT:	Saul haye' Jánathan índa há nidaal'a'ígíí t'áá ałtso éí David dadiyoołhééł , bizhdííniid .
PRED:	Jonathan and Jonathan said to Jonathan , “ Kill David and kill them . ”
GOLD:	Saul now urged his servants and his son Jonathan to assassinate David . But Jonathan , because of his strong affection for David ,

ID:	5813
INPUT:	Bił kéédahwiit'íinii bináádiijahgo ádanihiinilaa , áádóó nihi'ana'í danilíinii bitahgóó dloh hanáltǫǫh .
PRED:	He has made us an object of ridicule , and your enemies will laugh among us .
GOLD:	You have made us the scorn of neighboring nations.Our enemies treat us as a joke .

ID:	5814
INPUT:	Nihii' naazíinii Bóhólníihii yiba' ádaat'é ; nihíká análwo'ii índa nihinaage' nilį́ .
PRED:	The Lord is our helper and his shield ; he is your shield .
GOLD:	We put our hope in the Lord.He is our help and our shield .

ID:	5815
INPUT:	Naaki yiłkaah bijį́ dóola yázhí naakits'áadahgo , deenásts'aa' naakigo índa dibé yázhí dį́į́'ts'áadahgo dabiką'ii ła' béédááhaii hadaałt'éii náádahołniih doo ,
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the festival , two young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs .
GOLD:	“ On the second day of this seven-day festival , sacrifice twelve young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	5816
INPUT:	Bizéé'dóó aa ha'niih hólǫ́ǫgo ádeeshłííł ; nízaadi áádóó t'áá áhánígi dahólóonii bich'į' hasht'ehodít'é , hasht'ehodít'ée le' , ní Bóhólníihii , áko hadaałt'é ánáhodeeshdlííł .
PRED:	I will praise the lips of your lips , but I will bring disaster on your lips , ” says the Lord . “ I will repay them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	bringing words of praise to their lips.May they have abundant peace , both near and far , ” says the Lord , who heals them .

ID:	5817
INPUT:	Nébukadnézzar éí hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii daadziihígíí áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó áhodoonííł yaa dahalne'ii índa diné t'áá ałtso yisnáago Jerúsalem kin haal'áádóó Bábilan kéyahgóó iinííłkaadii éí Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah díí saad naaltsoos yikáá' áyiilaago Jerúsalemdóó ákǫ́ǫ́ yich'į' áyiilaa .
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar sent this message to all the elders of Babylon , the priests , the prophets , the prophets , the prophets , and all the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Jeremiah wrote a letter from Jerusalem to the elders , priests , prophets , and all the people who had been exiled to Babylon by King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	5818
INPUT:	Áko bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'gi didlidgo nááhániihígíí áádóó ak'áán nááhániihígíí áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihígíí índa hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihígíí bidił yik'íístahgo nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	Then he burned the altar of burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	He presented a burnt offering and a grain offering , he poured out a liquid offering , and he sprinkled the blood of peace offerings on the altar .

ID:	5819
INPUT:	Áko Sámson éí asdzání ábizhdííniid , Ałtįįtł'óól t'ah ditłée'ii tsosts'idgo bee she'astł'ǫ́ǫgo lą́ą , áko t'áá ła' diné ádaat'éhígi át'éego doo shidziil da deeshłeeł .
PRED:	Samson said to the woman , “ I 'm ready for seven days . I will be like a man , and I will not be like a man . ”
GOLD:	Samson replied , “ If I were tied up with seven new bowstrings that have not yet been dried , I would become as weak as anyone else . ”

ID:	5820
INPUT:	Záíyan bich'é'é bił dahołne' , Jó'akon , Aláahgo niNanit'a'í nilíi<unk> 'ohgo í'dólzingo télii , Jó , éí télii yázhí yik'i dahsidáago nich'į' bił yigááł .
PRED:	“ Look , you are the King of Zion , the King of Zion , the King of Zion .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Jerusalem , ‘ Look , your King is coming to you.He is humble , riding on a donkey — riding on a donkey 's colt . ' ”

ID:	5821
INPUT:	Nihílááh t'áá nihí tł'oh naadą́ą́' bitsǫz hádaaht'į́ , nidi nihinaanishígíí doo nihá bi'oh áńdoolníił da .
PRED:	But now , we will have plenty of straw , but we will not have plenty of straw . ”
GOLD:	Go and get it yourselves . Find it wherever you can . But you must produce just as many bricks as before ! ”

ID:	5822
INPUT:	Áko hódahooł'aahii éí deidiizts'ą́ą'go lą'í ádadííniid , Díí áhá'nínígíí t'áá íiyisí nantł'a ; háísh ałdó' yiyíists'ą́ą' doo ?
PRED:	When the disciples heard this , they said , “ We ca n't listen to these things ? ”
GOLD:	Many of his disciples said , “ This is very hard to understand . How can anyone accept it ? ”

ID:	5823
INPUT:	Páílat ánáádoo'niid , Da' ákoósh aláahgo naat'áanii nílį́ ? Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , Jó , aláahgo naat'áanii nishłínígíí bee háínídzíí' . Jó , t'áá aaníinii baa hashne' doo biniyé shi'dizhchį́ , índa díí biniyé nahasdzáán bikáa'gi níyá . T'áá ádzíłtso t'áá aanííjí dajílíinii éí dashizdiits'a' .
PRED:	“ Are you the king ? ” Pilate asked . “ I am the King of the king , ” Pilate replied . “ I am the one who has given you the message of all the earth . ”
GOLD:	Pilate said , “ So you are a king ? ” Jesus responded , “ You say I am a king . Actually , I was born and came into the world to testify to the truth . All who love the truth recognize that what I say is true . ”

ID:	5824
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad baa hashniih doo . Bóhólníihii bizaad baa hashniih doo .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord , for I will praise the word of God .
GOLD:	I praise God for what he has promised ; yes , I praise the Lord for what he has promised .

ID:	5825
INPUT:	Áádóó hodiyingo haz'ánígíí índa agháago hodiyingo haz'ánígíí éí t'áá áłah ákwe'é ałts'ą́ą́hjí dáádílkał naaki dahidínil .
PRED:	The entry room of the Temple was on each side of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	Both the sanctuary and the Most Holy Place had double doorways ,

ID:	5826
INPUT:	Azhą́ ákót'ée nidi , ni éí doo kin shá ádíílíił da , nidi niye' t'áá ni ná yizhchínígíí éí kin íidoolíiłgo bii' shízhi' baa ha'niih doo , níi ni' .
PRED:	“ But do n't say , ‘ You are my sister , but you will praise your name . '
GOLD:	but you are not the one to do it . One of your own sons will build the Temple to honor me . '

ID:	5827
INPUT:	<unk> , Áshna , Níízib ,
PRED:	Jezreel , Kesm , Kesed ,
GOLD:	Iphtah , Ashnah , Nezib ,

ID:	5828
INPUT:	Nidi ádíshní , Doodayéi , Bóhólníihii , háálá t'áá bóhólníhígíí índa doo deidą́ą́góó bee nihá haz'áanii éí ła' ts'ídá t'ah doo yishą́ą da .
PRED:	“ No , ” I replied , “ for we have never sinned against the Lord , for we have never sinned . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , Lord , ' I replied . ‘ I have never eaten anything that our Jewish laws have declared impure or unclean . '

ID:	5829
INPUT:	Łahgo át'éego tsíńdadohkees ho'doo'niid
PRED:	The Sign of their sins
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	5830
INPUT:	Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é dah yinéełii bich'į' yit'íní ízh'diilyaa , áádóó Filístiya dine'é ádadííniid , Shoo , Hííbrew dine'é léi' adahasdzą́ą́góó ná'ádees'į́į́'dę́ę́' haazh'áázh lá .
PRED:	As he was leaving the Philistines , he said to the Philistines , “ Listen to the Philistines , ” he told the Philistines , “ A Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrews .
GOLD:	When the Philistines saw them coming , they shouted , “ Look ! The Hebrews are crawling out of their holes ! ”

ID:	5831
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , háishą' nízhi' doo yidísin da , áádóó doo yaa haniih da doo ? Jó , t'áá ni t'éiyá t'áá sáhí diníyin . Ał'ąą dine'é bił dah nidahaz'ą́ą́dę́ę́' naa áłah dooleełgonich'į' nidahałáa doo , háálá t'áá ákogi ááníiłii ííshjání silį́į́' .
PRED:	O Lord , why should I praise the name of the name of the Lord ? You alone are the God of the nations , and you will worship them .
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	5832
INPUT:	Zíírah biye' Éíkan wolyéii Bóhólníihii bich'į' nideet'áanii yee doo ákǫ́ǫ́ áátįįdígíí biniinaa doósh Bóhólníihii yee hashké nídzinii yee Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso atíyiilaa da ? Áádóó éí doo ákwii áát'įįdígíí t'éiyá biniinaa diné náánáła' ałdó' ádabi'disdįįd .
PRED:	The man named Zerah from the Lord 's clan , but the people of Israel did n't realize that the Lord had destroyed the people of Israel . The people of Israel were completely destroyed by their sins .
GOLD:	Did n't divine anger fall on the entire community of Israel when Achan , a member of the clan of Zerah , sinned by stealing the things set apart for the Lord ? He was not the only one who died because of his sin . ”

ID:	5833
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é yich'į' ádééhodoolzįįł , áádóó t'áá éí yoołkáałdi Ííjip dine'é Bóhólníihii yéédahodoosįįł ; t'áá aaníí , náádahidoonihii áádóó náádayiiłniihii yee nidahałáa dooleeł índa yee ádee hadidoodzihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' yee ádee hadahididziihgo yida'doolííł .
PRED:	In that day the Lord will bring Egypt to Egypt , but they will know that the Egyptians will worship the Lord . Then they will worship the Egyptians , and they will worship the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord will make himself known to the Egyptians . Yes , they will know the Lord and will give their sacrifices and offerings to him . They will make a vow to the Lord and will keep it .

ID:	5834
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , diné nanítinii áádóó bee hosíníł'áanii bínabiníłtinii , éí bik'ihojidlí .
PRED:	O Lord , you are blessed ; blessed are those who obey your decrees .
GOLD:	Joyful are those you discipline , Lord , those you teach with your instructions .

ID:	5835
INPUT:	Áko Filístiya diné naaghalgo David yiyiiłtsą́ągo t'óó yánahałt'i'go yeidloh , háálá t'ahdii ashkii t'óó łichíi'go bííyisii jílį́ .
PRED:	When David saw this , he looked up and saw that David was a son named David .
GOLD:	sneering in contempt at this ruddy-faced boy .

ID:	5836
INPUT:	ahóyéel'áágóó bibee'aa a'ááh hasinii éí miilgo ádazhnéelą́ą'go doo ákwii ádajit'ínígíí áádóó bee haz'áanii dajiitíhígíí índa ádił nida'jiilzíhígíí há yóó'anéidiyii'aahgo hak'ijidlí , nidi ádił oodzíí' bee bihodiit'i'ii yá naatłizh yę́ę doo yénálniih da doo ; jó , da'azhé'é yę́ę doo ákwii ádajíít'įįdígíí hada'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi índa dį́įdi ałk'i ná'ázhchį́įjį' bik'i hwiileehgo bá nináhwiish'nííł .
PRED:	He will show justice to those who love him , and he will be punished for their sin . He will be punished for the sins of the sins of the sins of the wicked people of Israel , but he will never be punished for their sins .
GOLD:	I lavish unfailing love to a thousand generations.I forgive iniquity , rebellion , and sin.But I do not excuse the guilty.I lay the sins of the parents upon their children and grandchildren ; the entire family is affected — even children in the third and fourth generations . ”

ID:	5837
INPUT:	Nidi t'óó yówehda bee haa hane'ígíí adahideezdláád , áko t'óó ahayóí deididoots'į́į́ł biniyé áádóó bąąh dah nidahaz'ánígíí náádabidi'doodlááł biniyé haa áłah silį́į́' .
PRED:	But many people will hear about him , and many will hear him . They will be raised from their bodies , and many are raised from the dead .
GOLD:	But despite Jesus ' instructions , the report of his power spread even faster , and vast crowds came to hear him preach and to be healed of their diseases .

ID:	5838
INPUT:	Łah kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ą́ góne' diné nazhnitingo , hane' yá'át'éehii baa hojilne' , nít'éé' aláahgo nááda'iiłniihii áádóó bee haz'áanii yínda'niłtinii índa diné yá aląąjį' naazíinii haa yíkai ,
PRED:	One day Jesus went to the Temple and taught the leading priests to the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	One day as Jesus was teaching the people and preaching the Good News in the Temple , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders came up to him .

ID:	5839
INPUT:	Áko diyingo naal'a'í éí ła' ákǫ́ǫ́ bidááhdę́ę́' naazínígíí áyidííniid , Éé' chinii baa doołtsóosgo nahjį' kódaohłééh . Áko ánááhodi'ní , Doo ákwii é'ét'éii yę́ę ná yóó'adish'aahgo éé' ílínígíí bee handideeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	Then one of the angel said to the angel , “ Get up and pick up your clothing , and take it into your clothing . I will show you your clothing , and I will make you clean . ”
GOLD:	So the angel said to the others standing there , “ Take off his filthy clothes. ” And turning to Jeshua he said , “ See , I have taken away your sins , and now I am giving you these fine new clothes . ”

ID:	5840
INPUT:	K'ad éí kodóó ch'íhínáahgo áádóó yah anáhídáahgo ahóyéel'áágóó Bóhólníihii naa áhályą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ Go and go out to the land of the Lord ! The Lord will protect you forever .
GOLD:	The Lord keeps watch over you as you come and go , both now and forever .

ID:	5841
INPUT:	Shíttimgi Ízrel dine'é kééhat'į́įgo Mó'ab dine'é bitsi'ké yił ajił yaa nídiikai .
PRED:	As they arrived at the town of Moab , the Israelite women of Moab and led their daughters to the Israelites .
GOLD:	While the Israelites were camped at Acacia Grove , some of the men defiled themselves by having sexual relations with local Moabite women .

ID:	5842
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi bijéédaahkałii éí diyingo bee ak'e'da'ashchíinii deididoots'į́į́ł , índa doo da'oo'íinii doo bá bidayeet'į́į'ii áádóó chahałheeł biyi'dę́ę́' da'iidoołtsééł .
PRED:	In that day , you will hear the word of God , and those who hear their eyes will see their eyes .
GOLD:	In that day the deaf will hear words read from a book , and the blind will see through the gloom and darkness .

ID:	5843
INPUT:	Áko aláahgo naat'áanii ání , Díí asdzání la' kóní , Díí hinánígíí éí shí shiyáázh , áádóó daaztsánígíí éí ni niyáázh nít'éé' , áádóó ła'ígíí ání , Dooda , daaztsánígíí éí ni niyáázh nít'éé' , áádóó hinánígíí éí shí shiyáázh .
PRED:	“ This is what the king says : ‘ This is my son , ' the woman said , ‘ You are the son of your son and your son , and your son is dead . '
GOLD:	Then the king said , “ Let 's get the facts straight . Both of you claim the living child is yours , and each says that the dead one belongs to the other .

ID:	5844
INPUT:	Díí ałdó' nihijéí biyi'di baa nitsídaahkees : diné biye' t'áá hashkée neinitinígi át'éego Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God t'áá hashkée nanihinitin .
PRED:	And if you are doing this , you will know that the Lord your God is giving you his own heart .
GOLD:	Think about it : Just as a parent disciplines a child , the Lord your God disciplines you for your own good .

ID:	5845
INPUT:	Áádóó télii éí Béílam ííłní , Da' doósh nitélii nishłį́įgo níí' sélį́į́' bijį́į́dóó wóshdę́ę́' díí jį́įjį' tándííyį́į da ? Łahdaásh kóniishłaa ? Ákohgo , Nidaga' , jidííniid .
PRED:	Then Balaam said to Balaam , “ Do n't I remember this hour ? ” And he replied , “ No , I have never been taken from this day . ”
GOLD:	“ But I am the same donkey you have ridden all your life , ” the donkey answered . “ Have I ever done anything like this before ? ” “ No , ” Balaam admitted .

ID:	5846
INPUT:	Shoo , Bóhólníihii háá'áyį́į́h jį́ nihaidiní'ą́ ; éí bąą hastą́ą́h jį́ ná'ádleeh bik'eh bááh naaki jį́ bíighahgo nihaa néidi'ááh ; nihá haz'ánígi hazhó'ó hasht'edínóht'é ; bíni'dii tsosts'id jį́į́ góne' diné doo ła' nahgóó ch'ídoogáał da .
PRED:	“ The Sabbath day of the Lord has given you a Sabbath day for six days , for you have no rest on the Sabbath day of rest until the seventh day of the Lord will never leave you .
GOLD:	They must realize that the Sabbath is the Lord 's gift to you . That is why he gives you a two-day supply on the sixth day , so there will be enough for two days . On the Sabbath day you must each stay in your place . Do not go out to pick up food on the seventh day . ”

ID:	5847
INPUT:	Áko ákwe'é Shííba yee hóozhi' ; éí bąą kin haal'áhígíí díí jį́į́góó Bíyer-shííba hoolyé .
PRED:	Then Sheba called the name of Sheba to Beersheba in Beersheba .
GOLD:	So Isaac named the well Shibah ( which means “ oath ” ) . And to this day the town that grew up there is called Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) .

ID:	5848
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí Bóhólníihii ííłní , Áko haniih ákwíinilaago Ííjip dine'é yaa dahodidoots'į́į́ł ; ( jó , nibee adziilii bee éí hatahdóó díí dine'é ch'ííní'eezh , )
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ Tell the Egyptians to hear the land of Egypt , for they have brought you out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	But Moses objected . “ What will the Egyptians think when they hear about it ? ” he asked the Lord . “ They know full well the power you displayed in rescuing your people from Egypt .

ID:	5849
INPUT:	Áádóó hazhé'é éí Ííjip kéyahdóó yá'ádaat'éehii télii neeznáá bił bik'i nida'astł'ǫ́ǫgo áádóó télii dabi'ádígíí neeznáago , neest'áanii áádóó ch'iyáán índa bist'e'go áádę́ę́' yikiin doogáałii bił bik'i nida'astł'ǫ́ǫgo , díí yich'į' áyiilaa .
PRED:	He brought ten donkeys to the land of Egypt , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , and donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , donkeys , and donkeys , and donkeys .
GOLD:	He also sent his father ten male donkeys loaded with the finest products of Egypt , and ten female donkeys loaded with grain and bread and other supplies he would need on his journey .

ID:	5850
INPUT:	Áthenzgi Paul naaghá
PRED:	Paul Preaches in Athens
GOLD:	Paul Preaches in Athens

ID:	5851
INPUT:	Yee nidaabaahii áádóó tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí áádóó tsindaabąąs índa diné ayóó ánéelą́ą'go yił náhookǫsdę́ę'go nihaa doonééł , áko t'áá ałtsodę́ę́' naagé áádóó naagééd dah deí'aahgo áádóó béésh ch'ah dabich'ahgo anadanihidooł'įįł . Áko yee nihaa nídadóot'įįłígíí baa dideesh'ááł áádóó t'áá bí bik'ehgo nihaa nídadóot'įįł .
PRED:	They will look for their chariots and charioteers , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and charioteers , and charioteers . I will show them their weapons , and they will show them their authority . ”
GOLD:	They will all come against you from the north with chariots , wagons , and a great army prepared for attack . They will take up positions on every side , surrounding you with men armed with shields and helmets . And I will hand you over to them for punishment so they can do with you as they please .

ID:	5852
INPUT:	Áko Jiiháshafat dabizhé'é yę́ę da'iiłhaazhígi át'éego ajiiłhaazhgo David yę́ę bikin haal'áagi dahazhé'é yę́ę yóó'ádaalyaaígi yóó'áho'diilyaa . Áko haye' Jiihóram hatsásk'ehgi aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	When Jehoshaphat died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . So his son Ahaziah became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jehoshaphat died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Jehoram became the next king .

ID:	5853
INPUT:	Háálá Jóseph dine'é naakigo dah yikahígíí éí Manáseh áádóó Íífreiyim dine'é ádaat'į́ ; éí bąą Líívai dine'é éí kéyah íí' dooleełígíí t'áadoo ła' yaa deideez'ą́ą da , nidi kin hadaas'áii yii' kéédahat'į́į dooígíí t'éiyá ; ákwii kéyah dahootsooígíí t'áá bił éí dabilį́į́' bá índa ákwii bee dahólónígíí bá nahaz'ą́ .
PRED:	For the tribe of Joseph received two allotment of land , Manasseh , Ephraim , Manasseh , and the half-tribe of Manasseh settled in the land of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The descendants of Joseph had become two separate tribes — Manasseh and Ephraim . And the Levites were given no land at all , only towns to live in with surrounding pasturelands for their livestock and all their possessions .

ID:	5854
INPUT:	Da' shádahałchįįhísh ? ní Bóhólníihii . T'áá bí yee atíńda'dilnéehgo ádił nídahałąąhgo baa yáńdahasįįh .
PRED:	“ What is the Lord 's anger ? ” they cry . “ Do n't you escape the insults of their sins ? ”
GOLD:	Am I the one they are hurting ? ” asks the Lord . “ Most of all , they hurt themselves , to their own shame . ”

ID:	5855
INPUT:	Naaltsoos yisdisii iidííłk'ą́ą́'
PRED:	The scroll of the Covenant
GOLD:	Baruch Reads the

ID:	5856
INPUT:	Dibé áádóó béégashii bá nidootsiłgo éí t'áá daats'í bidínóołnah ? Doodaii' tónteel biyi'dę́ę́' łóó' t'áá át'é áłah ádoolníiłgo t'áá daats'í bidínóołnah ?
PRED:	Do you realize that the flocks of sheep or goats or the fish in the sea ? Are you going to fight the fish ?
GOLD:	Even if we butchered all our flocks and herds , would that satisfy them ? Even if we caught all the fish in the sea , would that be enough ? ”

ID:	5857
INPUT:	Ákót'éego bich'į' yájíłti' , nít'éé' naat'áanii léi' haa níyáago hach'į' nitsidinígo'go ání , Áníídí yee' shitsi' daaztsą́ , nidi tį' ákǫ́ǫ́ diit'ashgo bik'i dah didíílnih , áko hinááh nídoodleeł .
PRED:	As he was speaking to him , a man came to him and bowed low before him . “ Come , ” he said . “ Come , let 's go back to bed . ”
GOLD:	As Jesus was saying this , the leader of a synagogue came and knelt before him . “ My daughter has just died , ” he said , “ but you can bring her back to life again if you just come and lay your hand on her . ”

ID:	5858
INPUT:	Nihita' yidoozįįłgo kojí yá'át'ééh nihididooniiłgonihá niididoo'áałii nihee ádin .
PRED:	We do n't know that we are right , and we will not be counted .
GOLD:	If only there were a mediator between us , someone who could bring us together .

ID:	5859
INPUT:	Áádóó Géed dine'é ałdó' kéyah íí' dadooleełii Mózes beidiní'ą́ ; éí Géed dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo baa deet'ą́ .
PRED:	The tribe of Gad had given the tribe of Gad , for Moses had given the tribe of Gad .
GOLD:	Moses had assigned the following area to the clans of the tribe of Gad .

ID:	5860
INPUT:	Senákerib wolyéii éí anaa' hasłį́į́'
PRED:	Assyria Invades Judah
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	5861
INPUT:	Áko Barábas bá ch'éézhníłt'e' , nidi Jesus éí hazaad k'ehgo nibí'íltsxasgo tsin ałnáoszid bikáa'jį' bił i'doolkał biniyé baazhdiní'ą́ .
PRED:	When Jesus was looking for a crowd , Jesus took him to the cross and began to be crucified with him .
GOLD:	So Pilate released Barabbas to them . He ordered Jesus flogged with a lead-tipped whip , then turned him over to the Roman soldiers to be crucified .

ID:	5862
INPUT:	áádóó tł'ízíchǫǫh t'ááłá'ígo éí ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'éego áłahjį' didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You must also sacrifice one male goat as a sin offering , along with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	5863
INPUT:	Áko Mózes nádzáago diné aląąjį' naazíinii hágo yidííniidgo dabinááł díí saad t'áá át'é Bóhólníihii hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bił ch'íjiiz'ą́ .
PRED:	So Moses returned to the camp and called the elders of the Lord and gave this message to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Moses returned from the mountain and called together the elders of the people and told them everything the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	5864
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánáábidoo'niid , Thomas , shiiniłtsánígíí bąą shiisínídląąd . Doo dashiiłtséeh da nidi dashoodlą́ągo shaa dadzólíii éí bik'idahojidlí .
PRED:	Jesus said to Thomas , “ You have seen me , my trust in me , but those who believe me will believe in me .
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ You believe because you have seen me . Blessed are those who believe without seeing me . ”

ID:	5865
INPUT:	Áádóó shił dah dii'áazhgo Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin si'ánígíí binaa haz'ą́ąjį' shił niní'áázh , nít'éé' shoo , Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin bich'éédą́ą'gi chaha'oh áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí bita'gi diné naadiin ashdla' yilt'éego kin bii' sohodizin yits'ą́ąjį' dadéez'į́į'go ha'a'aahjigo jį́honaa'éí yich'į' nidahałáago yiiłtsą́ .
PRED:	Then I went to the Temple of the Lord and saw me standing in front of the Temple of the Lord . When I saw the Temple of the Lord , I saw fifty men standing in front of the Temple .
GOLD:	Then he brought me into the inner courtyard of the Lord 's Temple . At the entrance to the sanctuary , between the entry room and the bronze altar , there were about twenty-five men with their backs to the sanctuary of the Lord . They were facing east , bowing low to the ground , worshiping the sun !

ID:	5866
INPUT:	Háálá Diné Silį́į'ii ałdó' doo bá na'al'a' da , nidi á naal'a' doo índa be'iina' ninéidiní'ą́ągo daaztsánígíí yee lą'í ninéidiyoołnih yiniyé níyá .
PRED:	For the Son of Man has not sent his servants to preach the Good News for many days .
GOLD:	For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve others and to give his life as a ransom for many . ”

ID:	5867
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , nintsíkees danilíinii dooládó' ílį́įgo baa nitsískees da ! Dooládó' ayóó ánéelą́ą' da !
PRED:	Oh , O God , how great is ! How wonderful for you !
GOLD:	How precious are your thoughts about me , O God.They can not be numbered !

ID:	5868
INPUT:	Háálá t'áadoo nánídlínígóó ho'dizhchį́ , áádóó chahałheeł góne' ahojileeh , índa házhi' t'áadoo bééhoozįįh da .
PRED:	For the light of the world is born , and the darkness will never be seen .
GOLD:	His birth would have been meaningless , and he would have ended in darkness . He would n't even have had a name ,

ID:	5869
INPUT:	Shigaan bee Íífreiyim dine'é ádídeíníshtą'go yikah dooleełgóó bínabiníłtą́ą́' . Hadaałt'é áńdeishdlaa , nidi t'áadoo bił béédahoozin da .
PRED:	I have made my arm for my people , so they can not return to my arm , but they do n't understand them .
GOLD:	I myself taught Israel how to walk , leading him along by the hand.But he does n't know or even carethat it was I who took care of him .

ID:	5870
INPUT:	nidi níyol bidziilgo hoł bééhoozingo nídzísdzííd , áko <unk> deezhtłizhgo , Bóhólníihii , yisdáshíłteeh , jiníigo hazhdoolghaazh .
PRED:	But when the wind blows , he saved me from the wind , he cried out to me , “ Lord , save me ! ”
GOLD:	But when he saw the strong wind and the waves , he was terrified and began to sink . “ Save me , Lord ! ” he shouted .

ID:	5871
INPUT:	<unk> tsah índa látsíní hadeezhí bílátsíín sinilgo dziiłtsą́ áádóó hadeezhí Rebékah bizaad dzidiizts'ą́ą'go , Diné kóshíłní , níigo éí diné bich'į' jiníyáago tó hahadleehdi ghą́ą́'ask'idii yíighahgóó sizį́įgo baazhníyá .
PRED:	When she saw her , she said to her , “ Do n't let her go into the field , ” she said . “ Do n't be afraid of me , ” she said .
GOLD:	He had seen the nose-ring and the bracelets on his sister 's wrists , and had heard Rebekah tell what the man had said . So he rushed out to the spring , where the man was still standing beside his camels .

ID:	5872
INPUT:	Doo nahałtingóó áádóó hadoh éí yas too' néiłtsih ; t'áá ákót'éego diné ádił nida'iisíi'ii jishcháá' nídabiłtsih .
PRED:	I will pour out the rain on the earth , and I will pour out the grave .
GOLD:	The grave consumes sinnersjust as drought and heat consume snow .

ID:	5873
INPUT:	Da'íísółts'ą́ą́' , shik'isóó ayóó'ánihósh'níinii , jó , nihokáa'gi badahojoobá'íii oodlą' deidoot'įįłgo índa Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bíí' dadooleełgo ts'ídá nábiizláá' . Éí ayóó'ádabó'níinii bíí' dooleełgo yee nihoní'ą́ .
PRED:	Listen to me , dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , for they have been given to the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	Listen to me , dear brothers and sisters . Has n't God chosen the poor in this world to be rich in faith ? Are n't they the ones who will inherit the Kingdom he promised to those who love him ?

ID:	5874
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí hódahooł'aahii doo bił ákódaat'éégóó yaa nídaat'ínígíí doo jidiizts'ą́ą' da nidi hoł bééhoozingo ábizhdííniid , Díí saadísh bik'ee nidaałtal ?
PRED:	But Jesus did n't listen to his disciples , but he told them , “ Do n't you understand this ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus was aware that his disciples were complaining , so he said to them , “ Does this offend you ?

ID:	5875
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shich'ijí nílínígíí bee dził niłdzilgo si'ánígíí nahalingo áshiinilaa ; doo shiníníł'į́į́góó shich'į' nahwii'náá nít'éé' .
PRED:	You have made me holy mountain , O Lord , my holy mountain ; you have made me sick .
GOLD:	Your favor , O Lord , made me as secure as a mountain.Then you turned away from me , and I was shattered .

ID:	5876
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii haadzíi'go ání , Jiníyáhádę́ę́' ákǫ́ǫ́ t'ą́ą́' nihéézhdoodááł ; díí kin haal'áajį' doo yah azhdoogáał da .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ He will return to his own city , and he will not enter this city .
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , says the Lord .

ID:	5877
INPUT:	Áádóó t'áá ałtso bitah dzideezghalgo diné bíla' bąąh dahaz'ánígíí ábizhdííniid , K'ídílchííd . Áko ákódziidzaago hála' bąąh dahaz'áanii hadaałt'é násdlį́į́' .
PRED:	As he looked at them , he said to the people , “ Get up ! Get up ! Get up ! ” So he said .
GOLD:	He looked around at them one by one and then said to the man , “ Hold out your hand. ” So the man held out his hand , and it was restored !

ID:	5878
INPUT:	Éí bąą ándishní , Habąąhági át'éii t'óó ahayóígíí há yóó'anídoot'ą́ągo bąą , t'áá íiyisí ayóó'í'jó'ní , nidi t'áá háiida a'ohgo há yóó'anídoot'ánígíí , t'áá éí a'ohgo í'jó'ní .
PRED:	Therefore , I tell you , your love is forgiven , but those who love others will love others . But those who love others .
GOLD:	“ I tell you , her sins — and they are many — have been forgiven , so she has shown me much love . But a person who is forgiven little shows only little love . ”

ID:	5879
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí nant'á ; ts'ídá ayóó át'éii yee hadít'é ; Bóhólníihii hadít'éego dziil yee ákászaaz . Nahasdzáán ałdó' hazhó'ó hasht'e'niiní'ą́ągo ts'ídá doo nahjį' adoot'áał da .
PRED:	The Lord is exalted , and he will rule the earth with his strength . He will never be put to death .
GOLD:	The Lord is king ! He is robed in majesty.Indeed , the Lord is robed in majesty and armed with strength.The world stands firmand can not be shaken .

ID:	5880
INPUT:	Ííjip dine'é bich'į' náasdi áhodoonííł baa dahane'
PRED:	A Message for Egypt
GOLD:	Messages for the Nations

ID:	5881
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádajíshóonii éí diné yá'ádaat'éehii bich'į' yaa anídajiit'įįh doo , áádóó diné doo yá'ádaashóonii éí diné t'áá ákogi ádaat'éii bił yah ada'iiztiingi yaa anídajiit'įįh doo .
PRED:	The wicked will be wicked , and those who do evil will be wicked .
GOLD:	Evil people will bow before good people ; the wicked will bow at the gates of the godly .

ID:	5882
INPUT:	Tó łą́ągi áádóó yódí t'óó ahayóigi kéédahoht'íinii , adádanoołníinii k'ad nihá nidahwiizt'i' .
PRED:	You have given great wisdom and many nations , O people of the earth , and you have given us victory .
GOLD:	You are a city by a great river , a great center of commerce , but your end has come.The thread of your life is cut .

ID:	5883
INPUT:	Níłtsą́ biba' nidzíiztą́ nahalingo shiba' nidaháaztą́ą łeh nít'éé' ; níłtsą́ nidayólí nahalingo yídin ádaanéehgo k'adę́ę dashidiits'į́įh łeh nít'éé' .
PRED:	When the Spirit saw me , they saw me as they saw me . They were overwhelmed with songs of joy .
GOLD:	They longed for me to speak as people long for rain.They drank my words like a refreshing spring rain .

ID:	5884
INPUT:	Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii éí ał'ąą dine'é kéyah bíí' dadooleełii yá ałts'áyiizoh yę́ędą́ą́' áádóó Ádam bits'ą́ą́dóó deíchíihii ałts'áyiiznil yę́ędą́ą́' Ízrel dine'é ánéelt'e'ígíí bik'ehgo kéyah bá haadzoh .
PRED:	In the land , the land of the tribe of Israel divided the land of the tribe of Edom , which was allotted to the tribe of Edom .
GOLD:	When the Most High assigned lands to the nations , when he divided up the human race , he established the boundaries of the peoplesaccording to the number in his heavenly court .

ID:	5885
INPUT:	Áko Ízrel dine'é bá nááhidoonihígíí nizhnílóóz ; éí tł'ízí ádił oodzíí'jí nááhidoonihígíí Ízrel dine'é bá nááhániihii át'éego nízdiidzį́į́z áádóó jiisxį́įgo t'áá átséedi ádił oodzíí'jí náájiisnii'ígi át'éego náájiisnii' .
PRED:	So the Israelite goat as a sin offering for the Israelite goat , and he slaughtered the goat as a sin offering for the sin offering . He offered sacrifices to the people of Israel as a sin offering .
GOLD:	Next Aaron presented the offerings of the people . He slaughtered the people 's goat and presented it as an offering for their sin , just as he had first done with the offering for his own sin .

ID:	5886
INPUT:	Jéshuwa éí Jóíyakim há yizhchį́ , Jóíyakim éí Iiláíyashib há yizhchį́ , Iiláíyashib éí Jóíyada há yizhchį́ ,
PRED:	Shemaiah was the father of Jedaiah ( son of Shemaiah was the father of Shemaiah . )
GOLD:	Jeshua the high priest was the father of Joiakim.Joiakim was the father of Eliashib.Eliashib was the father of Joiada .

ID:	5887
INPUT:	Háálá k'adę́ę danihiistsééh , Diyin God yee shik'ijidlíii ła' bee nihił hodeeshnihgo nihí ałdó' bee nihik'ihwiizhdoodliiłgo bee nihidziil dadoohłeeł nisin .
PRED:	For if you are being crushed , I will lift you a blessing to God , and you will be a blessing for you .
GOLD:	For I long to visit you so I can bring you some spiritual gift that will help you grow strong in the Lord .

ID:	5888
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í nítínígo dį́į́' dabinii' áádóó t'ááłá'í nítínígo dį́į́' dabit'a' .
PRED:	There were four wings and four wings and four faces .
GOLD:	except that each had four faces and four wings .

ID:	5889
INPUT:	Áádóó Peter t'áá nízaadę́ę́' hakéé' yigáałgo , aláahgo náá'iiłniihii bikin binaa haz'ą́ągi biná'ástł'iní góne' yah ííyá ; ákwe'é kǫ' léi'gi siláo yił naháaztą́ągo ná'iidzííł .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him and went to the high priest at the courtyard of the Temple . As he was walking along the middle of the city , a fire filled with a fire .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and went right into the high priest 's courtyard . There he sat with the guards , warming himself by the fire .

ID:	5890
INPUT:	Éí ákódzaadóó Bóhólníihii binááhániihii nááhidoonih bijį́į́ góne' bídahólníihii áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii bada'áłchíní índa doo Ízrel dine'é k'ehjí hadadít'éii t'áá ałtso atídeeshłííł .
PRED:	On the third day of the Lord will bring on the Sabbath day of judgment on the day of the Lord . I will punish all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ On that day of judgment , ” says the Lord , “ I will punish the leaders and princes of Judahand all those following pagan customs .

ID:	5891
INPUT:	Áádóó tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí yindanit'a'í éí Jiiháshafat dayiiłtsą́ągo ádaaní , Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í át'į́ ; éí bąą yił da'ahidoogą́ą́ł yiniyé yináshzhiizh , nidi Jiiháshafat hadoolghaazhgo Bóhólníihii bíká eelwod , áádóó Diyin God dabidiisnáa'go hats'ą́ąjį' dah diikai .
PRED:	When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat 's chariots , King Jehoshaphat of Israel cried out to fight him , “ The Lord has helped us ! ”
GOLD:	So when the Aramean chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat in his royal robes , they went after him . “ There is the king of Israel ! ” they shouted . But Jehoshaphat called out , and the Lord saved him . God helped him by turning the attackers away from him .

ID:	5892
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nishłíinii éí baa áháshyą́ ; t'áá áłahájį' tó bił neheshkaah doo ; doo ła' haada yidoolíłígíí biniyé t'áá ákwíí tł'éé' índa t'áá ákwíí jį́ baa áháshyą́ .
PRED:	I am the Lord , and I will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	I , the Lord , will watch over it , watering it carefully.Day and night I will watch so no one can harm it .

ID:	5893
INPUT:	Áádóó Ánas wolyéii áłtsé yich'į' dahazlóóz , háálá éí Kéíyafas haadaaní nilį́ , áko t'áá éí náháhígíí biyi' aláahgo náá'iiłniihii ałdó' nilį́ .
PRED:	Then Caiaphas was the first of the twelve disciples , who was the Messiah . ( This was the high priest who was the high priest . )
GOLD:	First they took him to Annas , since he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas , the high priest at that time .

ID:	5894
INPUT:	Áízak bá ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádaalyaaígíí t'áadoo nídadoodleełí da áádóó Ízrel bihodiyingo nahaz'áanii t'áá ádzaaí nídadoodleeł índa Jerobówam baa ałk'eedóó náás ahoolchíiłii bik'ijį' nishłį́įgo diltłish bee ádahodeeshdįįł .
PRED:	But Isaac did not destroy the pagan shrines . Instead , he will not destroy the sanctuary of the sanctuary of Israel . I will destroy the people of Israel , and I will destroy them forever .
GOLD:	The pagan shrines of your ancestors will be ruined , and the temples of Israel will be destroyed ; I will bring the dynasty of King Jeroboam to a sudden end . ”

ID:	5895
INPUT:	Jó , éí nida'iiniihgóó áłchíní nidaháaztą́ągo yił nidaanéhígíí kót'éego yich'į' ádaanínígíí nidahalin , Tsin bee í'dílzoołí nihá nidasii'ne' , nidi doo da'oołzhiizh da ; nihich'į' atídadiniidlį́į́' , nidi nihí t'áadoo daohcha da .
PRED:	They were like a little child , and they were sitting on their behalf . They did n't mourn for us , but they did n't weep for us .
GOLD:	They are like children playing a game in the public square . They complain to their friends , ‘ We played wedding songs , and you did n't dance , so we played funeral songs , and you did n't weep . '

ID:	5896
INPUT:	<unk> ahéénátł'ingo ní'áhígíí t'áá dabinááł bighá'níníiłgo niyéél bił bighá'níłjiid .
PRED:	I am writing to you in the house of the village in the village .
GOLD:	Dig a hole through the wall while they are watching and go out through it .

ID:	5897
INPUT:	Ákohgo díí nihada'áłchíní bee bił dahołne'go bił béédahodoozįįł , Ízrel dine'é bá díí Jórdan tooh ha'naa nihoníłtseiigo tsé'naa niníná .
PRED:	Then you will know that your children will cross the Jordan River , and you will cross the Jordan River to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Then you can tell them , ‘ This is where the Israelites crossed the Jordan on dry ground . '

ID:	5898
INPUT:	Jesus ánááhodoo'niid , T'áá háiida díí tó yoodlą́'ígíí éí dibáá' náádoodleeł ,
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Anyone who is thirsty and the water will be baptized . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Anyone who drinks this water will soon become thirsty again .

ID:	5899
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné nílíinii , Gag bich'į' handziihgo kóbidiní , Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Éí bijį́ Ízrel shidine'é bohoníłdzilgo kééhat'į́įgo ts'ídá nił bééhózin doo .
PRED:	“ Give this message to the people of Israel : ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will know that I am going to live ! '
GOLD:	“ Therefore , son of man , prophesy against Gog . Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : When my people are living in peace in their land , then you will rouse yourself .

ID:	5900
INPUT:	Béégashii dziisxíinii éí diné dziisxínígíí bił aheełt'é ; dibé yázhí náádziisnii'ii éí łééchąą'í bik'os k'ízhníti'ígíí bił aheełt'é ; ch'iyáán náájiiłniihígíí éí bisóodi bidił náájiiłniihígíí bił aheełt'é , índa t'áá háiida tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii nááhániihii náájiiłniihígíí éí e'elyaii bich'į' nahojiłá nahalin . T'áá aaníí , t'áá bí deinízinígíí bik'ehgo nideideez'ą́ , áádóó t'óó baa'ihii yaa naakaígíí bił dahóshǫ́ .
PRED:	“ If the ox finds a lamb for a burnt offering , the male lamb is a pleasing aroma to the priest , the priest must also offer sacrifices to the priest , and those who offer sacrifices to the Lord . He is a pleasing aroma to those who worship idols .
GOLD:	But those who choose their own ways — delighting in their detestable sins — will not have their offerings accepted.When such people sacrifice a bull , it is no more acceptable than a human sacrifice.When they sacrifice a lamb , it 's as though they had sacrificed a dog ! When they bring an offering of grain , they might as well offer the blood of a pig.When they burn frankincense , it 's as if they had blessed an idol .

ID:	5901
INPUT:	Samériya kéyahdi dził daní'áhígíí bighą́ą́'góó ch'il na'atł'o'ii k'ináádadidoohdlééł . K'ééda'didléehii éí k'ida'didooléełgo nídeineest'áanii łikango deiyą́ą doo .
PRED:	Do n't let the mountains flourish in Samaria , bringing them back to the hills . Do n't let them drink wine from the vineyards .
GOLD:	Again you will plant your vineyards on the mountains of Samariaand eat from your own gardens there .

ID:	5902
INPUT:	Áádóó nitsínáásíkéezgo oo'áłígíí biyaagi doo nidadilna'ii łahda t'áá baa honinééh , índa dahayóii anaa'gi łahda t'áá bik'eh hodidleeh áádóó dahóyáanii bááh łahda doo shóidoołt'eeł da índa diné ak'idadi'yiitįįhii łahda doo adoot'įįł da áádóó diné da'iichįįhii łahda doo bich'odaha'níígóó yiiłtsą́ , áko t'áá ałtso bá bik'íhwiilzhíísh áádóó bá ashja da'ale' .
PRED:	And if you do n't want to live under the sun , you will have enough food to go to battle , and if you do n't want to get enough food for the people to get enough food and peace and peace .
GOLD:	I have observed something else under the sun . The fastest runner does n't always win the race , and the strongest warrior does n't always win the battle . The wise sometimes go hungry , and the skillful are not necessarily wealthy . And those who are educated do n't always lead successful lives . It is all decided by chance , by being in the right place at the right time .

ID:	5903
INPUT:	Táir kin haal'áagi háísh yik'ijį' nahaz'ą́ ? Éíyee' náádaałahgóó naat'áanii ninádayii'nííł ; éíyee' baa nida'iiniihí naat'áanii danilį́ ; éíyee' baa nida'iiniihí nihokáá'góó diné baa yáhásinii danilį́ .
PRED:	“ Where is the city of Tyre ? The city of Tyre has not been built , and it is nothing for us ! We are not our own people ! ”
GOLD:	Who has brought this disaster on Tyre , that great creator of kingdoms ? Her traders were all princes , her merchants were nobles .

ID:	5904
INPUT:	Díí éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá nidaal'a' ; Júdah kéyahgi t'áá át'éé nít'éé' kin hadaas'á ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astłinígóó siláo niyiiznilígíí ałdó' aláahgo naat'áanii yá nidaal'a' .
PRED:	The king sent messengers to Judah , and he sent the commander of the fortified towns of Judah .
GOLD:	These were the troops stationed in Jerusalem to serve the king , besides those Jehoshaphat stationed in the fortified towns throughout Judah .

ID:	5905
INPUT:	Áadi lá índa tónteel bibąąhgóó séí yíl'áhígíí biláahgo áníł<unk> doo ni ; díí lá biniinaa t'áá na'níle'dii hahásdzíi' ni .
PRED:	For you have driven the depths of the Mediterranean Sea , for you have told them what you did .
GOLD:	they would outweigh all the sands of the sea.That is why I spoke impulsively .

ID:	5906
INPUT:	Jó , dahináanii bitahdi diné hak'ee bił nidahooyeehgo áshłaa ; doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhii danilíinii diltłish bee nidaaztseedii bitahdi Féro áádóó t'óó ahayóí bisiláo dah yinééł nít'éé' yę́ę bił yóó'ádahodi'doolnííł , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	I am sending you out among the living among the living among you . I will shatter the sword of Pharaoh , the sword of Pharaoh , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Although I have caused his terror to fall upon all the living , Pharaoh and his hordes will lie there among the outcasts who were slaughtered by the sword . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5907
INPUT:	nidi tsosts'id jínígíí éí Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God biháá'áyį́į́h jį́ át'é , áko éí bijį́ t'áá ha'át'éegoda doo nidoolnish da , ni lá índa niye' ałdó' dooda , nitsi' ałdó' dooda , diné ná naalte' ałdó' dooda , asdzání ná naalte' ałdó' dooda , nibéégashii nidi dooda , nitélii nidi dooda , nilį́į́' ał'ąą ádaat'éii nidi dooda , dé'éyóní t'óó átsééd nił kééhat'íinii nidi ałdó' doo nidoolnish da . Áko diné ná naal'a'í áádóó asdzání ná naal'a'í t'áá nigi át'éego hááhályį́įh doo .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the Lord your God is giving you rest for the Sabbath days of the Lord your God . You must also be slaves , but you are slaves , but you are not slaves , but you are not slaves . But you will never be slaves . ”
GOLD:	but the seventh day is a Sabbath day of rest dedicated to the Lord your God . On that day no one in your household may do any work . This includes you , your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , your oxen and donkeys and other livestock , and any foreigners living among you . All your male and female servants must rest as you do .

ID:	5908
INPUT:	I'íí'ą́ągo chaha'oh iildóhígíí nahonishłingo ááshdįįł ; nahachagiitsoh níyol yáábiiłhą́hígíí nahonishłin .
PRED:	I am like a shadow of the sun , like the wind of the wind .
GOLD:	I am fading like a shadow at dusk ; I am brushed off like a locust .

ID:	5909
INPUT:	Yót'ááh hiníláii bich'ą́ą́h k'os nídiilkǫǫhgo ánáyiil'įįh ; nahasdzáán bá níłtsą́ hasht'ééyiil'įįh ; dziłgóó ch'il hááhinoot'į́įłgo áyósin .
PRED:	He sees the clouds of the heavens , and he sees the mountains of the earth .
GOLD:	He covers the heavens with clouds , provides rain for the earth , and makes the grass grow in mountain pastures .

ID:	5910
INPUT:	T'áá díkwíí nołt'éhígo doohdzih ; azhą́ yádiłhił biyi'di sǫ' yíl'áhígi ánóo<unk> nít'éé' nidi , háálá Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God áníinii doo bik'eh dahonoł'į́į da .
PRED:	You will reply , ‘ You will be angry with the stars , but you will not obey the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	Though you become as numerous as the stars in the sky , few of you will be left because you would not listen to the Lord your God .

ID:	5911
INPUT:	Shits'in t'áá át'é yídéeshtahgo bíneesh'ą́ ; dashiníł'į́įgo dashidiniilgęęzh ;
PRED:	I have seen my bones , and I have seen my bones .
GOLD:	I can count all my bones.My enemies stare at me and gloat .

ID:	5912
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Díí hastiin éí bee haz'áanii doo yik'eh át'éégóó Diyin God bich'į' nahadlá níigo diné yíni' yá ádahale' .
PRED:	“ This is what the husband says : This is what the law of God has done to us .
GOLD:	They accused Paul of “ persuading people to worship God in ways that are contrary to our law . ”

ID:	5913
INPUT:	Diné t'áá ákogi át'éii t'áá ákogi ájít'éhígíí yóó'azhdíí'ą́ągo , áko doo ákwii é'ét'éii baa nijigháago , éí bik'ee dazhdootsaał ; doo ákwii ájíít'įįdii bik'ee dazhdootsaał .
PRED:	The godly will die because of their righteous behavior , and you will die because of their sins .
GOLD:	When righteous people turn from their righteous behavior and start doing sinful things , they will die for it . Yes , they will die because of their sinful deeds .

ID:	5914
INPUT:	Tsį́įłgo haasdzíi'go ádííniid , Nihokáá' dine'é t'áá ałtso dabiyooch'íidii danilį́ .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ All the world are a liar . ”
GOLD:	In my anxiety I cried out to you , “ These people are all liars ! ”

ID:	5915
INPUT:	David áádóó naat'áanii danilį́į́ nít'éé' yę́ę éí kin bii' sohodizin yindaal'a'ii Néthinim wolyéii Líívai dine'é yíká anídaajah doo biniyé nideiznilii éí Néthinim dine'é naakidi neeznádiindóó ba'aan naadiin ánéelą́ą'go éí t'áá ałtso bízhi' naaltsoos dabikáá' .
PRED:	The Temple servants of David , the Temple servants servants of the Temple servants servants who were working in the Temple of the Temple . The people of the Temple was taken from the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	and 220 Temple servants . The Temple servants were assistants to the Levites — a group of Temple workers first instituted by King David and his officials . They were all listed by name .

ID:	5916
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ázhdííniid , Ak'ah tóshjeeh t'ááłáhídi neeznádiin bee shąąh háá'á . Áádóó ánááhodoo'niid , Nąąh háá'áhígíí nídiiłtsóosgo tsį́įłgo nídaahgo , t'áá ashdladiinígo ánílééh .
PRED:	Then he said to her , “ Get up ! Get up your jar ! Get up , and you will be healed . ”
GOLD:	The man replied , ‘ I owe him 800 gallons of olive oil . ' So the manager told him , ‘ Take the bill and quickly change it to 400 gallons . '

ID:	5917
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii éí Mózes áyidííniid , Ííjip kéyahdi néínídzáago bik'ee t'óó ayóigo áhooníiłii nílák'edíí'ánígíí Féro binááł ádadííliił , nidi Féro bijéí deestł'isgo diné doo yéé'doołnih da .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go to Egypt , but do n't let them rejoice in the land of Egypt . Instead , let them go to Pharaoh and let them go to Pharaoh . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord told Moses , “ When you arrive back in Egypt , go to Pharaoh and perform all the miracles I have empowered you to do . But I will harden his heart so he will refuse to let the people go .

ID:	5918
INPUT:	éigi át'éego doo yá'áshǫ́ǫ́góó doo hadeesdzih da , doodaii' na'adlo' doo ła' bee hadeesdzih da .
PRED:	Do n't say , ‘ I am innocent , and I will not answer you . '
GOLD:	my lips will speak no evil , and my tongue will speak no lies .

ID:	5919
INPUT:	Ákohgo hodílzingo doo adą́ baa nisiikai áádóó díí biniyé nihiDiyin God nídeisiikango nihisodizin nihá yidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	And we heard that we were fasting and fasting , and we prayed to God for us .
GOLD:	So we fasted and earnestly prayed that our God would take care of us , and he heard our prayer .

ID:	5920
INPUT:	Áko Goláíyath sizį́įgo Ízrel dine'é bisiláo dah yinéłígíí yich'į' hadoolghaazhgo ání , Ha'át'éegoshą' anaa' biniyé ch'ínooná ? Da' shíísh doo Filístiya dine'é <unk> <unk> da ? Áádóó nihíísh doo Saul binaal'a'í danohłį́į da ? Diné ła' nídadoołteehgo bíni'dii shich'į' hididááh .
PRED:	When the Israelite army arrived at the camp , the commander of Israel cried out to him , “ Why are you going to fight the Philistines ? Are you going to fight the Philistines ? Are you going to fight against me ? ”
GOLD:	Goliath stood and shouted a taunt across to the Israelites . “ Why are you all coming out to fight ? ” he called . “ I am the Philistine champion , but you are only the servants of Saul . Choose one man to come down here and fight me !

ID:	5921
INPUT:	bá nijil'a'í éí ándahwii'aahii yich'į' hoł doo'ash , índa bá nijil'a'í éí ch'é'étiinjį' hoł doo'ashgo dáádílkał , doodaii' ch'é'étiin siláii bik'ijį' tsah yee hajaa' yighá'dootsih , ákót'éego t'éiyá hool'áágóó bá nijil'a' doo .
PRED:	He will bring him to his disciples , and he will carry out the doors of the gateway on the road to the roof of the Nile . This is the road to the roof of the Nile .
GOLD:	If he does this , his master must present him before God . Then his master must take him to the door or doorpost and publicly pierce his ear with an awl . After that , the slave will serve his master for life .

ID:	5922
INPUT:	Jó'akon , t'áá ádzaagóó yik'i hodii'ą́ągo kóní , Nitsi' doo bizháán naagháa da lá . Ákondi kǫ́ǫ́ díí shitsi' éí diné bee ádingo bee bééhózinii át'é . Áádóó kin haal'áádóó hastóí aląąjį' naazíinii bidáahjį' éé' bee ééhózinígíí niidoołkał .
PRED:	“ Look , ” he said . “ I will not marry her . But this man 's daughter will be a virgin of young man , ” he said . “ But if you do n't know that the elders of the city will be taken into the city . ”
GOLD:	He has accused her of shameful conduct , saying , “ I discovered that your daughter was not a virgin. ” But here is the proof of my daughter 's virginity . ' Then they must spread her bed sheet before the elders .

ID:	5923
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii bibi'oh adidilyéehii kintahdóó dego dah diildohgo kin haal'áádóó ha'a'aahjígo dził si'ánígíí bikáá' niildoh .
PRED:	“ Sing to the Lord , the glorious mountain of the Lord , the mountain of the earth .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord went up from the city and stopped above the mountain to the east .

ID:	5924
INPUT:	Áko Aizéíyah éí Heziikáíyah áyidííniid , T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii ánínígíí yísíníłts'ą́ą́' :
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ,
GOLD:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies :

ID:	5925
INPUT:	Bik'i hodiit'áanii índa ak'i dahodii'áanii t'áadoo ałch'į' nii'níłí , áádóó bik'i hodiit'áanii ák'i hadidoodzihgi t'áadoo bá ashja'aléhí , diné ninádidoot'áałgi Rome dine'é doo yee nahas'ą́ą da , dishní .
PRED:	“ Do n't be handed over to him , ” they yelled . “ Do n't be beaten and beaten , ” they said , “ I 'm going to crush us ! I 'm going to Rome ! ”
GOLD:	I pointed out to them that Roman law does not convict people without a trial . They must be given an opportunity to confront their accusers and defend themselves .

ID:	5926
INPUT:	Háálá átséedi Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go áyidííniid ,
PRED:	For the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	For the Lord had said to Moses ,

ID:	5927
INPUT:	Naaltsoos yisdisii ła' nínáádiitįįhgo átsédą́ą́' naaltsoos yisdisii saad bee bik'e'ashchíinii éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihóíyakim iidííłk'ą́'ígíí t'áá éí saad naaltsoos bikáa'gi bee bik'e'náá'dííłchííł .
PRED:	The scroll was written in the book of Jehoiakim 's reign , and the words of the Kings of Judah are burned in the fire .
GOLD:	“ Get another scroll , and write everything again just as you did on the scroll King Jehoiakim burned .

ID:	5928
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí béésh łitsoii bee <unk> <unk> béé'jiidlaago tsin adzíítsigo bąąh dah dzistį́ ; diné t'áá háiida tł'iish bishxashii éí tł'iish dah hidiilt'e'ígíí yik'i níghalii éí hináa doo .
PRED:	And Moses did n't let the bronze trust in the middle of the snake . Anyone who eats the snake into a snake will live in the middle of the snake .
GOLD:	So Moses made a snake out of bronze and attached it to a pole . Then anyone who was bitten by a snake could look at the bronze snake and be healed !

ID:	5929
INPUT:	Áádóó náádadi'yoołnihgo bááh náádahołniihígíí bił dibé yázhí tsosts'idgo ła' béédááhaaí dabiką'ígíí hadaałt'éii áádóó dóola yázhí t'ááłá'ígo índa deenásts'aa' naakigo éí Bóhólníihii bich'į' didlidgo nááhániihii ádaat'éego ak'áán nááhániihii áádóó yanáadzi'go nááhániihii óóltą'go didlidgo nááhániihii Bóhólníihii bich'į' łikání halchinii át'éego náádahołniih doo .
PRED:	You must present a young bull and a one-year-old male lamb for a burnt offering , a ram , and a one-year-old male lamb with no defects . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Along with the bread , present seven one-year-old male lambs with no defects , one young bull , and two rams as burnt offerings to the Lord . These burnt offerings , together with the grain offerings and liquid offerings , will be a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5930
INPUT:	Áádóó Sálaman ání , Diné ílíinii jílį́įgo hatsii' t'ááł á'í nidi doo ła' ni'jį' nidoodił da , nidi doo yá'ádaashóonii bee haho'deel'į́į'go éí dazdootsaał .
PRED:	Then Solomon said , “ Son of man , let the man die , but let anyone die . But if the wicked die , it will die . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	5931
INPUT:	Niha'áłchíní dadidoodliłgo Mólek diyin bidi'níinii t'áadoo bich'į' ninádahidoh'aahí , doodaii' nihiDiyin God bízhi' doo dílzingóó doo ádadoohłíił da . Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́ .
PRED:	“ Do not forget the covenant I am giving you . I am the Lord your God . I am not holy . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not permit any of your children to be offered as a sacrifice to Molech , for you must not bring shame on the name of your God . I am the Lord .

ID:	5932
INPUT:	Éí bąą t'áá háiida díí áłchíní yázhígi át'éego a'ohgo ádaa nitsídzíkeesígíí , éí yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii biyi'di aláahgo ayóó át'éii jílį́ .
PRED:	So you will be proud and arrogant , but you are the Kingdom of Heaven .
GOLD:	So anyone who becomes as humble as this little child is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	5933
INPUT:	éí ni'ana'í danilíinii ayóó'ííní'ní índa nik'is danilíinii éí jiiníłá ; jó , díí jį́ díí bee ííshją́ą́ ádi'nilyaa : naat'áanii danilíinii áádóó nidaal'a'í danilíinii t'áadoo danilínígóó baa nitsíníkees . Jó , díí jį́ kót'éego naa ákoniizį́į́' : Ábsalam hináago áádóó nihí éí díí jį́ ałtso nanihi'diztseedgo ákót'éego t'éiyá nił bik'e'ehwiih doo nít'éé' lá .
PRED:	You have loved your servants and your friends , and you have rejected what you have done today . You have been very careful to know that you are doing what you have done today , and you have done today .
GOLD:	You seem to love those who hate you and hate those who love you . You have made it clear today that your commanders and troops mean nothing to you . It seems that if Absalom had lived and all of us had died , you would be pleased .

ID:	5934
INPUT:	;
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Authority of Jesus Challenged

ID:	5935
INPUT:	Áádóó Asíriya dine'é aláahgo binanit' a'í <unk> éí Ízrel dine'é yich'į' anaa' hasłį́į́' , áko Ménahem bee óhólnííh bidziilgo jótą' doo biniyé <unk> háká adoolwołgo béésh łigaii tálent wolyéhígíí t'ááłáhídi míilgo baazhnínil .
PRED:	The king of Assyria sent this message to the king of Assyria : “ Tell the king of Assyria to give him a piece of silver .
GOLD:	Then King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria invaded the land . But Menahem paid him thirty-seven tons of silver to gain his support in tightening his grip on royal power .

ID:	5936
INPUT:	Doodaii' t'áá ha'át'íhída bąą t'áá ádzaagóó ádee hazdoodzí'ígíí éí doo t'óó bíighahígo ninázh'doodléeł da , nidi bą́ą́h ílínígíí ashdla'go aháádzooígíí t'ááłá'í bínéizdoozohgo ninázh'doodlééł , áko doo ákǫ́ǫ́ ájíít'įįdjí nááhániihii át'éego nááhániih bijį́į́ góne' éí bíí' ílíinii baa nízh'doo'nił .
PRED:	“ If you present a vow or a vow or a vow to the priest , the priest must not accept the property of the priest 's property . He must pay the priest as a special gift to the priest .
GOLD:	or anything obtained by swearing falsely . You must make restitution by paying the full price plus an additional 20 percent to the person you have harmed . On the same day you must present a guilt offering .

ID:	5937
INPUT:	áádóó ná'áshjaa' yázhí áádóó toohjį' noołnahii índa ná'áshjaatsoh ,
PRED:	the barn owl , the barn owl , the desert owl ,
GOLD:	the little owl , the cormorant , the great owl ,

ID:	5938
INPUT:	T'áá ákogi ááníiłii índa nibee yisdá'iildéehii t'áá ákwíí jį́ baa hashne' doo , háálá ákónéelą́'ígíí doo shił bééhózin da .
PRED:	I know what is right and right , for I do n't know the day of trouble .
GOLD:	I will tell everyone about your righteousness.All day long I will proclaim your saving power , though I am not skilled with words .

ID:	5939
INPUT:	Áádóó Het dine'é , Ámor dine'é , Píírez dine'é , Jííbas dine'é índa Háíva dine'é t'áá ałtso daadzí'ígíí éí doo Ízrel dine'é danilíinii
PRED:	Then the Canaanites , Amorites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	There were still some people living in the land who were not Israelites , including the Hittites , Amorites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	5940
INPUT:	Ba'át'e' ádaadinii bich'į' na'át'e' ádingo í'díínílzin , áádóó ák'edahal'íinii bik'ijį' nílį́įgo í'díínílzin .
PRED:	You must show justice to the wicked , and you are pure .
GOLD:	To the pure you show yourself pure , but to the crooked you show yourself shrewd .

ID:	5941
INPUT:	Áko éidí dah diikaigo , Jesus éí diné yíl'áhígíí bich'į' John baa ayázh'niiłti'go ájíní , Ha'át'íishą' dadínóoł'įįłgo honoojíígóó nidasoohkai ? Lók'aa' níyol bighádígíí daats'í ?
PRED:	So Jesus went to the crowd and began talking about John . When he saw him , he asked them , “ Are you going to hide ? ”
GOLD:	As John 's disciples were leaving , Jesus began talking about him to the crowds . “ What kind of man did you go into the wilderness to see ? Was he a weak reed , swayed by every breath of wind ?

ID:	5942
INPUT:	Nidi Íísa hadááh yílwodgo hazénázhchid , áádóó hazts'ǫs , áko t'áá ájíłah jííchah .
PRED:	But Esau jumped up and stood up to the camp . Then he embraced him and kissed him .
GOLD:	Then Esau ran to meet him and embraced him , threw his arms around his neck , and kissed him . And they both wept .

ID:	5943
INPUT:	Nít'éé' t'áá éí bijį́ Sádjusii danilíinii haa yíkai , éí aninéédę́ę́' doo náá'di'yiijeeh da daaní , áko nidahódééłkidgo
PRED:	On that day some of the Pharisees came from the Sadducees and asked Jesus , “ No one will heal you from the dead . ”
GOLD:	That same day Jesus was approached by some Sadducees — religious leaders who say there is no resurrection from the dead . They posed this question :

ID:	5944
INPUT:	Kót'éego Sálaman éí Abáíyathar joolyéii Bóhólníihii bich'į' doo náá'iiłniihii náájídlį́į da doogo t'óó nahjį' hahóółt'e' . Éí Bóhólníihii t'áá bí bizaad bohodoolníiłgo Sháíloh haz'ánídi Íílai ba'áłchíní ahoolchíiłii bídéét'i'go yee haadzíí' nít'éé' .
PRED:	So Solomon agreed to Abiathar the priest , and he refused to let them go to the place of worship the Lord . He told Eli the descendants of Eli the descendants of Eli .
GOLD:	So Solomon deposed Abiathar from his position as priest of the Lord , thereby fulfilling the prophecy the Lord had given at Shiloh concerning the descendants of Eli .

ID:	5945
INPUT:	Jóseph hánaaíké dziiłtsą́ągo t'áá ałtso béédahodzísin , nidi bich'į' doo ádééhodzílzin da , áádóó t'áá na'níle'dii bich'į' hadziisdzíi'go ájíní , Háádę́ę'shą' naahkai ? bizhdííniid . Áko ádadííniid , Kéínan kéyahdę́ę́' ádeit'į́ . Ch'iyáán ła' nidahidiilnih biniyé niikai .
PRED:	When Joseph saw that Joseph was afraid of them , he said to them , “ We have never sinned against us , ” they replied . “ Where are we looking for us ? ” So they said , “ We have gone out of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	Joseph recognized his brothers instantly , but he pretended to be a stranger and spoke harshly to them . “ Where are you from ? ” he demanded. “ From the land of Canaan , ” they replied . “ We have come to buy food . ”

ID:	5946
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jóseph ádííniid , Nihibéeso ádaasdįįdgo nihilį́į́' shaa dahohníiłgo nihilį́į́' bideená nihadi'yeestsoł .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to Joseph , “ You have sold me your money , and you have sex with us . ”
GOLD:	Joseph replied , “ Since your money is gone , bring me your livestock . I will give you food in exchange for your livestock . ”

ID:	5947
INPUT:	Niná'iilyééjí bee nahaz'áanii
PRED:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer
GOLD:	Protection of Property

ID:	5948
INPUT:	Áko ałtso ádahoséłdįįd ; tídahodiishłaago t'áadoo náádahizhdii'na' da ; t'áá aaníí shiyaajį' naa'ahizhneezdee' .
PRED:	So I destroyed my enemies , and my enemies have completely wiped out their heads .
GOLD:	I consumed them ; I struck them down so they did not get up ; they fell beneath my feet .

ID:	5949
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii yigháahgo doo ił ni'íldįįh ałdó' yił yighááh , áádóó doo ił ídlį́ haleehgo ánahat'i' ałdó' haleeh .
PRED:	The wicked will disappear , and the words of the wicked will disappear .
GOLD:	Doing wrong leads to disgrace , and scandalous behavior brings contempt .

ID:	5950
INPUT:	Éí doodaii' awéé' t'óó atsą́ háá'éelgo yóó'ályaiit'áadoo deezghalii nahonishłin doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	I could not see a little child , or I was like a strong child .
GOLD:	Why was n't I buried like a stillborn child , like a baby who never lives to see the light ?

ID:	5951
INPUT:	Áádóó yá'ąąshdę́ę́' iinéé' kóníigo diséts'ą́ą́' , Díí bee ak'e'íłchí : Kodóó náásgóó Bóhólníihii dayoosdląądgo daninéhígíí bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo . Áko Níłch'i Diyinii ádííniid , T'áá aaníí éí bił dahózhǫ́ǫ doo , bindaanish yits'ą́ą́dóó háádadoolyįh , háálá nidaas'a'go yee ła'dayiilaii t'áá bił dahólǫ́ǫ doo !
PRED:	Then I heard this message from heaven : “ Write this message from the Lord : This is what I said : ‘ This is what the Spirit of the Lord says : Those who are living in heaven will be filled with joy . '
GOLD:	And I heard a voice from heaven saying , “ Write this down : Blessed are those who die in the Lord from now on . Yes , says the Spirit , they are blessed indeed , for they will rest from their hard work ; for their good deeds follow them ! ”

ID:	5952
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii lá nihahastiin ła' bił náádanihighango háádaałyį́įhgo ánéidoodlííł . Ákohgo t'óó bi<unk> noot'ą́ áádóó yéego anáádazhniicha .
PRED:	The husband of the Lord will turn his road into the wilderness , and they will cry for joy . Then they will cry for joy .
GOLD:	May the Lord bless you with the security of another marriage. ” Then she kissed them good-bye , and they all broke down and wept .

ID:	5953
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Bóhólníihii éí Dził Sáínaidę́ę́' honíle' , Dził Síyerdóó hach'į' hahóóle' índa Dził Péírandóó bee adideezdláád ; éí neeznáadi mííl bidiyį́į́' yił yíkai ; nish'náájí bílák'eedóó bee haz'áanii diltłi'ii hach'į' kóyiilaa .
PRED:	Then they said , “ The Lord appeared to Mount Sinai , from Mount Sinai and from Mount Seir . They are united with the people of Seir .
GOLD:	“ The Lord came from Mount Sinaiand dawned upon us from Mount Seir ; he shone forth from Mount Paranand came from Meribah-kadeshwith flaming fire at his right hand .

ID:	5954
INPUT:	T'áá shí íinisingo nááhániihígíí nich'į' nááhideeshnih . Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nízhi' bee naa hashniih doo , háálá éí yá'át'ééh .
PRED:	I will offer sacrifices to you , O Lord , for I will praise you for your name .
GOLD:	I will sacrifice a voluntary offering to you ; I will praise your name , O Lord , for it is good .

ID:	5955
INPUT:	Díí bąą k'ad Bóhólníihii kóní , Tsásk'eh bikáá' sínítínídóó doo nídidíí'nah da , nidi t'áá aaníí dadíítsaał . Áko Iiláíjah dah nídiidzá .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Do n't let your enemies die , but you will die . But Elijah will die .
GOLD:	Now , therefore , this is what the Lord says : You will never leave the bed you are lying on ; you will surely die . ' ” So Elijah went to deliver the message .

ID:	5956
INPUT:	Jó , shide ádzaago nááshdóítsoh bitsiijį' daditł'ooii naalzheeh nahalingo shíkaní<unk> dóó t'óó bida'ayóii bee shik'ijį' nanilnish .
PRED:	I am like a lion on my head , and my head is like a lion .
GOLD:	And if I hold my head high , you hunt me like a lionand display your awesome power against me .

ID:	5957
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehii bidiníná doo yá'áshóoniísh aa doolyééł ? Jó , shiniyé a'áán ádahoolaa . Béénílniih , t'óó báhádzidígi át'éego bee atí'él'íinii bits'ą́ąjį' kódeeshłííł biniyé yá'át'éehgo bá yáshti' dooleeł biniyé nidááhdóó sézį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Are you ashamed of the wicked ? Do you want me to kill me ? Do n't you realize that I am afraid of the wicked .
GOLD:	Should they repay evil for good ? They have dug a pit to kill me , though I pleaded for themand tried to protect them from your anger .

ID:	5958
INPUT:	Íífreiyim ayóogo shinó'ááh áádóó Ízrel dine'é doo chohoo'į́į́góó shinda'alo' , Júdah éí Diyin God ba'ahódlíii t'ahdii yits'ą́ąjį' yigááł .
PRED:	The people of Israel are stubborn and stubborn , but God has turned away from me .
GOLD:	Israel surrounds me with lies and deceit , but Judah still obeys Godand is faithful to the Holy One .

ID:	5959
INPUT:	Áko Éíbraham éí Diyin God yich'į' sodoolzin , áko Diyin God éí Abímelek néidiisá , hwe'asdzą́ą́ ałdó' , asdzání há nidaalte' ałdó' , áádóó ha'áłchíní nidahwiizlį́į́' .
PRED:	Then Abraham prayed to God , and he took the wife of God to Abimelech . He also took his wives and children .
GOLD:	Then Abraham prayed to God , and God healed Abimelech , his wife , and his female servants , so they could have children .

ID:	5960
INPUT:	Béésh łigaii índa óola yee nideich'ąąh ; doo hidoolnáał da biniyé bee atsidí yee yił ada'ałkał .
PRED:	They are bound with silver and gold , so they can not be bound with gold .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	5961
INPUT:	Nidi ho'didééh bééhodoozįįł biniyé náá'iiłniihii honééł'į́į́'dóó bik'ijį' halóód nááltseígíí hakágí bii'góó náádees'nii' ládą́ą́' éí náá'iiłniihii nááhodínóoł'įįł .
PRED:	But when he saw that he had been healed , he broke his clothes and broke it into a skin disease .
GOLD:	But if the rash continues to spread after the person has been examined by the priest and has been pronounced clean , the infected person must return to be examined again .

ID:	5962
INPUT:	Bááh bizéí ajiiłkaad nahalingo níló nihiyiiłkaad ; deesk'aazgo ánáyiil'įįhgoshą' háí yii' sizį́įgo yíneel'ą́ ?
PRED:	“ If you eat the hungry , what makes it ceremonially unclean , what goes into the cold ?
GOLD:	He hurls the hail like stones.Who can stand against his freezing cold ?

ID:	5963
INPUT:	áádóó Jiihóíyada biye' Biinéíyah éí siláo dah deínéehii yinanit'a'í nilį́ , índa Zéídak áádóó Abáíyathar éí náá'iiłniihii nilį́ ,
PRED:	Benaiah son of Zadok , Benaiah son of Zadok , the priest , and Abiathar are the priests .
GOLD:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was commander of the army.Zadok and Abiathar were priests .

ID:	5964
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , doo ákwii ádeiit'įįdígíí nihaa halne' nidi , nízhi' binahjį' nihá atínít'į́ , háálá t'óó ahayóidi t'ą́ą́' anáhiniidee'go nich'į' nida'ayeelzíí' .
PRED:	O Lord , we have sinned against us , but we have sinned against us .
GOLD:	The people say , “ Our wickedness has caught up with us , Lord , but help us for the sake of your own reputation.We have turned away from youand sinned against you again and again .

ID:	5965
INPUT:	Éíbraham yę́ę biDiyin God índa Néíhor yę́ę biDiyin God éí hazhé'é yę́ę biDiyin God lá nihá yeinít'į́į doo . Áko Jéíkab bizhé'é Áízak biDiyin God yidósinígíí bee ádee hazdoodzíí' ,
PRED:	This is the God of Abraham and his father , the God of Abraham , the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob .
GOLD:	I call on the God of our ancestors — the God of your grandfather Abraham and the God of my grandfather Nahor — to serve as a judge between us. ” So Jacob took an oath before the fearsome God of his father , Isaac , to respect the boundary line .

ID:	5966
INPUT:	díí nááyiisnii'ígíí éí béésh łigaii łeets'aat'ą́hí t'ááłá'ígo éí shékel wolyéii t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo áádóó béésh łigaii łeets'aa' nímazí t'ááłá'ígo éí níbaal bii' hodílzingi shékel choo'íinii tsosts'idiin dah hidiidloh bíighahgo , díí t'áá áłah bii' ak'áán hadeezbingo ak'ah bił ałtahgo éí ak'áán nááhániihii át'éego nááyiisnii' ,
PRED:	He brought a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , a silver basin weighing four pounds of silver , which equals twenty pounds of choice flour moistened with olive oil , which is made of choice flour moistened with olive oil .
GOLD:	His offering consisted of a silver platter weighing 31/4 pounds and a silver basin weighing 13/4 pounds ( as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel ) . These were both filled with grain offerings of choice flour moistened with olive oil .

ID:	5967
INPUT:	Áko éí ayóó ánísht'é áshidoolííł , háálá shíhígíí éí néididooléełgo hazhó'ó yee nihił hodoolnih .
PRED:	And I will give you the glory of my great treasure , for it will be given to me .
GOLD:	He will bring me glory by telling you whatever he receives from me .

ID:	5968
INPUT:	Sha'áłchíní , t'óó kónígháníjį' nihitaashá . Shíká danohtáa dooleeł , áko Jew dine'é bich'į' haasdzí'ígi át'éego k'ad ánihidishní , Déyáágóó doo dadohkááh át'ée da .
PRED:	Dear children , I will search for you , and you will never find me . I tell you what I am going to live .
GOLD:	Dear children , I will be with you only a little longer . And as I told the Jewish leaders , you will search for me , but you ca n't come where I am going .

ID:	5969
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Sálaman éí Bóhólníihii bibikáá' náá'iiniihí bidáahjigo Ízrel dine'é áłah nilínígíí yinááł yiizį'go dego yá'ąąshjigo yadidiilnii'
PRED:	Then Solomon stood before the Lord and stood before the whole community of Israel standing before the Lord .
GOLD:	Then Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in front of the entire community of Israel . He lifted his hands toward heaven ,

ID:	5970
INPUT:	Łóó' bee hahaltsósí tónteel biih dzółtsósígi át'éegi ákwii hojílǫ́ǫ doo áádóó ał'ąą dine'é bá bąąh aseesyíinii jílį́į doo ; kót'éego shí Bóhólníihii Diyin God haasdzíí' .
PRED:	You will put them into the sea , like a fish in the sea , for I am the Lord .
GOLD:	It will be just a rock in the sea , a place for fishermen to spread their nets , for I have spoken , says the Sovereign Lord . Tyre will become the prey of many nations ,

ID:	5971
INPUT:	Nidi t'áá háiida shíists'ą́ą'ii doo bich'į' nahwii'náágóó kééhat'į́į doo , áádóó báádahadzidii doo bik'ee bił yéé'góó hasht'edít'éego kééhat'į́į doo .
PRED:	But those who listen to me will listen to me , and those who listen to me will live .
GOLD:	But all who listen to me will live in peace , untroubled by fear of harm . ”

ID:	5972
INPUT:	Áádóó Símiyan dine'é kéyah bíí' silį́'ígíí biyi' kin hadaas'áhígíí éí kódahoolyé : Bíyer-shííba , Sííba , Móladah ,
PRED:	So the tribe of Simeon went to Beersheba , where the tribe of Simeon had come to Beersheba .
GOLD:	Simeon 's homeland included Beersheba , Sheba , Moladah ,

ID:	5973
INPUT:	Tónteel bikáá' názbąsgo hodeezooígíí bee adinídíín éí chahałheeł yił ałts'ánéi'nił .
PRED:	It is a covenant between the farthest corners of the earth , and it is covered with light .
GOLD:	He created the horizon when he separated the waters ; he set the boundary between day and night .

ID:	5974
INPUT:	Áádóó Abímelek ádííniid , Jó , kǫ́ǫ́ shikéyah , t'áá nił yá'áhoot'éhígi kééhót'į́į doo .
PRED:	“ Look , ” Abimelech replied . “ I will live in the land of yours . ”
GOLD:	Then Abimelech said , “ Look over my land and choose any place where you would like to live . ”

ID:	5975
INPUT:	Áádóó ach'į' nahwii'ná biyi' bááh t'įįhdígo niha'doołtsoł índa nihich'į' nahwii'náa nidi , tó t'įįhdígo nihaidookááł , áádóó nahinitiní doo nídidoot'į́įł da , nidi nanihinitiní danół'į́į doo ,
PRED:	You must have no food , but you will live in trouble , but you will live in trouble , but you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Though the Lord gave you adversity for foodand suffering for drink , he will still be with you to teach you.You will see your teacher with your own eyes .

ID:	5976
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii t'óó báhádzidgo báháchįįhgo atí'éł'íinii bee kéyahgi nahodeezk'ą́ą́' ; diné éí chizh nahalingo bee hodook'ą́ął doo ; diné yił háá'áázh doo yaa hą́ą́h dínóozįįłí da .
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is a terrible anger ; the anger of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will burn them like a fire .
GOLD:	The land will be blackenedby the fury of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people will be fuel for the fire , and no one will spare even his own brother .

ID:	5977
INPUT:	Éran bigish
PRED:	Aaron 's Cleansing for Aaron
GOLD:	Aaron 's Staff Becomes a Serpent

ID:	5978
INPUT:	Bidziilígíí bąą biinéigo honíts'aa' góyaa bik'é<unk> diits'a' , áádóó atah nidoobah biniyé da'ahijigánígíí yidááh yilwo' .
PRED:	Listen to the voice of the ram , and the news of the battle cries for the battle .
GOLD:	It paws the earth and rejoices in its strengthwhen it charges out to battle .

ID:	5979
INPUT:	áádóó ałdó' asdzání ajiyéehii índa asdzání doo diné bee haleehii ał'ąą át'éego hayi' honít'i' . Asdzání doo ajiyéehii éí Bóhólníihii bá na'anish bízhneedlį́įgo hats'íís índa hwii' sizíinii t'áá áłah diyin dooleełgo baa nitsídzíkees , nidi asdzání éí diné hwee hólóonii haash yit'éegoda hahastiin bił hojíshǫ́ǫ dooleeł biniyé nihokáá' bił nidahazt'i'ii bízhneedlį́įgo baa nitsídzíkees .
PRED:	And if she is not a woman or woman or woman , she is able to do anything in the Lord 's sight . He has given her to his own body and soul , but she has given her to the Lord . He has given her to his wife , but she has given her husband .
GOLD:	His interests are divided . In the same way , a woman who is no longer married or has never been married can be devoted to the Lord and holy in body and in spirit . But a married woman has to think about her earthly responsibilities and how to please her husband .

ID:	5980
INPUT:	Díík'ǫsh éí bąąhági át'éii nahalin , áko éí nahjį' kódaahłééh , áko taos'nii' ániidíii díík'ǫsh t'áágédígíí nidahonohłingo bąąhági át'éii nihitah ádin dooleeł . Háálá Christ atis'adeesdzáago bee bééhániihgo dibé yázhí nááhániihii nihá nilį́įgo nááhaaznii' .
PRED:	“ Do n't be like this sin , ” says the Lord . “ Bring a new lamb for a sin offering to the Passover goat as a sin offering . For Christ has no defects . ”
GOLD:	Get rid of the old “ yeast ” by removing this wicked person from among you . Then you will be like a fresh batch of dough made without yeast , which is what you really are . Christ , our Passover Lamb , has been sacrificed for us .

ID:	5981
INPUT:	Áádóó bizhé'é ábíłní , Háajigoshą' ííyá ? Háálá haye'ké éí Júdahdę́ę́' Diyin God yá halne'ii níyáhígíí ííyáajigoígíí hadayíísid .
PRED:	“ Where did he get back ? ” he asked . “ Where is the prophet who has been torn down from Judah ? ”
GOLD:	The old prophet asked them , “ Which way did he go ? ” So they showed their father which road the man of God had taken .

ID:	5982
INPUT:	Áko kin bii' sohodizin bich'éédą́ą'gi nish'náájígo áádóó nishtł'ajígo íí'áhígíí áyiilaa ; nish'náájígoígíí éí Jéíkin yee yiyíízhi' áádóó nishtł'ajígoígíí éí Bó'az yee yiyíízhi' .
PRED:	Then he built an altar in front of the Temple and built it in front of his right hand . He also built his right hand to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then he set up the two pillars at the entrance of the Temple , one to the south of the entrance and the other to the north . He named the one on the south Jakin , and the one on the north Boaz .

ID:	5983
INPUT:	Díidí Íísa ba'áłchíní náás da'ahílchíihii ádaat'į́ ( Íísa éí Íídam ałdó' wolyé ) .
PRED:	These are the clans of Esau 's descendants , Esau ( also known as Edom ) .
GOLD:	This is the account of the descendants of Esau ( also known as Edom ) .

ID:	5984
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bik'ijidlíi doo , índa Diyin God yisdábííłtíinii t'áá ákogi ánít'é bididooniił .
PRED:	May the Lord be blessed , and he blesses those who do what is right .
GOLD:	They will receive the Lord 's blessingand have a right relationship with God their savior .

ID:	5985
INPUT:	Diné ájít'éii t'áá ałtso yá'ádaat'ééh jinízin , nidi Bóhólníihii éí diné biniyé ájít'íinii bił bééhózin .
PRED:	It is good to all the people , but the Lord knows what is right .
GOLD:	People may be pure in their own eyes , but the Lord examines their motives .

ID:	5986
INPUT:	ninásdzidgo bąą , háálá diné hashkéii nílį́ , áádóó t'áá jíík'e sha'doolyééł t'éí nínízin índa t'áadoo k'idííníláii nánígish .
PRED:	Therefore , if you are afraid , you will be cut off from one animal , and you will be cut off .
GOLD:	I was afraid because you are a hard man to deal with , taking what is n't yours and harvesting crops you did n't plant . '

ID:	5987
INPUT:	nihich'į' bádahazhchįįd yę́ędą́ą́' t'áá dahinii'náago adanihiisna' doo nít'éé' ,
PRED:	He was angry with us , and he was angry with us .
GOLD:	They would have swallowed us alivein their burning anger .

ID:	5988
INPUT:	áko hahane' ya'oozlí'ígíí t'áá ákót'é Diyin God t'áá aaníí lá níigo yee lą́ asłį́į́' .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to him , for it is true to him .
GOLD:	Anyone who accepts his testimony can affirm that God is true .

ID:	5989
INPUT:	Áádóó nihí éí hodiyingo haz'ánígi áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí baa ádahołyą́ą doo , ákohgo Ízrel dine'é t'óó báhádzidgo bee atí'él'íinii doo bik'i nááhwiidoodleeł da .
PRED:	“ You must not eat the altar of the sanctuary and your anger will be filled with anger . Then the anger of Israel will be filled with anger .
GOLD:	“ You yourselves must perform the sacred duties inside the sanctuary and at the altar . If you follow these instructions , the Lord 's anger will never again blaze against the people of Israel .

ID:	5990
INPUT:	Jó , Bóhólníihii kóní , Diné nitsinákahgo áádóó nídaaldzidgo dasidiits'ą́ą́' , áko doo hodéezyéel da .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The man of the Lord says , ‘ We will not listen and help you . ' ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ I hear cries of fear ; there is terror and no peace .

ID:	5991
INPUT:	Naaki góne' dáádiníbaalígíí bine'dę́ę́' ła' nááház'ą́ , éí ts'ídá aláahgo hodiyingo haz'ą́ hoolyé .
PRED:	One day some of the second brother 's armor came from the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	Then there was a curtain , and behind the curtain was the second room called the Most Holy Place .

ID:	5992
INPUT:	T'áá ákwíí jį́ ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii dóola yázhí nááhíłniih doo áádóó bikáá' náá'iiniihí doo bąąh chinígóó áníléehgo bikáa'gi bee k'ééhoodǫǫłii nááhíłniih doo índa bikáa'jį' ak'ah yeidííziłgo dólzingo ádíílííł .
PRED:	“ On the eighth day you must present a young bull and a young bull for a sin offering . Then anoint him to purify the altar and make it right with olive oil .
GOLD:	Each day you must sacrifice a young bull as a sin offering to purify them , making them right with the Lord . Afterward , cleanse the altar by purifying it ; make it holy by anointing it with oil .

ID:	5993
INPUT:	Áko Léíban ánááhodoo'niid , Díí atsi'kéhígíí éí shitsi'ké , díí áłchíní éí sha'áłchíní , díí łį́'ígíí shilį́į́' , índa yíní'ínígíí t'áá ałtso shí . Nidi k'ad díí shitsi'ké índa ba'áłchíní nidayiishchínígíida daashdeeshłííł ?
PRED:	So Laban replied , “ This is my daughters , my daughters , and your daughters are my sons and daughters . And now I will give my daughters to my sons and daughters . ”
GOLD:	Then Laban replied to Jacob , “ These women are my daughters , these children are my grandchildren , and these flocks are my flocks — in fact , everything you see is mine . But what can I do now about my daughters and their children ?

ID:	5994
INPUT:	Jó , díí t'áá ałtso yiiłtsą́ , áádóó t'áá shí diséts'ą́ą'go bik'idiitą́ .
PRED:	I have seen all these things , and I have seen it .
GOLD:	“ Look , I have seen all this with my own eyesand heard it with my own ears , and now I understand .

ID:	5995
INPUT:	Azhą́ Diyin God bibee adziilii bee béédahózinii t'óó ahayóidi binááł baa nijiyáa nidi , t'áadoo dahoosdląąd da ;
PRED:	But he did n't believe in God 's miraculous signs , but he did n't believe his miraculous signs .
GOLD:	But despite all the miraculous signs Jesus had done , most of the people still did not believe in him .

ID:	5996
INPUT:	Háálá ání , Shinanit'a'í danilíinii t'áá ałtso aláahgo naat'áanii danilį́ .
PRED:	For they said , ‘ The kings of my kings are all kings . '
GOLD:	He will say , ‘ Each of my princes will soon be a king .

ID:	5997
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Da'nítiingóó nisoozį́įgo dasídóo'į́į́' . T'áá náshiinídą́'ídi bee nida'nitinii , éí yá'át'éehgo atiinígíí bínda'ídółkidgo ákǫ́ǫ́ deínóhkááh , áko nihii' naazíinii háá'áyį́į́h yik'ídahidookah . Nidi , Éí bik'ehgo doo dayíníikáah da doo , dadííniid .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ Get up to the door of the ancient boundary . Stay here in the square and tell you what is right , but do n't follow your evil ways . ” But the Lord said , “ Do n't let us go on your Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Stop at the crossroads and look around.Ask for the old , godly way , and walk in it.Travel its path , and you will find rest for your souls.But you reply , ‘ No , that 's not the road we want ! '

ID:	5998
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá ádzíłtso t'áá ałtsoní bee bilááh dazhneel'ánígíí éí lą'í adadziiznil , nidi díí asdzání t'áá íiyisí bahojoobá'í nidi , t'áá bee hólónígi ayíínil , yee hináanii nidi t'áá ałtso .
PRED:	For they have given many different kinds of wealth , but they have earned a rich woman .
GOLD:	For they gave a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she had to live on . ”

ID:	5999
INPUT:	náá'iiłniihii Eliyéízar áádóó dah oonéłígíí t'áá ałtso bidááhdóó bił nidíí'ash , áko t'áá dabinááł bee óhólnííh baa díísįįł .
PRED:	Eleazar the priest and all the leaders of the community , and present them to him before him .
GOLD:	Present him to Eleazar the priest before the whole community , and publicly commission him to lead the people .

ID:	6000
INPUT:	náá'iiłniihii éí łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hakáá'góó t'áá át'é hazlį́'ígíí yinééł'į́į'go éí naałniih hodoolna'ígíí , Doo ánít'éhí da , hodidooniił ; jó , t'áá át'é łigaii silį́į́' lá , áko ho'didéeh doo .
PRED:	“ If the priest finds that the person ceremonially unclean , the priest must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . If the person ceremonially unclean , he must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	When the priest examines the infected person and finds that the disease covers the entire body , he will pronounce the person ceremonially clean . Since the skin has turned completely white , the person is clean .

ID:	6001
INPUT:	Peter díí t'ahdii yee yáłti'go , saad deidiizts'ą́'ígíí t'áá ałtso Níłch'i Diyinii bik'i dahoole' .
PRED:	When Peter heard these things , they all heard him say , “ May God be healed . ”
GOLD:	Even as Peter was saying these things , the Holy Spirit fell upon all who were listening to the message .

ID:	6002
INPUT:	Yádiłhił biyi'dę́ę́' adi'ní nahalingo Bóhólníihii haadzíí' , Aláahgo Ayóó'át'éii biinéé' diists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	The voice of the heavens are like a voice from the Lord , the voice of the Almighty .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resounded .

ID:	6003
INPUT:	Hasht'e'ádadołnéehgo yéego nisoozį́ , háálá nihinaagóó diltłish adooldił , diníigo Ííjip kéyahdi áádóó Mígdal kin haal'áadi áádóó Naf kin haal'áadi índa Tahápaniiz kin haal'áadi baa nahólne' .
PRED:	Get up ! Get up and live in Egypt , for this is what the sword of Egypt . This is what the Lord says : I am about to live in southern Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Shout it out in Egypt ! Publish it in the cities of Migdol , Memphis , and Tahpanhes ! Mobilize for battle , for the sword will devour everyone around you .

ID:	6004
INPUT:	Nahałtingo tó danee<unk> 'ígóó tó lą'í danílį́įgo íínísin . Tó nee<unk> 'ígóó náhodííłkǫǫłgo ni' hoolzhólí ánáhóódlííł , índa nanise' nooséełgo bik'ijiinídlí .
PRED:	I am sending you into a desert desert , and you will plant the springs of water in the wilderness .
GOLD:	You drench the plowed ground with rain , melting the clods and leveling the ridges.You soften the earth with showersand bless its abundant crops .

ID:	6005
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é daabíhígíí yílák'ee hayíínilgo binaanish ayóó ádabóodziilgo bidine'é yił yit'íní áyiilaa .
PRED:	He has made the nations strong , and he has made them strong .
GOLD:	He has shown his great power to his peopleby giving them the lands of other nations .

ID:	6006
INPUT:	Áko at'ééd bíla' jiiłtsoodgo ábijiní , Ta<unk> ha kóomii , éí , At'ééd , nídiidááh nidishní , jiníigo óolyé .
PRED:	When she saw her , she said to her , “ I am the girl , ” she said . “ Come to you ! ”
GOLD:	Holding her hand , he said to her , which means “ Little girl , get up ! ”

ID:	6007
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' béésh łigaii tálent wolyéii neeznádiin bíighahgo bik'é Ízrel dine'é bitahdę́ę́' neeznádiindi míilgo siláo ayóogo dahayóígíí haa yí'nil .
PRED:	So he chose 200 pieces of silver from each tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	He also paid about 7,500 pounds of silver to hire 100,000 experienced fighting men from Israel .

ID:	6008
INPUT:	Ná naal'a'í nishłíinii nánooshkąąhgo nizaad bik'ehgo aa a'ááh nínízinígíí bee ha'ííníshníi le' .
PRED:	Give your unfailing love to your servant , for I love your word .
GOLD:	Now let your unfailing love comfort me , just as you promised me , your servant .

ID:	6009
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii t'áá ákogi át'éii bibikáá'dóó nahat'áii yikáá' dah sidáago ha'asídígíí yee doo yá'ádaat'éehii ałtso nahjį' kóyiił'įįh .
PRED:	When you sit on the throne , the throne of the earth will be filled with violence .
GOLD:	When a king sits in judgment , he weighs all the evidence , distinguishing the bad from the good .

ID:	6010
INPUT:	Ínáoltą'í biniyé bibéeso doo a'í'aah da łeh , áádóó diné doo ádihodiilt'i'ii bąąhági át'éii yaa nídóot'įįł biniyé aa yílyéii doo néidiilée da . Kót'éego jiináanii doo nahjį' hahodi'doolt'eeł da .
PRED:	“ Do n't worry about the poor , and the person who judges the guilty person must not be punished for the sins of the poor .
GOLD:	Those who lend money without charging interest , and who can not be bribed to lie about the innocent.Such people will stand firm forever .

ID:	6011
INPUT:	Dahataa łígíí alą́ąjį' yikah . Akéédę́ę́' bibee na'a'néhí sin yee nidaanéhígíí yikah . Bita' góne' éí ch'ikéí ásaa' daagádígíí yee nidaanéego yikah .
PRED:	They sent messengers out to the oldest troops , and they will go out into the camp . They will go out into the middle of the camp .
GOLD:	Singers are in front , musicians behind ; between them are young women playing tambourines .

ID:	6012
INPUT:	Jó , ádaalyaii t'áá át'é díí jį́įjį' ił hodiniih yik'ee nidadi'ni'go nihił béédahózin .
PRED:	Remember that the things you do , so that you will be ashamed of all these things .
GOLD:	For we know that all creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time .

ID:	6013
INPUT:	Nidi Éíhab hwe'asdzą́ą́ Jézebel hodiyiisnáa'go Bóhólníihii binááł doo yá'áshóonii binizhdoolnishgo biniyé niná'ázhdeet'ánígíí éí diné doo ła' ákót'ée da nít'éé' .
PRED:	But Ahab 's wife did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as he had done .
GOLD:	( No one else so completely sold himself to what was evil in the Lord 's sight as Ahab did under the influence of his wife Jezebel .

ID:	6014
INPUT:	ábíłní , Nídiidááh , ashkii áádóó bimá ałdó' bił Ízrel bikéyahgóó nihéénóhkááh , háálá ashkii yida'niiłhį́ yę́ę daneezná .
PRED:	“ Get up , ” he told him , “ and go out to the land of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Get up ! ” the angel said . “ Take the child and his mother back to the land of Israel , because those who were trying to kill the child are dead . ”

ID:	6015
INPUT:	Áádóó Éíbraham bíídíiską́ą́dóó hináago neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan ashdla' binááhai .
PRED:	And Abraham lived 82 years .
GOLD:	Abraham lived for 175 years ,

ID:	6016
INPUT:	Áko haye' Áízak índa Íshmeiyel éí Zóhar , Het dine'é nilíinii biye' Íífran bikéyahgi Mámre bíighahgi haz'ą́ ; éí Makpíílagi hatséníhoodzání góne' yóó'áhoolaa .
PRED:	So Isaac gave his son Isaac , the cave of Machpelah , which was buried in the field of Machpelah , near Mamre .
GOLD:	His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah , near Mamre , in the field of Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite .

ID:	6017
INPUT:	Bíni'dii Ízrel dine'é Ábiilaii baa bił nidahoozhǫǫh ; bíni'dii Záíyandóó dine'é binanit'a'í t'áá íiyisí yaa bił dahózhǫ́ !
PRED:	Let the people of Israel rejoice in Jerusalem.Let the kings of Israel be filled with joy .
GOLD:	O Israel , rejoice in your Maker.O people of Jerusalem , exult in your King .

ID:	6018
INPUT:	Sáíman Peter éí yiyiiłtsą́ągo Jesus yiyaajį' nitsidinígo'go kójíní , Bóhólníihii nílíinii , shits'ánínááh , háálá bąąhági ááníiłii nishłį́ .
PRED:	When Simon Peter saw him , he fell to the ground and said to him , “ Lord , save me from sin . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	When Simon Peter realized what had happened , he fell to his knees before Jesus and said , “ Oh , Lord , please leave me — I 'm such a sinful man . ”

ID:	6019
INPUT:	Dan dine'é bikéyahdóó shádi'áahjigo bíighahgóó ha'a'aahjí áádóó e'e'aahjí hoodzo doo , éí Ásher dine'é bíí' doo .
PRED:	“ Asher will west of the tribe of Dan on the east side of the east side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	“ Asher 's territory lies south of Dan 's and also extends from east to west .

ID:	6020
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Jéíkab áyidííniid , Dah diinéehgo Béthelgóó dínééh ; áadi kénááhót'į́į doo ; ákwe'é Diyin God bich'į' náádi'yííłnih biniyé bikáá' náá'iiniihí ádíílííł ; nínaaí Íísa bits'ą́ą́' yóó'íínílwod yę́ędą́ą́' ákwii nich'į' yit'íní í'diishyaa .
PRED:	God said to Jacob , “ Go to Bethel , and go to Bethel . Go to Bethel and offer sacrifices to God at Bethel , where he had fled to the altar .
GOLD:	Then God said to Jacob , “ Get ready and move to Bethel and settle there . Build an altar there to the God who appeared to you when you fled from your brother , Esau . ”

ID:	6021
INPUT:	Jit'íinii nináneel'ą́ąjį' baa hoł hózhónígíí nahalingo bee hahínídzí'ígíí bik'ehgo joogáałii éí baa shił nihoozhǫǫh .
PRED:	I delight in your royal palace , for I delight in your regulations .
GOLD:	I have rejoiced in your lawsas much as in riches .

ID:	6022
INPUT:	Nidi diné ílíinii éí yá'ádaat'éehii yinaha'á áádóó yá'ádaat'éehii yee sizį́ .
PRED:	But a person who works on good side is good and good .
GOLD:	But generous people plan to do what is generous , and they stand firm in their generosity .

ID:	6023
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Diyin God be'ajooba' , índa t'áá hashkée yee atí'éł'íinii baa ákoniizįįh . Jó , Jew dine'é dajílíinii doo da'joodlánígíí biniinaa t'áá hashkée atíháł'į́ , nidi ni t'éí Diyin God bibee ajooba' yee naa jooba'ígíí baa ákoniizįįh . Áłahjį' baa dzíínílíigo hinínáago naa jooba' doo , éí doodago ni ałdó' t'óó nahjį' andi'dootih .
PRED:	May God 's grace and mercy on God 's way , and if we are being unfaithful to God 's faith , we do n't want you to do what you are doing . But if you are doing , you will be gracious to God 's mercy .
GOLD:	Notice how God is both kind and severe . He is severe toward those who disobeyed , but kind to you if you continue to trust in his kindness . But if you stop trusting , you also will be cut off .

ID:	6024
INPUT:	Áko nahasdzáán bikáa'gi kéédahat'íinii t'áá ałtso , nahasdzáán niit'ą́ą́dę́ę́' Dibé Yázhí seesyį́ nilíinii iináájí naaltsoos bíhígíí bii' t'áadoo dabízhi' ádaalyaii , naayéé' yich'į' nidahodoołaał .
PRED:	And all the people who live in the world will be thrown into the name of the Lamb . They will worship the name of the Lamb .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	6025
INPUT:	Jéíkab áádóó Íísa ałch'į' k'énáhásłį́į́'
PRED:	Jacob 's Journey to Esau
GOLD:	Jacob and Esau Make Peace

ID:	6026
INPUT:	T'óó báhádzidgo báhóóchįįdgo yee atí'éł'ínígíí yee nishiisdláád , áádóó shik'ee deeznih ; shich'į' biwoo' ahíideeshk'ash ; shi'ana'í náshidiniilgęsh .
PRED:	A fierce anger burns against me , and I am overwhelmed with my enemies .
GOLD:	God hates me and angrily tears me apart.He snaps his teeth at meand pierces me with his eyes .

ID:	6027
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God bich'į' ts'ídá t'áadoo bee nihik'íhót'ahí da doo .
PRED:	Do n't be fooled by the Lord your God .
GOLD:	But you must be blameless before the Lord your God .

ID:	6028
INPUT:	Áko Sérai éí Éíbram áyidííniid , Shoo , Bóhólníihii doo ashchį́į́góó áshósin ; t'áá shǫǫdí asdzání shá naal'a'ígíí bił ałt'ani'aash , áko daats'í sha'áłchíní hodooleeł . Áko Éíbram éí Sérai bizaad k'eh ádziidzaa .
PRED:	Then Abram said to Abram , “ Oh , that the Lord has given me a young woman . Please let me be my servant , Sarai , Sarai , Sarai , so that she could have obeyed him . ”
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her. ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	6029
INPUT:	T'óó ádahodil'į́įgo dahalne'ii bits'ąą ádaa ádahołyą́ , jó éí dibégi át'éego doo báhádzidgóó nihaa nídaakah , nidi dabiyi'di t'éí mą'iitsoh t'óó báhádzidgo dichin daazlį́į'go da'aldeełii nidahalin .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of these false prophets , for they are as stubborn as useless as useless as useless as grass .
GOLD:	“ Beware of false prophets who come disguised as harmless sheep but are really vicious wolves .

ID:	6030
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Teaching about Salt and Light

ID:	6031
INPUT:	Áko éí asdzání bizajííyá , áádóó hazts'ǫs , índa t'áadoo hach'į' yáníziní áháłní ,
PRED:	Then she told her , “ Do n't be afraid of the night , ” she told her .
GOLD:	She threw her arms around him and kissed him , and with a brazen look she said ,

ID:	6032
INPUT:	Áádóó naal'a'í t'áadoo yee choo'ínígíí tł'óó'dóó nówehjį' chahałheeł góne' ahołhan ; áadi diné daachxa áádóó biwoo' ahídeidiłk'ash doo .
PRED:	“ Do n't be fooled by the fiery furnace , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . Then there will be weeping and weeping .
GOLD:	Now throw this useless servant into outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . '

ID:	6033
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jiihó'ahaz yę́ę biye' Jó'ash nant'áago naaki náhááh góne' Júdah dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í Jó'ash yę́ę biye' Amazáíyah aláahgo nant'á silį́į́' .
PRED:	Jehoash son of Jehoash began to rule over Judah in the seventh year of King Jehoash of Judah .
GOLD:	Amaziah son of Joash began to rule over Judah in the second year of the reign of King Jehoash of Israel .

ID:	6034
INPUT:	Diné ła' hak'is nilíinii bąąhági át'éii biniinaa doo da'dootsaałii áyoolíiłgo joo'į́įgo bá sozdilzin doo , áko Diyin God hinááh ánábidoodlííł . Bąąhági át'éii biniinaa doo da'dootsaałii hólǫ́ǫgo iiná haa didoot'ááł . Nidi bąąhági át'éii biniinaa da'dootsaałii hólǫ́ ; éí yee bąąhági ádzaii bá sodołzin , doo dishníigo ádíshníi da .
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” someone said . “ He will put up his eye on a man to death , and he will put his death into sin . He will never be able to pray for sinners , but he will never be able to be forgiven . ”
GOLD:	If you see a fellow believer sinning in a way that does not lead to death , you should pray , and God will give that person life . But there is a sin that leads to death , and I am not saying you should pray for those who commit it .

ID:	6035
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii báhóóchįįdgo tahonooskaadgo doo haa ná'áhodílt'į́į da ; dadine' é éí nááda'iiłniihii índa hastóí á naazíinii doo bił dáálįįd da .
PRED:	The Lord was very angry with them , and he was rejected by the sins of the priests .
GOLD:	The Lord himself has scattered them , and he no longer helps them.People show no respect for the priestsand no longer honor the leaders .

ID:	6036
INPUT:	Áko Paul ání , Shik'isóó , aláahgo náá'iiłniihii jílínígíí doo shił bééhózin da lá , háálá kóníigo Diyin God bizaad bee ak'e'ashchį́ , Nidine'é binanit'a'í baa'ihgo doo bá hadíídzih da .
PRED:	Paul replied , “ My dear brothers and sisters , for I do n't know what the Scriptures say , ‘ I am writing to you . ' ”
GOLD:	“ I 'm sorry , brothers . I did n't realize he was the high priest , ” Paul replied , “ for the Scriptures say , ‘ You must not speak evil of any of your rulers . ' ”

ID:	6037
INPUT:	Dabinii' éí díí nidahalin : bidááhdóó éí diné daalnii' , nish'náajigo dabinii'ígíí éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí daalnii' , nishtł'ahjigo dabinii'ígíí éí béégashii daalnii' , bikée'jigo dabinii'ígíí éí atsá daalnii' .
PRED:	These are the ones who belong to their right hand , and I am like a lion who had been cut off like a lion 's right hand .
GOLD:	Each had a human face in the front , the face of a lion on the right side , the face of an ox on the left side , and the face of an eagle at the back .

ID:	6038
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Éíhab yę́ę biye' Eihazáíyah éí Jiiháshafat ííłní , Bíni'dii shá nidaal'a'í éí ná nidaal'a'í yił tsinaa'eeł yee dookah . Nidi Jiiháshafat doo íinízin da .
PRED:	Then Ahab said to Jehoshaphat , “ Let 's go out to the boat with my servants , ” Jehoshaphat replied . “ Let 's go back to the ship . ”
GOLD:	At one time Ahaziah son of Ahab had proposed to Jehoshaphat , “ Let my men sail with your men in the ships. ” But Jehoshaphat refused the request .

ID:	6039
INPUT:	háálá John éí diné ts'ídá t'áá ákogi át'éii índa diyinii nilį́įgo Hérad hoł bééhózingo John béédzíldzid , éí bąą t'óó baa áhojilyą́ą́ nít'éé' . Íídą́ą́' John áháłnínígíí jidiizts'ą́ą'go bik'ee t'áá íiyisí t'óó hoł haada , ákondi baa hoł hózhǫ́ǫgo jidiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	For John realized that John was righteous , and he was afraid of Herod and John was afraid of the Baptist . But when he heard what he was saying , he was very hungry .
GOLD:	for Herod respected John ; and knowing that he was a good and holy man , he protected him . Herod was greatly disturbed whenever he talked with John , but even so , he liked to listen to him .

ID:	6040
INPUT:	Nihitahgóó diné diyoolyééł yiniyé diné yik'é ałch'į' nida'iizlá . Bił kééhót'íinii bits'ą́ą́dóó ínáóltą'í biniyé nááhíníchid ; bee bilááh níí' dooleełii ahanihínínil índa nee áchą́hwíídéeni'go bee bilááh dooleełii hasht'e'nihínínil ; kwíínít'įįdígíí bee sheisínínah , ní Bóhólníihii Diyin God .
PRED:	“ Do n't charge interest among you , ” says the Lord. “ Do n't charge interest in charge of interest in charge of interest in charge of your neighbor , for you have given me victory over your enemies .
GOLD:	There are hired murderers , loan racketeers , and extortioners everywhere . They never even think of me and my commands , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	6041
INPUT:	Áko ła' haa deiz'ą́ . Nít'éé' ábijiní , Díishą' háí bitsiits'iin bik'i si'ą́ , áádóó háísh bízhi' bikáá' ? Nít'éé' ádahałní , Síízar lą́ą .
PRED:	The leaders said to him , “ Who is the head of his head ? Who is the head ? ” And he said , “ Here is the name of Caesar ! ”
GOLD:	When they handed it to him , he asked , “ Whose picture and title are stamped on it ? ” “ Caesar 's , ” they replied .

ID:	6042
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii baa ha'niih le' , háálá kin haal'áii ana'í bináshzhiizhii bii' góne' yee aa a'ááh nízinii ayóó ánóolninígíí shich'į' ííshjání áyiilaa .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , for he has made a covenant with his unfailing love .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , for he has shown me the wonders of his unfailing love.He kept me safe when my city was under attack .

ID:	6043
INPUT:	Kót'éego David habee aditł'į́į́h áádóó tsé bee Filístiya diné naa abíijíítł'ingo bik'eh dzideesdlį́į'go dziisxį́ ; David éí diltłish doo ła' neitin da nít'éé' .
PRED:	So David and his army chased David and killed the Philistines . So David killed his sword and killed him .
GOLD:	So David triumphed over the Philistine with only a sling and a stone , for he had no sword .

ID:	6044
INPUT:	Éí bąą Sárah t'áá hayi'ídi ádaa joodlohgo ájíní , Da' shí hasistihdóó bik'ijį' índa shahastiin bóhonishníihii haastihgoósh shił nááhoneeni doo ?
PRED:	So Sarah said to Sarah , “ Am I an old man who is old and old ? Have I been an old man born to me ?
GOLD:	So she laughed silently to herself and said , “ How could a worn-out woman like me enjoy such pleasure , especially when my master — my husband — is also so old ? ”

ID:	6045
INPUT:	Diyin God nílíinii , shiDiyin God nílį́ ; ts'ídá t'áá aaníí hándínísh'į́į' doo . Kéyah náhooltseii áádóó nídínéesdzáago tó ádindi shii' sizíinii níká dibáá' nilį́ áádóó shits'íís nídin nilį́ .
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and I will search for you , O God , and I am no water .
GOLD:	O God , you are my God ; I earnestly search for you.My soul thirsts for you ; my whole body longs for youin this parched and weary landwhere there is no water .

ID:	6046
INPUT:	Mózes éí Ízrel dine'é ak'eh dahonoł'į́ , yiłní
PRED:	Moses said to the Israelites ,
GOLD:	Moses Urges Israel to Obey

ID:	6047
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíí' ; Éran haye' nidilt'éego hats'ą́ą́' neezná ; éí Bóhólníihii yinááł náá'iisnii'go neezná .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Listen to Aaron , Aaron , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The Lord spoke to Moses after the death of Aaron 's two sons , who died after they entered the Lord 's presence and burned the wrong kind of fire before him .

ID:	6048
INPUT:	Nít'éé' kin bii' sohodizin biyi'dę́ę́' iinéé' ayóó íits'a'go diyingo nidaal'a'í tsosts'idígíí kwííłníigo diséts'ą́ą́' , Nihílááh , Diyin God t'óó báhádzidgo bibee até'él'íinii tsosts'idgo łeets'aa' biyi'ígíí nahasdzáán bikáá'góó yadaahkaah .
PRED:	Then a loud voice from the Temple and said , “ Go and tell the seven angels , ‘ Go and see the seven angels who are filled with the wrath of God . ' ”
GOLD:	Then I heard a mighty voice from the Temple say to the seven angels , “ Go your ways and pour out on the earth the seven bowls containing God 's wrath . ”

ID:	6049
INPUT:	Diné dahóyáanii t'óó ádaa yádadínóodzįįł ; bił dahodooląąłgo dabidi'doolnééł . Shoo , Bóhólníihii bizaad doo deiniizį́į' da , ákoshą' ha'át'íí hódzą́ shį́į́ bii' dahólǫ́ ?
PRED:	The words of the wise will be destroyed , and those who say , “ The Lord will certainly destroy those who are wise ? ”
GOLD:	These wise teachers will fallinto the trap of their own foolishness , for they have rejected the word of the Lord.Are they so wise after all ?

ID:	6050
INPUT:	Áádóó bílátahgi dah azkánígíí binahjį' t'áá ałch'ijí áliv sikaadii naakigo ałdó' íí'á .
PRED:	“ These are the olive oil of olive oil — the olive oil of the olive oil .
GOLD:	And I see two olive trees , one on each side of the bowl . ”

ID:	6051
INPUT:	Asdzání ła' bijéí łoh áádóó tł'óół yistł'óonii át'éego bíla' éí álátsíín niná'niłí át'éego aniné biláahgo dích'íi'go hadinish'į́į́' ; t'áá háiida Diyin God yił hóshóonii éí yits'ádínóochééł , nidi diné ádił ni'iilzíihii éí asdzání azahodínóo'ah .
PRED:	“ Do n't be like a trap of a trap , or a fool is like a cart . If you do n't let the wicked fall into the mouth of the wicked , you will be cut off from the wicked .
GOLD:	I discovered that a seductive woman is a trap more bitter than death . Her passion is a snare , and her soft hands are chains . Those who are pleasing to God will escape her , but sinners will be caught in her snare .

ID:	6052
INPUT:	Áádóó índa tł'óo'jigo dáń'dítį́hígíí biyi'dę́ę́' éí áádóó náwóne'di ahééhool'áhígíí éí bíighahjį' ánízahígíí yínáá'néé <unk> go t'ááłáhídi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan naaki ké siláádóó náá'áłníí' ánízah ; ha'a'aahjigo índa náhookǫsjigo t'áá áłah ákóhonízah .
PRED:	The top of the gateway passage was also 875 feet long , and the gateway passage came to the east side of the north gateway passage .
GOLD:	Then the man measured across the Temple 's outer courtyard between the outer and inner gateways ; the distance was 175 feet .

ID:	6053
INPUT:	Deíldzisgóó tó hadaazlį́į́dóó danílį́įgo áyósin , áko dah daask'idígíí bita'góó danílį́ .
PRED:	The cold and floods are clothed with water , and he is the greatest to the ground .
GOLD:	You make springs pour water into the ravines , so streams gush down from the mountains .

ID:	6054
INPUT:	Háálá t'ááłáhígo nináádahódídóołkiłgi nidi hach'į' dáátiid .
PRED:	For no one dared to ask him what he meant .
GOLD:	And then no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	6055
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii bizaad éí hool'áágóó hólǫ́ . Éí saadígíí hane' yá'át'éehii át'éego bee nidanihidi'neestą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the Lord has told us what he has done to us .
GOLD:	But the word of the Lord remains forever. ” And that word is the Good News that was preached to you .

ID:	6056
INPUT:	Áko Ásasdi nihéédiidzáago iih dasiilt'e' , áádóó Mitilíiniidi nihił aní'éél .
PRED:	We left Ephesus , but we were afraid of Cyprus .
GOLD:	He joined us there , and we sailed together to Mitylene .

ID:	6057
INPUT:	Háálá ayóó át'éego shaa a'ááh nínízin , áádóó ch'į́įdiitah nihoneel'ą́ą́dę́ę́' shii' sizíinii háíníłtį́ .
PRED:	For you have shown me your unfailing love , and you have made me safe from the grave .
GOLD:	for your love for me is very great.You have rescued me from the depths of death .

ID:	6058
INPUT:	Nidi asdzání éí Diyin God deidísinii yá'át'éehgo ó'oo'níiłii bee béédaho'dílzin doo .
PRED:	But if you know God 's ways , you will know that you are holy .
GOLD:	For women who claim to be devoted to God should make themselves attractive by the good things they do .

ID:	6059
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , k'ad éiyá Níłch'i Diyinii aidii'aahii nihił béédahózin doo nihósh'ní .
PRED:	And now , dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Now , dear brothers and sisters , regarding your question about the special abilities the Spirit gives us . I do n't want you to misunderstand this .

ID:	6060
INPUT:	Áko tálent t'ááłá'í ba'ít'ánígíí bits'ą́ą́' nídooh'aahgo tálent neeznáá neijaahígíí baa noh'aah .
PRED:	“ Take one of your money and give it to one of you .
GOLD:	“ Then he ordered , ‘ Take the money from this servant , and give it to the one with the ten bags of silver .

ID:	6061
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nahasdzáán bikáá'góó aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ałtso saad bee hahínídzíi'ii deidiizts'ą́ą'go naa dahaniih doo .
PRED:	O Lord , hear the words of the earth , and all the words of the earth will praise you .
GOLD:	Every king in all the earth will thank you , Lord , for all of them will hear your words .

ID:	6062
INPUT:	Áko diyingo naal'a'í ání , Díí ts'ídá doo yá'áshóonii át'é , áko asdzání éí bee na'akáhí biyi' góne' anáyíyoo<unk> áádóó béésh diłhį́hí adáádít'áhí yidánéidiníłhan .
PRED:	Then the angel said , “ This wicked is what the wicked say , ‘ This woman 's evil and the corruption will be thrown into the sky . '
GOLD:	The angel said , “ The woman 's name is Wickedness , ” and he pushed her back into the basket and closed the heavy lid again .

ID:	6063
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' índa hódahooł'aahii ábizhdííniid , Tį' , Judíyagóó náádiikah .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Let 's go to Judea . ”
GOLD:	Finally , he said to his disciples , “ Let 's go back to Judea . ”

ID:	6064
INPUT:	Díí ałdó' diné dahóyáanii dabizaad . Diné ał'oh át'éego baa nízhdóot'įįłgo doo yá'át'éeh da .
PRED:	The wise do n't say , “ It 's better to be better off than a person ! ”
GOLD:	Here are some further sayings of the wise : It is wrong to show favoritism when passing judgment .

ID:	6065
INPUT:	Jó , tsin bee í'dílzoołí , doodaii' tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii , azhą́ éí doo hináa da nidi diits'a' , áko doo ákwii diits'a'góó haa yit'éegoshą' diits'a'ígíí bééhózin doo ?
PRED:	But if you hear the sound of the flute or the harp , how can we hear the sound of the flute ?
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	6066
INPUT:	Háálá Diyin God éí baa nida'aldeehii t'áá ałtso , nidanil'inii t'áá ałtso t'áá bił , yá'ádaat'éehii , doodaii' doo yá'ádaat'éehii éí yee aa nídóot'įįł .
PRED:	For God will judge everyone who is good for you . He will judge everyone who is good and good .
GOLD:	God will judge us for everything we do , including every secret thing , whether good or bad .

ID:	6067
INPUT:	Diltłish bee nidanihidi'dootsiłgo Ízrel dine'é bikéyah bibąąhdi atídanihideeshłííł , áko Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo nihił béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	I will destroy your sword , but I will punish you in the land of Israel . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	You will be slaughtered all the way to the borders of Israel . I will execute judgment on you , and you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	6068
INPUT:	Jesus Christ bibee ayóó'ó'ó'níinii bee t'áá ánółtso ayóó át'éego nihídin nishłį́įgo Diyin God shá bił bééhózin .
PRED:	I am writing to you in Christ Jesus Christ , and you know that I am not worthy of love .
GOLD:	God knows how much I love you and long for you with the tender compassion of Christ Jesus .

ID:	6069
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí , diné doo áhályáanii ałdó' atiingóó yigáałgo yee ak'idi'yiitįįhígíí ádįįh , áádóó t'áá bidááh hakáhígíí t'áá ałtso yich'į' doo áháyą́ yee yit'íní í'dólzin .
PRED:	As a wise person dies in the streets , he will be able to stand in front of all the wise .
GOLD:	You can identify foolsjust by the way they walk down the street !

ID:	6070
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí diné biláahgo doo ak'idi'yiitįįhígi ánísht'é , áádóó diné ak'i'dadi'yiitįįhígi át'éego doo ak'i'diishtįįh da .
PRED:	I do n't understand the meaning of the wise , and those who understand what is right .
GOLD:	I am too stupid to be human , and I lack common sense .

ID:	6071
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Shínaaíké hanishtá ; t'áá shǫǫdí shił hólne' , háadi nida'niłkaad ?
PRED:	“ Please , my brothers ! ” he asked . “ How are you looking for me ? ”
GOLD:	“ I 'm looking for my brothers , ” Joseph replied . “ Do you know where they are pasturing their sheep ? ”

ID:	6072
INPUT:	Zóbahdóó Néíthan biye' Áígal ałdó' , Géed dine'é Béínai ałdó' ,
PRED:	Then Nathan the tribe of Gad , Gad ,
GOLD:	Igal son of Nathan from Zobah ; Bani from Gad ;

ID:	6073
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é t'áá ałtso tooh bibąąhgóó tó doodlį́įłii yíka'da'ageed , háálá tooh nílínígíí doo dayódlą́ą́' át'ée da .
PRED:	So all the people of Egypt did not drink the water from the Nile River .
GOLD:	Then all the Egyptians dug along the riverbank to find drinking water , for they could n't drink the water from the Nile .

ID:	6074
INPUT:	Nihida'oł'į́į dooleełgi t'áá nihí nihił béédahózin . Aají nihitahgi nideiikai yę́ędą́ą́' doo ák'eh dahoniil'į́į da nít'éé' .
PRED:	You know that we were going to see you , and we did n't obey us .
GOLD:	For you know that you ought to imitate us . We were not idle when we were with you .

ID:	6075
INPUT:	<unk> ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii neeznádiindóó ba'aan naakits'áadah .
PRED:	The family of Parosh2,172
GOLD:	The family of Jorah112

ID:	6076
INPUT:	Áádóó hwíighahgi deeyáago bee nidaho'diltéhígíí yideelchidgo , da'íłteehii deizį' . Áko daaztsánígíí áyidííniid , Dinééh , ándishní , Nídiidááh .
PRED:	As they stood beside the crowd , they grabbed the lame man and grabbed him and said , “ Get up ! ” So they said , “ Go and get up ! ” So they said , “ Go and get up ! ”
GOLD:	Then he walked over to the coffin and touched it , and the bearers stopped . “ Young man , ” he said , “ I tell you , get up . ”

ID:	6077
INPUT:	Ákohgo diné ashdlalt'éhígíí dah náádiikaigo Léíyish kin haal'áadi yíkai . Áko t'áadoo yąąh dabíni'ígóó ákwii kéédahat'ínígíí Sáídan dine'é bił hasht'ehodít'é áádóó hasih dahodiil'aahgo kéédahat'ínígi át'éego dziiłtsą́ . Éí kéyah biyi' naat'áanii doo hólǫ́ǫ dago doo baa yáhásinígi ádabi'dilnéeh da . Sáídan dine'é bits'ą́ądi nízaadi kéédahojit'į́įgo bąą dadine'é náánáła' doo bił ahaa nida'jiilniih da .
PRED:	When the five men left the town , they saw that they were not living in the land of Sidon and Sidon , they would live in the land of Sidon , and no one will live in the land of Sidon .
GOLD:	So the five men went on to the town of Laish , where they noticed the people living carefree lives , like the Sidonians ; they were peaceful and secure . The people were also wealthy because their land was very fertile . And they lived a great distance from Sidon and had no allies nearby .

ID:	6078
INPUT:	Ákohgo Amazáíyah éí Éímas ábizhdííniid , Náasdi áhodoonííł yaa halne'ii nílíinii , nílááh , yówehjį' Júdah kéyahgóó nídílyeed ; áadi bááh niyą́ą le' ; áadi hólne' le' .
PRED:	He said to his master , “ Go and go to Judah . Go to the land of Judah , but let him go to the land of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Then Amaziah sent orders to Amos : “ Get out of here , you prophet ! Go on back to the land of Judah , and earn your living by prophesying there !

ID:	6079
INPUT:	Áko ázhdííniid , Bee haz'áanii bínda'nołtinii , nihí ałdó' doo hojooba' ájíníi da ! Háálá nihí bee haz'áanii diné bide ádaahłaa , nidi t'áá nihí éí nihílázhoozh t'ááłá'í nidi doo bee bidadinołníih da .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law , ” he replied . “ For you have not given you the law of God , but you can not break the hand of hell . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , ” said Jesus , “ what sorrow also awaits you experts in religious law ! For you crush people with unbearable religious demands , and you never lift a finger to ease the burden .

ID:	6080
INPUT:	Nidi doo nihił k'é nídahałeehgóó t'óó nihik'iijée'go binídoołzhish .
PRED:	But if you do n't need to get back , you will not stop it .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to make peace and prepare to fight , you must attack the town .

ID:	6081
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'ádaashóonii doo ła' binoołchéeł da nidi dadíníchééh , nidi diné t'áá ákogi át'éii éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'ooígíí doo yist'i'ii át'é .
PRED:	No one will rescue the wicked , but the godly will rescue the godly will save the lion .
GOLD:	The wicked run away when no one is chasing them , but the godly are as bold as lions .

ID:	6082
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Béílak éí naat'áanii átséhígíí bilááh ánéelą́ą'go t'áá íiyisí aláahgo ił danilíinii anááyííł'a' .
PRED:	So King Balak sent this message to King Balak .
GOLD:	Then Balak tried again . This time he sent a larger number of even more distinguished officials than those he had sent the first time .

ID:	6083
INPUT:	Doo t'áadoo le'é bídin nishłį́įgo ádíshníi da , háálá t'áá shee hólónígi baa shił hózhǫ́ǫgo bóhooł'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	I do n't know what I am saying , for I have n't been concerned about the Good News .
GOLD:	Not that I was ever in need , for I have learned how to be content with whatever I have .

ID:	6084
INPUT:	áádóó t'áadoo bee nihik'íhót'ahígóó , áádóó ałdó' nihił ééhózinígíí , nízaadgóó ha'ííníilnínígíí , nihá áhwiinít'į́'ígíí , Níłch'i Diyinii , t'áá aaníígóó ayóó'í'ííníi'nínígíí bee yá'át'éehgo ádééhoniilzin ,
PRED:	And if you do n't know what you say , you will be honest and gentle . We will be filled with the Holy Spirit , and we will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	We prove ourselves by our purity , our understanding , our patience , our kindness , by the Holy Spirit within us , and by our sincere love .

ID:	6085
INPUT:	Nidi Niiráíyah biye' Bérak éí Kaldíya dine'é yaa nihididoo'áałgo nidanihidoołtsił , éí doodaii' , yisnááh daniidlį́įgo Bábilan kéyahgóó anihidínóołkałgo biniyé nihik'ijį' nilį́įgo níni' ná áháł'į́ .
PRED:	But I will send them out to Baruch , and I will send you out to Babylon . I will send you out to Babylon , and you will be killed . ”
GOLD:	Baruch son of Neriah has convinced you to say this , because he wants us to stay here and be killed by the Babylonians or be carried off into exile . ”

ID:	6086
INPUT:	Díí bik'ehgo nááda'iyołniih doo , hómer wolyéii tł'oh naadą́ą́' t'ááłá'í bits'áką́ągo áádóó éí hastą́ąjį' ahádaashjaa'go t'ááłá'í bidoojaa'ígíí Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo ; tł'oh naadą́ą́' bidee'í ałdó' t'ááłá'í bidoojaa'go Bóhólníihii bich'į' náádahołniih doo ;
PRED:	“ On the third day of your festival , you must present one piece of grain and grain to the Lord . This will be a special gift to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ You must give this tax to the prince : one bushel of wheat or barley for every 60 you harvest ,

ID:	6087
INPUT:	Bidáá' gónaa biyaadóogo éí dóola bida'alyaago ashdla'áadah ké silá bíighahgo ahéénízį́ . T'ááłá'í béésh łitsoii éí dóola bééda'alyaago naakigo ałnaashiijí nít'i' .
PRED:	On the top of the Sea was about twelve gold . It was 71/2 feet deep from each side of the Sea .
GOLD:	It was encircled just below its rim by two rows of figures that resembled oxen . There were about six oxen per foot all the way around , and they were cast as part of the basin .

ID:	6088
INPUT:	Áádóó bikáá'dóó nahat'áii aa a'ááh hasin bił yit'ihgo haz'ą́ą doo áádóó ákwii David biníbaal biyi' góne' ła' t'áá aaníinii yee dah sidáa doo , áádóó ánihwii'aahgo áádóó doo haada yit'éii hát'į́į doo , índa haneetehee t'áá ákogi ááníił doo .
PRED:	He will sit on his throne with his throne , and he will enter the home of David . He will sit on the east side of his throne , and he will live forever .
GOLD:	then God will establish one of David 's descendants as king.He will rule with mercy and truth.He will always do what is justand be eager to do what is right .

ID:	6089
INPUT:	Áko Mózes áádóó Éran índa Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso Péíran honoojíigi Kéídesh hoolyéedi baa níjíkaigo hane' baa nídadziz'ą́ , áádóó Ízrel dine'é dah yinéłígíí t'áá ałtso éí kéyahdóó aneest'ą' nídajizhjaa'ígíí bich'į' ííshjání ádajiilaago deinééł'į́į́' .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron went out to the wilderness of Canaan , where they traveled through the wilderness of Zin and traveled to the wilderness of Canaan . They found all the people of Israel and traveled to the wilderness of Canaan .
GOLD:	to Moses , Aaron , and the whole community of Israel at Kadesh in the wilderness of Paran . They reported to the whole community what they had seen and showed them the fruit they had taken from the land .

ID:	6090
INPUT:	Diyin God éí Biizáliyel índa Ahóliyab bíni' bíighahgo iichįįhgo át'é hwiindzin bii' hólǫ́ǫgo áyiilaa , áko éí nidilt'éego naanish ał'ąą ádaat'éii íidoolíiłgo ts'ídá t'áá át'éegi bił bééhózin silį́į́' : éí atsidjí lá , na'ach'ąąh áádóó yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí índa łichxí'ígíí áádóó áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii biyi'jį' yistł'ǫ́ǫgo naashch'ąą'go atł'óó lá , áko t'áá ha'át'íhída yindoolnishii yiyiichįįh áádóó yinaha'áago binaanish ííł'į́ .
PRED:	Then God made a small stick to Bezalel and Oholiab son of Nebat . He was very angry with the ability to make a solemn pact with an image of blue , purple , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread . He also gave birth to purple , and scarlet thread and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The Lord has given them special skills as engravers , designers , embroiderers in blue , purple , and scarlet thread on fine linen cloth , and weavers . They excel as craftsmen and as designers .

ID:	6091
INPUT:	Nida'niłkaadii éí cha nidahałe'go hodiists'ą́ą́' , háálá yee ayóó ádaat'éii bił ahóóyá . Náshdóí yáázh bitsiijį' daditł'ooígíí biyi' nidahodi'ni'go hodiists'ą́ą́' , háálá Jórdan tooh yee ádaa ha'niih yę́ę t'áadoo biniyéhí da silį́į́' .
PRED:	You heard the sound of your heart , for the sound of your mighty arm.For the sound of your young lions are thrown into the Jordan River , for the sound of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Listen to the wailing of the shepherds , for their rich pastures are destroyed.Hear the young lions roaring , for their thickets in the Jordan Valley are ruined .

ID:	6092
INPUT:	Haa nízádígi shį́į́ kéyah bił hóóchxǫ'go hanályį́įh doo , háálá bikáá' kéédahoht'į́į́ nít'éé' yę́ędą́ą́' háá'áyį́į́h baa náhwiilzhíishgo t'áadoo hanáályį́į' da .
PRED:	“ Go and live in ruins , for there is no rest on the Sabbath day of rest , for there is no rest on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	As long as the land lies in ruins , it will enjoy the rest you never allowed it to take every seventh year while you lived in it .

ID:	6093
INPUT:	Nít'éé' ídahooł'aahii éí Jesus t'áá sáhí yaa yíkaigo ádeidííniid , Hait'éegoshą' nihí hadaniilchéehgo ch'ééh ádeiil'įįd ?
PRED:	When the disciples arrived , Jesus asked the disciples , “ How could we do ? ”
GOLD:	Afterward the disciples asked Jesus privately , “ Why could n't we cast out that demon ? ”

ID:	6094
INPUT:	Bijaa' dahólǫ́ǫ nidi doo yee da'diits'a' da . Bizéé' dahólǫ́ǫ nidi yee nídadidzihii ádaadin .
PRED:	They have ears but can not hear their mouths but can not see their lips .
GOLD:	They have ears but can not hear , and mouths but can not breathe .

ID:	6095
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Díí kin haal'áajį' nídoo' néełgo bee bich'į' hadeesdzih . <unk> náago kin haal'áagi hoł da'ahidoogą́ą́ł áádóó deidoołnééł índa yidahodidooniłgo adeididoołk'ą́ą́ł , áko Júdah kéyahgi kints'iil t'éí dah naazhjaa'go doo naagháhígóó áhodeeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will destroy the towns of Judah and the towns of Judah . I will destroy them , and I will destroy them and destroy them .
GOLD:	I will call the Babylonian armies back again . They will fight against this city and will capture it and burn it down . I will see to it that all the towns of Judah are destroyed , with no one living there . ”

ID:	6096
INPUT:	Áádóó diné t'áá ałtso hwéédahósinii Diyin God yá dahalne'ii éí bił Diyin God bá hojilne'go dahoołtsą́ , áko díí diné áda'ahidoo'niid , Kish biye'shą' ha'át'íí yee atah náánásdlį́į́' ? Saul wolyéiísh ałdó' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii yidiiyáá lá ?
PRED:	When all the people saw him , they said , “ Where are the prophet ? ” So Saul said , “ Why are the prophet of Saul ? ”
GOLD:	When those who knew Saul heard about it , they exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? How did the son of Kish become a prophet ? ”

ID:	6097
INPUT:	Áłchíní bizhé'é bąąh ádaasdįįdígíí bíni' t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nidaakaigo shí baa áháshyą́ą doo , áádóó asdzání bąąh ádahasdįįdii nii' kéédahat'íinii háni'dii shaa dadzólí .
PRED:	My father 's father is coming to me , and let me marry her widow .
GOLD:	But I will protect the orphans who remain among you.Your widows , too , can depend on me for help . ”

ID:	6098
INPUT:	áko níłch'i bida'iiníziinii diné yii'dę́ę́' hahaazhjée'go bisóodi yiih heezhjéé' , áko éí bisóodi bidah ch'ééjée'go be'ek'id yiih heezhjéé' , áko tó bííghą́ą́' .
PRED:	The demons threw the demons into the field and ran out into the middle of the pigs . So they ran out into the water and ran into the water .
GOLD:	Then the demons came out of the man and entered the pigs , and the entire herd plunged down the steep hillside into the lake and drowned .

ID:	6099
INPUT:	Índa bikéé'dóó naat'áanii danilíinii bił dahadlee'go diné áádóó nááda'iiłniihii índa Líívai dine'é yada'iiznil . Hilkáíyah áádóó Zekaráíyah índa Jáíyel éí Diyin God bikin bii' sohodizingi bídahólníihii éí atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii nááhidoonih biniyé naakidi mííldóó ba'aan hastą́diin dibé yázhí áádóó tł'ízí yázhí índa táadi neeznádiin dóola éí nááda'iiłniihii yaa deiznil .
PRED:	Then I gave the gifts to the priests and Levites , along with the priests , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , and the priest of the Temple of God . He also brought the priests to the priests and Levites in the Temple of God .
GOLD:	The king 's officials also made willing contributions to the people , priests , and Levites . Hilkiah , Zechariah , and Jehiel , the administrators of God 's Temple , gave the priests 2,600 lambs and young goats and 300 cattle as Passover offerings .

ID:	6100
INPUT:	Ákohgo Esther éí aláahgo naat'áanii yá naal'a'í ła' bik'i hodiinii'ii éí Esther yá naal'a'í Héítak hágo bizhdííniid , áko ha'át'íí biniyé áádóó ha'át'íí biniinaa Mórdiikai hach'į' áhóót'įįdígíí hazhó'ó shił bééhodoozįįł , nízingo hach'į' i'ííł'a' .
PRED:	Then Esther sent another message to Esther . “ What should I do ? ” Esther replied . “ What should I do to you ? ” So Esther replied .
GOLD:	Then Esther sent for Hathach , one of the king 's eunuchs who had been appointed as her attendant . She ordered him to go to Mordecai and find out what was troubling him and why he was in mourning .

ID:	6101
INPUT:	Áádóó yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Bénjamin dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik' ehgo bikéyah bééhoozin ; nít'éé' Júdah dine'é bikéyah áádóó Jóseph dine'é bikéyah bita' gónaa kéyah haadzooígíí bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	In the sixth year of the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Judah , and the half-tribe of Joseph received the allotment of land .
GOLD:	The first allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Benjamin . It lay between the territory assigned to the tribes of Judah and Joseph .

ID:	6102
INPUT:	Shii' sizíinii nílíinii , ha'át'íí lá bąą doo nił hats'íid da ? Áádóó ha'át'íí lá bąą ádił nitsééníltłi' ? Diyin God bee nił chohoo'į́ , háálá shíká análwo'go shił hózhǫ́ǫgo ánáshoodlíłígíí éí shiDiyin God baa nááhásh'niih doo .
PRED:	“ Why are I discouraged ? Why are I discouraged ? Why are my God ? For I will praise my God , my God , my God , for I will praise my God .
GOLD:	Why am I discouraged ? Why is my heart so sad ? I will put my hope in God ! I will praise him again — my Savior and my God !

ID:	6103
INPUT:	Áádóó Kéínan kéyahgi tsosts'idgo ał'ąą dine'é íísdįįdgo , kéyah daahó doogo hataideez'ą́ .
PRED:	He destroyed seven nations in Canaan , and he divided the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then he destroyed seven nations in Canaan and gave their land to Israel as an inheritance .

ID:	6104
INPUT:	Ha'át'íishą' biniyé nanít'ingo shits'ą́ą́' anííníchą́ą́' , áádóó shee aníní'į́į́' lá , áádóó t'áadoo shił hwíínílne' da ? Shił hwíínílne'go t'éí sin áádóó ásaa' yilghaałígíí áádóó tsin tł'óół bąąh daneelzhee'go bee nida'a'néii índa nihi ł dahózhǫ́ǫgo shits'ą́ą́' dah doonáa dooleeł nít'éé' .
PRED:	“ Why have you turned away from my home ? Why have you turned away from me ? Why have I heard the sound of grapes ? Why should I stop the harp and flute ?
GOLD:	Why did you slip away secretly ? Why did you deceive me ? And why did n't you say you wanted to leave ? I would have given you a farewell feast , with singing and music , accompanied by tambourines and harps .

ID:	6105
INPUT:	áádóó bidiyin dabidi'níinii adeideesk'ą́ą́' ; jó , éí doo diyin da nít'éé' , nidi tsé índa tsin ádaat'éego diné ádabiilaa ; éí bąą ádeisdįįd .
PRED:	They burned the gods of God and burned the gods of the gods , but they did not destroy the trees . So they destroyed them .
GOLD:	And they have thrown the gods of these nations into the fire and burned them . But of course the Assyrians could destroy them ! They were not gods at all — only idols of wood and stone shaped by human hands .

ID:	6106
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii t'áágéédísh díí haz'ánígíí ádeeshdįįłgo níyá ? Bóhólníihii áshíłní , Nílááh , díí kéyah bik'ijį' hasínáahgo áhółdįįh .
PRED:	“ But what is the Lord ? ” the Lord asked me . “ Go and destroy this land . ”
GOLD:	What 's more , do you think we have invaded your land without the Lord 's direction ? The Lord himself told us , ‘ Attack this land and destroy it ! ' ”

ID:	6107
INPUT:	She'asdzą́ą́ baa níyá , áádóó i'niiltsąądgo ashkii yishchį́ . Áko Bóhólníihii áshidííniid , Mei<unk> <unk> bee yidíízhiił .
PRED:	Yet she became pregnant and gave birth to a son , and she said to him , “ Lord ! ” And he said , “ I will name you forever . ”
GOLD:	Then I slept with my wife , and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son . And the Lord said , “ Call him Maher-shalal-hash-baz .

ID:	6108
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jesus ánáádoo'niid , T'áá shí ts'ídá ayóó ánísht'é í'díshnéehgo ts'ídá ayóó ánísht'é í'díshnéhígíí éí t'áadoo shá nídoodleełí da , nidi shiTaa' ayóó ánísht'éego áshósinígíí , Éí nihí nihiDiyin God , dadohní .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I am not worthy of glory , and I do n't want to see the glory of the Father . I am the one who sent me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered , “ If I want glory for myself , it does n't count . But it is my Father who will glorify me . You say , ‘ He is our God , '

ID:	6109
INPUT:	Dilní tsosts'id góne'ígíí
PRED:	The New Copy of the New Life
GOLD:	The Seventh Trumpet Brings the Third Terror

ID:	6110
INPUT:	Hach'il na'atł'o'ii índa hatsin fig naazkaadii hats'ą́ą́' deeshchǫǫł ; éí , Bił ałch'į' dah daashwo'ii shich'į' nidayiiléego shaa dayiiznil , jiníigo baa yájííłti' , nidi t'áá ałtsoní bee hodíłch'ilgo ádeeshłííł áádóó nidaaldlooshii yaa nahodidookah .
PRED:	I will destroy your fig trees and fig trees , and they will pay their crops for their fields , but they will repay them . I will send them out of the forest , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I will destroy her grapevines and fig trees , things she claims her lovers gave her.I will let them grow into tangled thickets , where only wild animals will eat the fruit .

ID:	6111
INPUT:	Áko shinanit'a'í ádandii'niid , Nihizhé'é hólǫ́ ; t'áá hazhó'ó haastih , índa haastihgo bá yizhchínígíí éí t'ah ániid naaghá ; bínaaí ádin , áko bí t'éí bimá yę́ę yits'ą́ą́dóó yidziih , áko bizhé'é ayóó'ábó'ní .
PRED:	“ We are our father 's father , ” he said . “ Our father is old and old . He was a father 's father , and he became the father of his father . He was a father , and he loved his mother .
GOLD:	And we responded , ‘ Yes , my lord , we have a father who is an old man , and his youngest son is a child of his old age . His full brother is dead , and he alone is left of his mother 's children , and his father loves him very much . '

ID:	6112
INPUT:	Nidi bik'ee háhóóchįįdgo , doo t'áá k'ad yah ajííyáa da . Éí bąą hazhé'é ch'íníyáago náhooskan .
PRED:	But now he became angry with his father , and he went out to the ground .
GOLD:	“ The older brother was angry and would n't go in . His father came out and begged him ,

ID:	6113
INPUT:	Nidi dóola yázhí bitsį' áádóó bikágí índa bichaan éí níbaal haal'áhídóó bits'áhwiiní'ą́ądi didííłił ; ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii át'é .
PRED:	But the meat of the bull , the meat of the bull , the meat of the bull , and burn it in the camp .
GOLD:	Then take the rest of the bull , including its hide , meat , and dung , and burn it outside the camp as a sin offering .

ID:	6114
INPUT:	Yá'át'éehii hádaaht'į́ , doo yá'át'éehii éí dooda ; ákódaaht'į́įgo t'éí dahinohnáa doo . Índa t'áá ádadooniidígi át'éego t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii Diyin God nihił hólǫ́ǫ dooleeł .
PRED:	Do n't worry about the good things you do good , and you will live in the sight of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Do what is good and run from evilso that you may live ! Then the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies will be your helper , just as you have claimed .

ID:	6115
INPUT:	Shí Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo Ííjip dine'é hoł béédahodoozįįł biniyé Ííjip kéyah bik'ijį' dah didiish'nii'go hatahdę́ę́' Ízrel dine'é ch'ídeesh'ish .
PRED:	I will know that I am the Lord , the Egyptians , and I will bring them out of Egypt to bring them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	When I raise my powerful hand and bring out the Israelites , the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	6116
INPUT:	Nít'éé' David ádííniid , Néíhash yę́ę shaa joozba'ígi át'éego biye' Héínan baa jiideeshbaał . Áko David éí bá nidaal'a'í hadadi'yoołnih biniyé hazhé'é ádinígíí hach'į' ayiis'a' . Áádóó David bá nidaal'a'í Áman dine'é bikéyahdi yíkai .
PRED:	Then David said to David , “ I want you to buy the gift he had given to his servants . ” So David sent his servants to present his servants to David .
GOLD:	David said , “ I am going to show loyalty to Hanun just as his father , Nahash , was always loyal to me. ” So David sent ambassadors to express sympathy to Hanun about his father 's death.But when David 's ambassadors arrived in the land of Ammon ,

ID:	6117
INPUT:	áádóó éí hoodzo dooígíí Béíyala kin shijaa'dóó e'e'aahjí Dził Sí<unk> hodeesdzo áádóó Dził Jíyarim náhookǫsjí hodeesdzo ; t'áá éí Késalan hoolyé áádóó Beth-shíímesh kin shijaa' góyaa índa Tímnah kin shijaa' bíighahgóó hodeesdzo ;
PRED:	From there the boundary went north to the Mediterranean Sea and the hill country of Beth-shemesh . These are the territory of Beth-shemesh and the hill country of Beth-shemesh .
GOLD:	The boundary circled west of Baalah to Mount Seir , passed along to the town of Kesalon on the northern slope of Mount Jearim , and went down to Beth-shemesh and on to Timnah .

ID:	6118
INPUT:	T'áá háiida bił kééhojit'íinii t'áá nahont'inee dziisxíinii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Anyone who kills another person will be cursed , and everyone will say , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who attacks a neighbor in secret . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	6119
INPUT:	Áádóó David éí naal'a'í dashdiił'a'go Jéíbesh-gíliyadóó dine'é ííłní , Bóhólníihii nihik'izhdoodliił , háálá nihinanit'a'í nilíinii Saul yę́ę baa dajiinohba'go yóó'ádaohłaa .
PRED:	Then David sent messengers to Jabesh-gilead to bless the Lord , for he said , “ May the Lord bless you from your enemies . ”
GOLD:	he sent them this message : “ May the Lord bless you for being so loyal to your master Saul and giving him a decent burial .

ID:	6120
INPUT:	K'ad ákódaohłééh , háálá Bóhólníihii éí David yee haadzíi'go ádííniid , Shá naal'a'í David binahjį' shidine'é Ízrel éí Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' áádóó ana'í t'áá ałtso bits'ą́ąjį' yisdádeeshnił .
PRED:	Now this is what the Lord said to David : “ I will rescue my servant David from the Philistines and from all Israel . ”
GOLD:	Now is the time ! For the Lord has said , ‘ I have chosen David to save my people Israel from the hands of the Philistines and from all their other enemies . ' ”

ID:	6121
INPUT:	Jóseph éí Ííjip binanit'a'í ábi'diilyaa
PRED:	Joseph 's Dreams
GOLD:	Joseph Made Ruler of Egypt

ID:	6122
INPUT:	( azhą́ Jesus t'áá bí doo tó yee asį́įh da nidi , bídahooł'aahii t'éiyá ) .
PRED:	But Jesus did not baptize with the water , but he is not a baptize with water .
GOLD:	( though Jesus himself did n't baptize them — his disciples did ) .

ID:	6123
INPUT:	Nidi télii alą́ąjį' nidahachíhígíí bitsásk'ehgi dibé yázhígo bee t'ą́ą́' náádahidoołnih , doodaii' bitsásk'ehgi doo ła' nááhideeshnih da danohsingo éí t'óó bik'os dahohtíih doo . Nihiye'ké alą́ąjį' nidahachíhígíí t'áá ałtso éí dibé yázhí bee t'ą́ą́' náádahidoołnih . Áko nááhániihii t'áágéedgo doo ła' shich'į' nizhdoogáał da .
PRED:	But if you refuse to return to their flocks , they will not return to their flocks and their children . But if you refuse to listen to their children , do n't let them go back to me . But do n't let them go back to me .
GOLD:	A firstborn donkey may be bought back from the Lord by presenting a lamb or young goat in its place . But if you do not buy it back , you must break its neck . However , you must buy back every firstborn son. “ No one may appear before me without an offering .

ID:	6124
INPUT:	Naaki góne' yéé' silį́į'ii bibanááhodooshzhiizh ; jó'akon , táá' góne' yéé' náádoodleełii k'adę́ę baa nááhoolzhíísh !
PRED:	The second time is coming , and the time is coming ! The time is coming !
GOLD:	The second terror is past , but look , the third terror is coming quickly .

ID:	6125
INPUT:	Kin haal'áádóó ayóó íits'a'go diné nidadi'ni' , áádóó diné tídáánáanii chaał hadahoyiinííh , nidi Diyin God doo yaa ná'áhodílt'į́į da .
PRED:	The cry of the city is filled with destruction and destruction , but the people cry out to God .
GOLD:	The groans of the dying rise from the city , and the wounded cry for help , yet God ignores their moaning .

ID:	6126
INPUT:	Diyin k'ehgo hojooba' ádaat'éego ádaa nitsídaakeesii bik'idahojidlí , háálá yá'ąąshii bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii daabíí' .
PRED:	God blesses those who are poor , for he is the Kingdom of Heaven .
GOLD:	“ God blesses those who are poor and realize their need for him , for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs .

ID:	6127
INPUT:	Áko Jesus t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ yiizį'go ádííniid , Shaa honohłóós , áko diné doo oo'íinii t'áá áyídídę́ę́' niníyáago áyidííniid ,
PRED:	Jesus stood at once and said to him , “ A man who healed me from a distance . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard him , he stopped and ordered that the man be brought to him . As the man came near , Jesus asked him ,

ID:	6128
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii bibee haz'áanii nihił da'ílį́
PRED:	Freedom from the Lord
GOLD:	Heth

ID:	6129
INPUT:	Díí jį́ Ar hoolyéhíjį' ha'naa ninohnééh ; éí Mó'ab kéyah bibąąhgóó áhoolyé .
PRED:	“ These are the terms of your covenant . This is the permanent law for Moab .
GOLD:	‘ Today you will cross the border of Moab at Ar

ID:	6130
INPUT:	Háálá ha'a'aahdę́ę́' índa e'e'aahdę́ę́' áádóó shádi'ááhdę́ę́' ayóó át'é á'doolíiłii ádin .
PRED:	For the east wind and the west , and the east will be west .
GOLD:	For no one on earth — from east or west , or even from the wilderness — should raise a defiant fist .

ID:	6131
INPUT:	áádóó níbaal bii' dahozdísinii bich'éédą́ą'jį' Ízrel dine'é t'áá át'é áłah ádíílííł .
PRED:	and present the whole community of Israel to the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	and call the entire community of Israel together at the entrance of the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	6132
INPUT:	Éí bąą atídanihishłéhígíí ałdó' bik'ee nihitah doo dahats'íid da doo , índa ádił nida'ayohsííh biniinaa nihinaagi doo siláhígóó ádeeshłííł .
PRED:	“ So I will make you sick , and I will make you sick . I will make you innocent , and I will make you innocent .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will wound you ! I will bring you to ruin for all your sins .

ID:	6133
INPUT:	Tsin bijeeh dilidgo łikání halchinii doo dílzinígíí áádóó didlidgo nááhániihii áádóó ak'áán nááhániihii díí bikáá' náá'iiniihí bikáa'gi ts'ídá doo didoodlił da , índa yanáadzi'go nááhániihii doo bik'i yeidooził da .
PRED:	They must burn incense on the altar and burn it on the altar of burnt offering and grain offering . It will be completely completely completely completely burned up .
GOLD:	Do not offer any unholy incense on this altar , or any burnt offerings , grain offerings , or liquid offerings .

ID:	6134
INPUT:	Áko díí kin hadaas'áii nideidiyiiz'ą́ : éí Kíídesh kin haal'áii Gálilii kéyah biyi' , t'áá éí Náftalai dine'é bikéyah át'éego dah daask'idígi , áádóó Shííkem kin haal'áii Íífreiyim dine'é bikéyah dah daask'idígi , índa Kírjath-árba kin haal'áii , t'áá éí Hííbran ałdó' hoolyé ; éí Júdah dine'é bikéyah dah daask'idígi ,
PRED:	Then he gave the towns of Zebulun : “ From the tribe of Naphtali , along with their surrounding villages . These are the tribes of Ephraim , Ephraim , Ephraim , and Naphtali .
GOLD:	The following cities were designated as cities of refuge : Kedesh of Galilee , in the hill country of Naphtali ; Shechem , in the hill country of Ephraim ; and Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah .

ID:	6135
INPUT:	Jį́honaa'éí yee bits'ádi'nílíidii éí t'áá sahdii át'é , tł'éhonaa'éí bee bits'ádi'nídíinii éí t'áá sahdii ánáánát'é , índa sǫ' bee bits'áda'deezdíinii ałdó' t'áá sahdii ánáádaat'é ; jó , sǫ' yee ayóó ádanóolninígíí t'áá da'níł'ąą ádaat'é .
PRED:	The sun will be made of the sun , and the moon will also be made of the sun , and the stars will also be made holy .
GOLD:	The sun has one kind of glory , while the moon and stars each have another kind . And even the stars differ from each other in their glory .

ID:	6136
INPUT:	Háálá doo t'áá nihí ádaa hwiilne' da , nidi Christ Jesus éí Bóhólníihii nilį́įgo baa hwiilne' , índa nihí éí Jesus bá nihinaal'a'í niidlį́įgo hwiilne' .
PRED:	For we preach the word of our Lord Jesus Christ , but we preach the Good News about Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	You see , we do n't go around preaching about ourselves . We preach that Jesus Christ is Lord , and we ourselves are your servants for Jesus ' sake .

ID:	6137
INPUT:	Áko chérabim bit'a' t'áá ahótą'go tádiin ké silá áníłnééz , ła' chérab bit'a' łahjí tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá éí kin neelkálíjį' biní'á . Áádóó łahjígo bit'a'ígíí ałdó' tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá éí łahjí chérab bit'a'ígíí bił ahidii'á .
PRED:	The cherubim was 71/2 feet long , each 71/2 feet long . His wings was 71/2 feet long . His wings was 71/2 feet long .
GOLD:	The total wingspan of the two cherubim standing side by side was 30 feet . One wing of the first figure was 71/2 feet long , and it touched the Temple wall . The other wing , also 71/2 feet long , touched one of the wings of the second figure .

ID:	6138
INPUT:	Nít'éé' hayííłką́ągo tábąąhgi Jesus sizį́įgo dajiiłtsą́ , nidi ídahooł'aahii Jesus át'į́įgo t'áadoo yéédahoosįįd da .
PRED:	When Jesus saw that Jesus was standing beside the bank of the lake , he did n't believe Jesus .
GOLD:	At dawn Jesus was standing on the beach , but the disciples could n't see who he was .

ID:	6139
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate

ID:	6140
INPUT:	T'óó áhodi'į́ bits'ąą ádaa áháyą́ągi bee i'ílnii'
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	A Warning against Hypocrisy

ID:	6141
INPUT:	doo Jew dine'é danilíinii bitahgóó baa nahodeeshnih biniyé biYe' shił yit'íní áyiilaa . Íídą́ą́' ats'íís áádóó bidił dahólóonii doo ła' bił baa nísíst'įįd da .
PRED:	I will tell you the Gentiles about the world , and I will not tell you the Son of Egypt .
GOLD:	to reveal his Son to me so that I would proclaim the Good News about Jesus to the Gentiles.When this happened , I did not rush out to consult with any human being .

ID:	6142
INPUT:	Nidi ni'ílnii'go , ákǫ́ǫ́ díínáałgo t'áá a'ohgo ádaat'éii dah nídinibįįhgi dah díníídaał , áko ni'níłnii'ígíí ándidooniił , Shik'is , aláahgo ádaat'éii dah nídinibįįhgi dah nídaah , áko nił da'ayánígíí t'áá ałtso bił nílį́į doo .
PRED:	But if you do n't need to sit on the table , you will sit on the threshing floor and say , ‘ Come , ' and say , ‘ You will be your brother . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Instead , take the lowest place at the foot of the table . Then when your host sees you , he will come and say , ‘ Friend , we have a better place for you ! ' Then you will be honored in front of all the other guests .

ID:	6143
INPUT:	Héírim ba'áłchíní da'ahílchíihii ła' : Eliyíízer , Aisháíjah , Malkáíyah , Shiiméíyah , Shímiyan ,
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah ,
GOLD:	From the family of Harim : Eliezer , Ishijah , Malkijah , Shemaiah , Shimeon ,

ID:	6144
INPUT:	Doo áhályáanii nishłį́į́ nít'éé' ! Jó , nihí ákónísht'ée dooleeł góne' adashinooyood , nihíjígo yee' yá'át'éehgo shá hadahidoohdzih nít'éé' . Háálá daal'aadii aláahdi ádaat'éii dabidohnínígíí doo bi'ohgo ánísht'ée da , azháánee' t'áadoo nishłíní da nidi .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you into the desert , and you have made me a good shepherd . For I am not the one who sent me to tell you what is right . ”
GOLD:	You have made me act like a fool . You ought to be writing commendations for me , for I am not at all inferior to these “ super apostles , ” even though I am nothing at all .

ID:	6145
INPUT:	Áko ła' hak'ídahidizheehgo áádóó hanák'e nináda'ałbałgo índa yéego nínádahodiika'go , Diyin God yá halne'ii nílį́įgo háishą' nándííłts'in bee nihił hólne' , dahałníigo haa nídiikai . Áádóó siláo dah dahodiilóozgo yéego hoł dzinídeidika'go yaa naaskai .
PRED:	Then he threw them into the boat and threw them into a panic . Then he led us out of the prophets and told us , “ Who is able to heal us ? ” And when we arrived .
GOLD:	Then some of them began to spit at him , and they blindfolded him and beat him with their fists . “ Prophesy to us , ” they jeered . And the guards slapped him as they took him away .

ID:	6146
INPUT:	Nidi k'ad Diyin God ch'ééh shideesá ; sha'áłchíní ałtso ásíníłdįįd .
PRED:	But now God has defiled me , and you have defiled my children .
GOLD:	“ O God , you have ground me downand devastated my family .

ID:	6147
INPUT:	Áádóó Líívai dine'é bigish bikáa'gi éí Éran bízhi' ádíílííł ; Ízrel dine'é dahazhé'é yę́ę náás ahoolchíiłii bá aląąjį' nidzizíinii gish t'ááłá'í hak'eh nítą́ą doo .
PRED:	“ Place the Levites in the name of Aaron , and take one of the Levites in the name of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	Inscribe Aaron 's name on the staff of the tribe of Levi , for there must be one staff for the leader of each ancestral tribe .

ID:	6148
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii kóní , Diné hóyáanii bibee hódzą' t'áadoo yee ádaa ha'niihí áádóó diné ayóó át'éii nilíinii yee ayóó át'éhígíí t'áadoo yee ádaa ha'niihí índa diné at'íinii biyódí t'áadoo yee ádaa ha'niihí ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The proud and proud will be proud , but fools are proud and proud .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't let the wise boast in their wisdom , or the powerful boast in their power , or the rich boast in their riches .

ID:	6149
INPUT:	Áko íídą́ą́' béégashii yáázh yida'iilaa , áko be'elyaii yich'į' nááda'iiłniih áádóó t'áá bí bíla' yee ádayiilaii yaa bił dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	Then he made the calf he had made the calf he had made , and he was filled with joy .
GOLD:	So they made an idol shaped like a calf , and they sacrificed to it and celebrated over this thing they had made .

ID:	6150
INPUT:	Áádóó bik'ijį' índa Ha<unk> dóó Ízrel dine'é dah náádii'náago Péíran honoojíigi ninááná'ná .
PRED:	They left the wilderness and camped in the wilderness of Israel in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then they left Hazeroth and camped in the wilderness of Paran .

ID:	6151
INPUT:	Áko Férisii danilíinii éí dayiiłtsą́ągo hódahooł'aahii ádeidííniid , Ha'át'éegoshą' nanihizhnitinígíí tax nahalyéhígíí yiniyé naazdáii índa bąąhági ádaaníiłii bił da'jiyą́ ?
PRED:	When the Pharisees saw Jesus , he asked the disciples , “ Why are you eating ? ”
GOLD:	But when the Pharisees saw this , they asked his disciples , “ Why does your teacher eat with such scum ? ”

ID:	6152
INPUT:	Ákondi k'ad chánah danohłį́ nihidishní , háálá ła'da nihitahdóó doo yóó'adootłishí da , nidi tsinaa'eeł t'éiyá ałtso nihidooltǫǫł .
PRED:	But now I am telling you , for no one will be left among you , because there is no one left in the boat .
GOLD:	But take courage ! None of you will lose your lives , even though the ship will go down .

ID:	6153
INPUT:	T'ááłá'í jinítínígo éí béésh łigaii áádóó béésh łitsoii hwee dahólónígíí Bóhólníihii baa dahizdeez'ánígíí nidajiizhjaa' , áko Bóhólníihii baa nídahizdeez'ą́ . Áádóó t'ááłá'í jinítínígo tsin nitł'izii hwee dahólónígíí chodeidoo'įįł biniyé nidajiizhjaa' .
PRED:	He brought the money to the Lord , silver , and bronze that is given to the Lord . He gave it to the people who have given them everything he has given them .
GOLD:	And all who had silver and bronze objects gave them as a sacred offering to the Lord . And those who had acacia wood brought it for use in the project .

ID:	6154
INPUT:	Jónah ahééh nízingo bisodizin
PRED:	Joseph 's Prayer for His Brothers
GOLD:	Jonah 's Prayer

ID:	6155
INPUT:	Atsiniltł'ish ahíł<unk> go bee tanoołkaad ; yíníłkáahgo bił ałtaa hó'aah !
PRED:	You guide the lightning with lightning , and you put it into the dust .
GOLD:	Hurl your lightning bolts and scatter your enemies ! Shoot your arrows and confuse them !

ID:	6156
INPUT:	Áko David éí Abísheiyai áádóó bá nidaal'a'í t'áá ałtso áyidííniid , Shoo , shiye' shits'ą́ą́dóó hazlį́į'ii , she'iina' niidoołt'ihgo yiniyé hát'į́ ; t'ah biláhídi át'éego díí Bénjamin dine'é nilíinii kót'éego yaa naaghá . Bíni'dii t'áadoo baa nídaot'íní , bíni'dii ódziih , háálá Bóhólníihii ákóbíłníigo át'į́ .
PRED:	Then David said to Abishai and his servants and his servants , “ Look , my son , my lord , and let my life be restored . Let me see what the Lord has done . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants , “ My own son is trying to kill me . Does n't this relative of Saul have even more reason to do so ? Leave him alone and let him curse , for the Lord has told him to do it .

ID:	6157
INPUT:	Áko Éíbram éí Lat hats'ánínáádóó bik'ijį' Bóhólníihii áhodííniid , Náhookǫsjigo áádóó shádi'áahjigo áádóó ha'a'aahjigo índa e'e'aahjigo díní'į́į́' .
PRED:	So Abram said to Lot , “ Lord , the Lord has told them to west of the south side of the north . ”
GOLD:	After Lot had gone , the Lord said to Abram , “ Look as far as you can see in every direction — north and south , east and west .

ID:	6158
INPUT:	Áko Dan dine'é yich'į' dadilwosh . Nít'éé' Máíkah bich'į'go nídadzizyizgo ádabijiní , Haa lá yinidzaago diné t'óó ahayóí nikéé' nooyééł ?
PRED:	Then the tribe of Dan stood up and stood up to Micah , shouting , “ How long will this man be killed ? ”
GOLD:	They were shouting as they caught up with them . The men of Dan turned around and said to Micah , “ What 's the matter ? Why have you called these men together and chased after us like this ? ”

ID:	6159
INPUT:	Ádanóolninígíí t'áadoo bééníldzidí , háálá yisdándeeshtéełgo biniyé nił honishłǫ́ , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	Do n't let me be afraid , for I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And do n't be afraid of the people , for I will be with you and will protect you . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	6160
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes bił dahojoolne'go ádajiní , Kéyah bich'į' nihííníł'aadígíí baa niikai ; t'áá aaníí éí kéyah yá'áhoot'éehgi abe' índa tsés'ná bitł'izh bee áda'azįįdgo haz'ą́ą́ lá , áko díí aneest'ą' áádę́ę́' nídashiijaa' .
PRED:	So Moses told them , “ You have given us a land flowing with milk and honey , honey , and honey . This is the land flowing with milk and honey .
GOLD:	This was their report to Moses : “ We entered the land you sent us to explore , and it is indeed a bountiful country — a land flowing with milk and honey . Here is the kind of fruit it produces .

ID:	6161
INPUT:	Jesus éí náá'diijeeh índa iiná nilį́
PRED:	Jesus Is the resurrection of life and eternal life .
GOLD:	The Plot to Kill Jesus

ID:	6162
INPUT:	Ts'ídá dooda lą́ą ! Bąąhági át'éii bits'ąą danee'náago haash yit'éego t'ahdii t'áá éí bii' dahinii'náa doo ?
PRED:	And how can we live ? How can we live ? Our lives are still alive ?
GOLD:	Of course not ! Since we have died to sin , how can we continue to live in it ?

ID:	6163
INPUT:	Hazéé' bee ajilįhígi át'éego ajółts'ą́ą́' bee saad hoł nibééhwiizįįh .
PRED:	We 've heard the words of your mouth , and you will soon know it .
GOLD:	Job said , ‘ The ear tests the words it hearsjust as the mouth distinguishes between foods . '

ID:	6164
INPUT:	T'áá háiida daz'diits'a'ii Níłch'i Diyinii éí da'oodlání áłah nídaadleehii kwííłníigo yee yił halne'ígíí háni'dii dajíists'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Holy Spirit . Anyone with ears to the churches .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches .

ID:	6165
INPUT:	Áko doo t'áá nihí nihindaanishígíí t'éiyá yidoołchǫǫł dagi át'é , nidi ayóó át'é asdzą́ą́ diyinii Daiyána wolyéii kin bii' bich'į' nahadláhígíí ałdó' doo ílį́į da dooleeł , áko doo bił ádaa hólníi da dooleełgi át'é , jó , éí Éízhagi índa nihokáá' dine'é t'áá át'é k'ad deidísin .
PRED:	They will not be afraid of me , but we will not be afraid of your wife . He will be the one who sits in the province of Asia , and we will be afraid of the world . ”
GOLD:	Of course , I 'm not just talking about the loss of public respect for our business . I 'm also concerned that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will lose its influence and that Artemis — this magnificent goddess worshiped throughout the province of Asia and all around the world — will be robbed of her great prestige ! ”

ID:	6166
INPUT:	Dził bąąhdóó tsé doo yílá bee haalne'ii e'elyaii bístałgo yiniłtsáanii éí béésh nitł'izii , béésh łitsoii , hashtł'ish , béésh łigaii índa óola ałtso yidííséí . Áko , aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , Diyin God Ayóó'át'éii éí náásgóó ádahodooníłígíí yaa halne'go baa neisíníyeel ; t'áádóo nídí ádooníiłii baa neisíníyeelgo yaa halne' .
PRED:	He did not destroy the rock of a dead rock . He had cut down the rock of iron , silver , silver , bronze , and iron chains that the kings of the Lord , the God of Israel , and the Assyrian king will fulfill his message .
GOLD:	That is the meaning of the rock cut from the mountain , though not by human hands , that crushed to pieces the statue of iron , bronze , clay , silver , and gold . The great God was showing the king what will happen in the future . The dream is true , and its meaning is certain . ”

ID:	6167
INPUT:	Josáíyah biye' Jiihóíyakim éí Júdah dine'é aláahgo yinant'áago dį́į́' náhááh góne' Diyin God yá halne'ii Jeremáíyah éí Niiráíyah biye' Bérak díí saad yee yich'į' yáłti'go naaltsoos yikáá' níyíí<unk> go ání ,
PRED:	On the fourth year of Zedekiah 's reign , during the fourth year of King Jehoiakim 's reign in Judah , Baruch son of Jeremiah . He gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	The prophet Jeremiah gave a message to Baruch son of Neriah in the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah , after Baruch had written down everything Jeremiah had dictated to him . He said ,

ID:	6168
INPUT:	Bízhi' diyinii bee baa dahohniih le' ! Bóhólníihii há daat'íinii bijéí bił nidahoozhǫǫh le' !
PRED:	Praise the name of the Lord ! Let them praise the Lord !
GOLD:	Exult in his holy name ; rejoice , you who worship the Lord .

ID:	6169
INPUT:	Doo áháyą' éí áłchíní bijéí bii'di hólǫ́ , nidi tsin bee áłchíní nánílghałgo bee hasht'e'nehedlóosii éí doo áháyą' yę́ę nízaadgóó ayízdínóołhał .
PRED:	Wise words are a stranger , but your lips are heavy , and your lips are heavy .
GOLD:	A youngster 's heart is filled with foolishness , but physical discipline will drive it far away .

ID:	6170
INPUT:	dabidiyoołhééł , áádóó tágí jį́ aleeh góne' náábidi'doodlááł . Áko t'áá íiyisí bąąh daháni' .
PRED:	On the third day , the third day of the dead will be raised into the dead .
GOLD:	He will be killed , but on the third day he will be raised from the dead. ” And the disciples were filled with grief .

ID:	6171
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Kin hadaas'á yę́ęgóó diné doo kéédahat'ínígíí nahalingo kin haal'áii ánihiséłdįįdgo tónteeldę́ę́' tó ayóó ánéelą́ą́' nik'i didoolkǫǫł .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will scatter the people of the land of the Negev . I will destroy the cities of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	6172
INPUT:	Háálá tł'óo'di áłchíní nidaakaígíí índa kintaa da'nítiingóó tsíłkéí nidaakaígíí nidadootsił biniyé nihitsédaasǫ' góne' índa aláahgo nihinanit'a'í bighan naaznil yę́ęgóó aniné yah ahóóle' .
PRED:	For some of the young women who had been killed in the streets and killed the women in the streets of the royal palace .
GOLD:	For death has crept in through our windowsand has entered our mansions.It has killed off the flower of our youth : Children no longer play in the streets , and young men no longer gather in the squares .

ID:	6173
INPUT:	Háálá t'ááłá'í jinítínígo dajókeedii éí haa dahalyé , hádajit'ínígíí bik'ídajiikááh , índa dáádílkał nídazniłts'inígíí há ąą ádaalne' .
PRED:	For everyone who finds a person being punished , and everyone who receives the open open open doors .
GOLD:	For everyone who asks , receives . Everyone who seeks , finds . And to everyone who knocks , the door will be opened .

ID:	6174
INPUT:	Áko Líbna kin haal'áádę́ę́' Jáshowa dah diiyáago Léíkish kin haal'áajį' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso hoł yíkaigo kin haal'áii biníjíshzhiizh áádóó bik'i jiijéé' ,
PRED:	So Joshua and the Israelite army went out to Libnah and attacked it . Then he attacked the town of Israel and attacked it .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	6175
INPUT:	Yá'ąąshdę́ę́' Diyin God déé'į́į'go éí nihokáá' dine'é ła'da daats'í ak'i'diitįįh , áádóó ła'da daats'í Diyin God hádaat'į́ nízingo háidéez'į́į́' .
PRED:	For God looked up from heaven and saw anyone speaking from heaven . No one can understand what he is from heaven .
GOLD:	God looks down from heavenon the entire human race ; he looks to see if anyone is truly wise , if anyone seeks God .

ID:	6176
INPUT:	áádóó nihich'į' díigi át'éhígíí hazhó'ó danół'į́ , áko díí béédaałniih dooígíí éí Bóhólníihii bibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii t'áá át'é bida'íínóhsin doo , áko danihijéí bik'ehgo índa daah'ínígíí bik'ehgo doo ádaahníił da doo ; jó , éí ajiłda bee t'óó ádee nidaahnéé nít'éé' ; shoo , díí béédaałniih .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey the commands of the Lord , and you will obey all these commands that the commands that the Lord has done . You will die , and you will die . You will die , and you will never die .
GOLD:	When you see the tassels , you will remember and obey all the commands of the Lord instead of following your own desires and defiling yourselves , as you are prone to do .

ID:	6177
INPUT:	K'ad hágo haa'íshą' díí baa nídíit'įįł , ní Bóhólníihii . Azhą́ nihibąąhági át'éii éí t'áá íiyisí łichxíí' nidi , yas nahalingo łigai dooleeł ; azhą́ diłhiłgo łichxíí' nidi , aghaałgaiigi át'éego łigai doo .
PRED:	“ Now , what will happen to you ? The Lord will surely be like snow , but he will be white as white as white as snow .
GOLD:	“ Come now , let 's settle this , ” says the Lord. “ Though your sins are like scarlet , I will make them as white as snow.Though they are red like crimson , I will make them as white as wool .

ID:	6178
INPUT:	áko ájíní , T'áá łinishchí'ígo shimá shishchį́ , áádóó t'áá łinishchí'ígo dah nídideeshdááł ; Bóhólníihii sheidiní'ą́ , Bóhólníihii shaa nááyiisdláá' ; Bóhólníihii bízhi' bee bi'dójíigo baa ha'niih le' .
PRED:	Then he said , “ I am the mother of my mother , and I will return to my mother and my mother . May the Lord be given to me . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ I came naked from my mother 's womb , and I will be naked when I leave.The Lord gave me what I had , and the Lord has taken it away.Praise the name of the Lord ! ”

ID:	6179
INPUT:	Nidi Bóhólníihii áháłní , Ákǫ́ǫ́ dínááh , háálá ats'áhoníłtį́įgo chohwiideesh'įįłii jílį́ , áko doo Jew dine'é danilíinii índa naat'áanii danilíinii , áádóó Ízrel dine'é bich'į' shízhi' bééhózingo ádajile' doo ,
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ Get away from the place of trouble , for I will bring charges against the Jewish leaders of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said , “ Go , for Saul is my chosen instrument to take my message to the Gentiles and to kings , as well as to the people of Israel .

ID:	6180
INPUT:	Áko shidził diyinii bighą́ą'di íínídlą́'ígi át'éego ał'ąą dine'é t'áá ałtso da'adlą́ą dooleeł ; idadí'nóodlį́įłgo nídadí'nóodlį́į́ł índa ts'ídá t'áadoo nidahaazhchį́į da nidahalin doo .
PRED:	Then I will drink the mountain of my holy mountain , and they will drink the water of the earth . They will drink wine and drink it .
GOLD:	Just as you swallowed up my peopleon my holy mountain , so you and the surrounding nationswill swallow the punishment I pour out on you.Yes , all you nations will drink and staggerand disappear from history .

ID:	6181
INPUT:	Ádił ni'iidzííhjí nááhániihii bik'ah éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' néidiłi' doo .
PRED:	It is a sin offering for the sin offering . It is a sin offering .
GOLD:	He must then burn all the fat of the sin offering on the altar .

ID:	6182
INPUT:	Bénjamin dine'é nilíinii Iiláíyada , éí diné hayóii nilį́ ; éí naakidi neeznádiindi mííl siláo éí k'aa' áádóó naagé nideijaahii yił dah yinééł .
PRED:	Benjamin is the army of Benjamin 's army , and he is a shield of shields and shields .
GOLD:	From Benjamin there were 200,000 troops equipped with bows and shields . They were under the command of Eliada , a veteran soldier .

ID:	6183
INPUT:	Nidi , Diyin God Bóhólníihii nílíinii , nich'į' dísh'į́į́' ; niniit'aajį' adínéeshchéełgo nich'į' cho'oosh'į́ ; t'áá ákohígo shidóóchííd yíila' !
PRED:	But I am the Lord , O Sovereign Lord , and do n't let me go to distant lands .
GOLD:	I look to you for help , O Sovereign Lord.You are my refuge ; do n't let them kill me .

ID:	6184
INPUT:	ádahodííniid , Diné doo bąąh nídahineeshgizhígíí baa yíníyáago bił da'ííníyą́ą́' .
PRED:	But the men said , “ You ate the Passover meal and ate it . ”
GOLD:	“ You entered the home of Gentiles and even ate with them ! ” they said .

ID:	6185
INPUT:	Diyin God bizaad t'ááłá'í ní'ánígo danéél'į́į'go yá'ádaat'éehgo bééhoozin ; baa dadzólíii éí yá naagé nilį́ .
PRED:	God is good to each other , and he is a shield for those who trust in you .
GOLD:	Every word of God proves true.He is a shield to all who come to him for protection .

ID:	6186
INPUT:	Jéíkab éí Réíchel áádóó Líyah bik'é Léíban yá naashnish
PRED:	Jacob 's worked for Rachel and Rachel .
GOLD:	Jacob Arrives at Paddan-Aram

ID:	6187
INPUT:	Ła'da nish'náájígo t'áadoo le'é yąąh dah neeshjį́įdgo , nidi t'óó dichin bidí'nóołhééł , áádóó nishtł'ajígo yee ííyą́ą' nidi , doo hwiih nilį́į da doo ; diné t'ááłá'í jinítínígo t'áá hó hagaan nijílghał doo .
PRED:	“ You must not eat your right hand , but you will eat it with food . You will not eat any food , but you will eat it .
GOLD:	They will attack their neighbor on the rightbut will still be hungry.They will devour their neighbor on the leftbut will not be satisfied.In the end they will even eat their own children .

ID:	6188
INPUT:	Áádóó Kóhath dine'é łahjį'ígíí yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo Íífreiyim dine'é áádóó Dan dine'é índa Manáseh dine'é ałníí'dóóígíí éí bada'áłchíní ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bikin hadaas'áii neeznáá kin haal'á bíighahgo bíí' daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	The rest of the tribe of Levi was allotted to the clans of the tribe of Ephraim and Ephraim . The half-tribe of Manasseh was allotted to the clans of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The other families of the Kohathite clan were allotted ten towns from the tribes of Ephraim , Dan , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	6189
INPUT:	Áko Jóseph áhodííniid , Díí ááhyiłní , Táá' bits'áoz'a'ígíí éí táá' yidoołkááł .
PRED:	Joseph said to Joseph , “ The third day will be three days . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph said . “ The three branches represent three days .

ID:	6190
INPUT:	Áko kin haal'áhígi dahólónígíí , diné áádóó asdzání ániid nidaakaii áádóó hadaastihii , béégashiida , dibéda índa téliida ts'ídá ałtso diltłish yee ádeisdįįd .
PRED:	The men who had lived in the town , women , women , women , goats , and cattle , donkeys , donkeys , and donkeys .
GOLD:	They completely destroyed everything in it with their swords — men and women , young and old , cattle , sheep , goats , and donkeys .

ID:	6191
INPUT:	Áko Jesus éí ashkii bizhé'é nayízhdééłkidgo ábijiní , Hádą́ą'shą' kót'į́ silį́į́' ? Áko ájíní , T'áá áłchíní nilį́į́dą́ą́' .
PRED:	Jesus asked his father , “ Is this the boy ? ” And he said , “ Yes , ” he said .
GOLD:	“ How long has this been happening ? ” Jesus asked the boy 's father.He replied , “ Since he was a little boy .

ID:	6192
INPUT:	Aghánáhóó'áádę́ę́' Diyin God éí Christ Jesus bee shíizhi'ígíí hodínéeshnééł biniyé t'áá shizááká nihoneel'ą́ąjį' yishwoł .
PRED:	For I am coming from God , who has come from heaven to death .
GOLD:	I press on to reach the end of the race and receive the heavenly prize for which God , through Christ Jesus , is calling us .

ID:	6193
INPUT:	Diné doo hóyáanii éí saad t'áá ałtso yoodlą́ , nidi diné hóyáanii éí yigááłgóó álą́ąjį' déez'į́į́' .
PRED:	The wise do n't believe the truth , but the wise have seen the truth .
GOLD:	Only simpletons believe everything they 're told ! The prudent carefully consider their steps .

ID:	6194
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jew dine'é bi'atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihii k'adę́ę baa hoolzhíishgo , Jerúsalem góde Jesus dah diiyá .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day Jesus went to Jerusalem , where he went to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	It was nearly time for the Jewish Passover celebration , so Jesus went to Jerusalem .

ID:	6195
INPUT:	Ade áhoot'é doo łeeshtahdóó haleeh da , índa ach'į' nahwii'ná doo łeeyi'dę́ę́' haniséeh da ;
PRED:	The dust of the sky will disappear , and the dust will disappear from the sky .
GOLD:	But evil does not spring from the soil , and trouble does not sprout from the earth .

ID:	6196
INPUT:	Háálá Jáshowa éí t'áadoo t'ą́ą́' anídílníhí tsiidétáán t'áá yił dah doolnihgo Éí'aigi kéédahat'íinii ałtso ádeisdįįdjį' yił dah doolnih nít'éé' .
PRED:	For Joshua turned and ran out to the ground and plundered the town .
GOLD:	For Joshua kept holding out his spear until everyone who had lived in Ai was completely destroyed .

ID:	6197
INPUT:	Áko Áízak haye' Jéíkab dashdiił'a' , áádóó Péídan-éíramgóó Síriya dine'é Biithúwel biye' éí Jéíkab áádóó Íísa bimá Rebékah bínaaí Léíban bich'į' ajííyá .
PRED:	So Jacob sent his son Isaac to Bethel , and Jacob named Laban ( which means “ Jacob 's brother , Esau , and Jacob 's brother Jacob . )
GOLD:	So Isaac sent Jacob away , and he went to Paddan-aram to stay with his uncle Laban , his mother 's brother , the son of Bethuel the Aramean .

ID:	6198
INPUT:	Áádóó David éí Filístiya diné áyidííniid , Ni éí diltłish áádóó tsiidétáán índa naagé bił shich'į' híídááł , nidi t'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é bisiláo biDiyin God nabí'í'įįhii bízhi' bee nich'į' heeshdááł .
PRED:	David said to the Philistines , “ You must return to the sword of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , but you will return to me from the tribe of Israel . ”
GOLD:	David replied to the Philistine , “ You come to me with sword , spear , and javelin , but I come to you in the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies — the God of the armies of Israel , whom you have defied .

ID:	6199
INPUT:	Díí haz'ánígi índa ákwii kééhojit'ínígíí t'áá bił ts'ídá díigi át'éego áhodeeshłííł , áko díí kin haal'áhígíí t'áá Tófetgi át'éego áhodeeshłííł .
PRED:	I will do this in the place where I will build this place , and I will build it in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , just as I did . ”
GOLD:	This is what I will do to this place and its people , says the Lord . I will cause this city to become defiled like Topheth .

ID:	6200
INPUT:	Bich'il na'atł'o'ii índa fig deíl'áhígíí atíyiilaa , áádóó bikéyah bikáa'gi t'áá níłtéél nít'éé' tsin naazkaadii niyiizti' .
PRED:	He built the fig trees and the trees , and he spread it throughout the land .
GOLD:	He ruined their grapevines and fig treesand shattered all the trees .

ID:	6201
INPUT:	Áko ádadííniid , Da' díísh doo Jesus , Jóseph biye' át'į́į da ? Bizhé'é áádóó bimá béédahoniilzin . Ha'át'éegoshą' áko k'ad , Shí yá'ąąshdę́ę́' hadááyá , jiní ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Is n't your son ? ” And when Joseph said , “ Why are your mother ? Why are you going to see ? ” And he said , “ Why did he come from heaven ? ”
GOLD:	They said , “ Is n't this Jesus , the son of Joseph ? We know his father and mother . How can he say , ‘ I came down from heaven ' ? ”

ID:	6202
INPUT:	Náshan éí Amínadab biye' , Amínadab éí Ram biye' , Ram éí Hézran biye' , Hézran éí Píírez biye' , Píírez éí Júdah biye' ,
PRED:	Ram was the son of Amminadab , whose mother was the son of Amminadab . The son of Amminadab was the ancestor of Judah .
GOLD:	Nahshon was the son of Amminadab.Amminadab was the son of Admin.Admin was the son of Arni.Arni was the son of Hezron.Hezron was the son of Perez.Perez was the son of Judah .

ID:	6203
INPUT:	Nidi Jesus éí yaa ákoniizį́į'go yik'ee doo bił hóózhǫǫd da , áko áhodííniid , Bíni'dii áłchíní shaa hakááh , t'áadoo shich'į' nidanoh'iní , háálá ákódaat'éhígíí Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii bíí' ádaat'é .
PRED:	But Jesus was amazed at them , and he said to them , “ Let me go to the Kingdom of God , for he is the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus saw what was happening , he was angry with his disciples . He said to them , “ Let the children come to me . Do n't stop them ! For the Kingdom of God belongs to those who are like these children .

ID:	6204
INPUT:	Áko tsindaabąąs bijáád naakiígíí bijáád yits'ą́ą́' yeidiyiiníiłgo nidahidinikááh silį́į́' ; éí bąą Ííjip dine'é ádadííniid , Bíni'dii Ízrel dine'é bits'ą́ąjigo t'ą́ąjį' dah didiijah , háálá Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é yich'į' anaa' ííł'į́ .
PRED:	So the chariot commanders heard the chariots and said to them , “ Let 's go out to Egypt , for the Lord has rescued us from Egypt . ”
GOLD:	He twisted their chariot wheels , making their chariots difficult to drive . “ Let 's get out of here — away from these Israelites ! ” the Egyptians shouted . “ The Lord is fighting for them against Egypt ! ”

ID:	6205
INPUT:	Áádóó óola bee na'ats'ǫǫsí bééda'alyaii náádayiisnii' : Filístiya dine'é yinanit'a'í ashdlalt'éego bikin hadaas'áii t'áá ałtso bik'ehgo , ła' ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'inii áádóó kin dashijaa' éí yá náádayiisnii' ; tsé ayóó áníłtso si'áníjį' Bóhólníihii yich'į' náádayiisnii' . Díí tsé ayóó áníłtsoígíí bikáa'gi Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii dah dadziz'ánígíí éí tsé díí jį́įdi t'ahdii Beth-shíímesh kin shijaa'dóó diné nilíinii , Jáshowa wolyéii bidá'ák'ehgi si'ą́ .
PRED:	Then the five gold rings and five oxen presented them to the Philistines . He measured the walls of Beth-shemesh and placed them on the walls of Beth-shemesh , and the Ark of the Lord had given me victory .
GOLD:	The five gold rats represented the five Philistine towns and their surrounding villages , which were controlled by the five rulers . The large rock at Beth-shemesh , where they set the Ark of the Lord , still stands in the field of Joshua as a witness to what happened there .

ID:	6206
INPUT:	Húshai biye' Béíyanah éí Ásher dine'é bikéyahdę́ę́' áádóó Éílath nahós'a'dę́ę́' ch'iyáán nináyiijááh .
PRED:	He married the tribe of Asher , from Anathoth in the land of Asher .
GOLD:	Baana son of Hushai , in Asher and in Aloth .

ID:	6207
INPUT:	Dį́į́' góne' yáá'iilt'e'ígíí Ísakar dine'é ahii' háá'ahiyoolchíiłii bik'ehgo bikéyah bá bénááhoosdzin .
PRED:	The homeland allocated to the clans of Issachar , and the tribe of Issachar were presented to the clans of the tribe of Issachar .
GOLD:	The fourth allotment of land went to the clans of the tribe of Issachar .

ID:	6208
INPUT:	Adónai-bíízek deisná
PRED:	Paul 's Dream at Gilgal
GOLD:	Israel Fails to Conquer the Land

ID:	6209
INPUT:	Áko Nóah bił énáhoosdzingo haye' akéédę́'ígíí áhóół'įįdígíí hoł bééhoozingo
PRED:	So Noah realized that the Messiah was revealed to his son .
GOLD:	When Noah woke up from his stupor , he learned what Ham , his youngest son , had done .

ID:	6210
INPUT:	Háá'áyį́į́h jį́ aleeh góne' diné bąąh náhineeshgizhgo , ákondi Mózes yee has'áanii doo k'éti' da nilį́įgo , da' ákoósh háá'áyį́į́h jį́ aleeh góne' diné hazhó'ó hadaałt'é ánáshdlaaígíí biniinaa shich'į' nihádahazhchįįd ?
PRED:	On the Sabbath day the Sabbath day Moses was circumcised , but the law of Moses said , “ You have not been broken into the Sabbath . Why have you been taken away from the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	For if the correct time for circumcising your son falls on the Sabbath , you go ahead and do it so as not to break the law of Moses . So why should you be angry with me for healing a man on the Sabbath ?

ID:	6211
INPUT:	Daniel éí Bélteshazar ałdó' joolyéego aláahgo naat'áanii áhodííniid , Da' baa neisíyeelii áádóó ááhyiłníinii shił bééhodíísįįłgoósh bíninil'ą́ ?
PRED:	Daniel replied , “ Did I tell you what the dream means of the dream ? ”
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	6212
INPUT:	Shí Jude , Jesus Christ yá naal'a'í , James yił háá'áázh nishłíinii , Diyin God aTaa' nilíinii diyingo ádahoolaii , Jesus Christ haa áhályą́ągo bíí' dajílínígíí , Diyin God háká ádííniidii , hach'į' naaltsoos áshłééh :
PRED:	This letter came to Jesus from James and said , “ I am writing to you from the Father of God , who gives you the Holy Spirit to Jesus Christ . ”
GOLD:	This letter is from Jude , a slave of Jesus Christ and a brother of James.I am writing to all who have been called by God the Father , who loves you and keeps you safe in the care of Jesus Christ .

ID:	6213
INPUT:	Nidi hwe'asdzą́ą́ jijoołáhígíí biyáázh alą́ąjį' há yizhchíinii baa ákoznízingo hwee hólóonii t'áá át'é naakidi ahą́ą́h nániiláago baazhdidoo'ááł , háálá bitsxe'ii bineest'ą' bee deezt'i'ii nilį́ ; alą́ąjį' bi'dizhchíinii nilį́įgo bíi'ii bíí' dooleełgo bee bá haz'ą́ .
PRED:	But if she becomes a virgin , he may give birth to his son , he will give birth to his firstborn son . He will give birth to his inheritance , for she has given birth to a son , for she has given birth to a son .
GOLD:	He must recognize the rights of his oldest son , the son of the wife he does not love , by giving him a double portion . He is the first son of his father 's virility , and the rights of the firstborn belong to him .

ID:	6214
INPUT:	Áko díík'ǫsh t'áágééd bááh ályaii hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleeh bijį́ atis'adeesdzá bee bééhániihgo dibé yázhí nááhániihii baa hoolzhiizh .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the Passover celebration , the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	Now the Festival of Unleavened Bread arrived , when the Passover lamb is sacrificed .

ID:	6215
INPUT:	Shefatáíyah ba'áłchíní náás ahoolchíiłii táadi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tsosts'idiindóó ba'aan naaki .
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah
GOLD:	The family of Shephatiah372

ID:	6216
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii kóshíłníigo náádiséts'ą́ą́' ,
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	6217
INPUT:	Ahídajikadígi át'éego tooh ahínídadiilk'ołgo índa dził t'áá ahąąh bił nidahoozhǫǫhgo
PRED:	The mountains tremble at the Euphrates River , and the mountains sing for joy .
GOLD:	Let the rivers clap their hands in glee ! Let the hills sing out their songs of joy

ID:	6218
INPUT:	Nidi ídahooł'aahii haa áłah silį́į́' , nít'éé' nízhdii'na' , áko kin haal'áajį' náádzídzá , áádóó biiskání Bárnabas bił Dérbiigóó jiní'áázh .
PRED:	So the disciples got up early the next morning and went to the town of Cyprus . So Barnabas returned to Antioch of Syria .
GOLD:	But as the believers gathered around him , he got up and went back into the town . The next day he left with Barnabas for Derbe .

ID:	6219
INPUT:	Ał'ąą dine'é éí ahoodzą́ągo ádahoolaaí góyaa nahodits'ǫ' ííłdááz ; tł'óół bee ódleehí nídeidees'į́į'ii t'áá bí yiih nídahaaskai .
PRED:	The nations are thrown into the bottomless pit ; they are thrown into the bottomless pit .
GOLD:	The nations have fallen into the pit they dug for others.Their own feet have been caught in the trap they set .

ID:	6220
INPUT:	Aa hwiinít'įįh beidoołkááł t'áá áyídí hadziih
PRED:	Do Not Judge Others
GOLD:	A Call to Faithfulness

ID:	6221
INPUT:	Éí yoołkáałdi ch'il na'atł'o'ii yíl'áago wáin łichíi'go bits'ą́ą́dóó ál'íinii baa dahohtaał .
PRED:	On the day of the grape harvest is a new wine of wine .
GOLD:	“ In that day , sing about the fruitful vineyard .

ID:	6222
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Diyin God yá dahalne'ii bídahooł'aahígíí éí Béthelgi Iiláísha yaa yíkaigo ádeiłní , Bóhólníihii díí jį́ bóhoníłníihii nits'ą́ą́' néididoołtéełgoósh nił bééhózin ? Aoo' , shił bééhózin ; t'áadoo ádadohníní .
PRED:	So the prophet went to Bethel and told him , “ You know what the Lord says : Are you going to do this ? ” “ Yes , ” they replied . “ Yes , do n't you know that I am going to do this ! ”
GOLD:	The group of prophets from Bethel came to Elisha and asked him , “ Did you know that the Lord is going to take your master away from you today ? ” “ Of course I know , ” Elisha answered . “ But be quiet about it . ”

ID:	6223
INPUT:	áádóó kin bii' sohodizin bił haz'ą́ągi ha'át'íhígíida doo naalyée da doogo bee hojiił'a' .
PRED:	He will not be able to build a house for the Temple of God .
GOLD:	and he stopped everyone from using the Temple as a marketplace .

ID:	6224
INPUT:	Óola áłts'óózígo neheeshgizhígíí áádóó yisdizii yá nahalingo dootł'izhígíí áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí áádóó łichxí'ígíí índa áłts'óózígo yisdizígíí bee na'at'ą́hí łigaii dits'idgo ályaii baa dahidoo'nił .
PRED:	He also made the ephod of pure gold , purple , and scarlet thread and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	So give them fine linen cloth , gold thread , and blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	6225
INPUT:	Ákohgo Mózes hach'į' yee haadzíi'go níbaal haal'áhígóó t'áá át'é hazhó'ó baa nídahojoolne'go diné áádóó asdzání éí níbaal bii' hodílzinii bee adoolnííł biniyé bá nidahizhdi'aahígíí k'adí doo ; t'áadoo nidahohjáhí , deidííniid . Áko Mózes yee haadzí'ígíí bik'ehgo doo ła' náádeíjáah da ,
PRED:	So Moses told them , “ Take the Levites to the camp of the Tabernacle , and bring them to the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle . ” So Moses told them , “ Do n't let anyone go to the Tabernacle . ”
GOLD:	So Moses gave the command , and this message was sent throughout the camp : “ Men and women , do n't prepare any more gifts for the sanctuary . We have enough ! ” So the people stopped bringing their sacred offerings .

ID:	6226
INPUT:	Áko náá'iiłniihii haye'ké ła' hatsásk'ehgi naal'a' doo biniyé ak'ah bik'i yaadziidgo bi'doolzį́'ígíí díí nááhániihii nááyiiłniih dooleeł ; díí hool'áágóó yee nihoní'áanii át'éego Bóhólníihii bich'į' ałtso nídídli' doo .
PRED:	“ Then the priest will present one of his sons as a special gift to the Lord . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	In each generation , the high priest who succeeds Aaron must prepare this same offering . It belongs to the Lord and must be burned up completely . This is a permanent law .

ID:	6227
INPUT:	Dadine'é bitahgóó díí baa dahołne' : Anaa' biniyé hasht'e'ádadołnééh , diné ayóó ádaat'éii bee bida'nołnííh . Bíni' diné t'áá ałtso nidaabaahii yit'ááh nájah ; bíni' ákǫ́ǫ́ dah hidikááh .
PRED:	“ Tell the people of Israel , ‘ Let the mighty warriors fight against the mighty warriors . Let them go down to battle .
GOLD:	Say to the nations far and wide : “ Get ready for war ! Call out your best warriors.Let all your fighting men advance for the attack .

ID:	6228
INPUT:	Shiye' , shizaad nídiniláago , áádóó shibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii hasht'e'nihidí'níiłgo ,
PRED:	My child , if you obey my commands , obey my commands ,
GOLD:	My child , listen to what I say , and treasure my commands .

ID:	6229
INPUT:	Diné éí chahałheeł yii' dayíkááh yę́ę ayóó át'éego adinídíingo dayiiłtsą́ ; kéyahgóó anoonééł bichaha'ohgi kéédahat'ínígíí ayóó át'éego bił ch'ída'deezdláád .
PRED:	I saw the skies in darkness , and those who live in the desert will die in the desert .
GOLD:	The people who walk in darknesswill see a great light.For those who live in a land of deep darkness , a light will shine .

ID:	6230
INPUT:	Íídą́ą́' Bóhólníihii éí Aháíjah ííłní , Jerobówam be'asdzą́ą́ biyáázh yá t'áadoo le'é níídóokił biniyé aadę́ę́' yigááł , háálá biyáázh daatsaah ; éí kót'éego bich'į' hadíídzih , háálá éí yah ííyáago asdzání náánáła' í'díl'į́į doo .
PRED:	At that time the Lord said to Jeroboam , “ Do n't be afraid of your wife , for he has sex with her son Jeroboam 's son , for she is a son of man . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord had told Ahijah , “ Jeroboam 's wife will come here , pretending to be someone else . She will ask you about her son , for he is very sick . Give her the answer I give you . ”

ID:	6231
INPUT:	Áko naaldlooshii dį́į'go ayóó ádaat'éé léi' tónteel biyi'dę́ę́' haaskai ; éí ádaat'éhígíí t'áá ał'ąą ádaat'é .
PRED:	Then he brought four animals from the sea , and the sea covered the sea .
GOLD:	Then four huge beasts came up out of the water , each different from the others .

ID:	6232
INPUT:	Áko Jesus naakits'áadah binááhaigo , Jerúsalemgóó ałnááda'aldahígíí bik'ehgo hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehgóó bił jíkai ,
PRED:	Jesus was about twelve years old when he returned to Jerusalem , they went to Jerusalem and preached the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	When Jesus was twelve years old , they attended the festival as usual .

ID:	6233
INPUT:	Bíyor biye' Bííla éí Íídam kéyahgi naat'áanii nilį́į́ nít'éé' ; bikin haal'áhígíí éí <unk> habah hoolyéé nít'éé' .
PRED:	These are the leaders of the tribe of Edom , who lived in the land of Edom .
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	6234
INPUT:	Áádóó Éran índa biye'ké bá bee ádííniidígíí t'áá át'é bik'ehgo ádíílííł ; tsosts'id jį́ diyingo hats'ąą hasti' doo .
PRED:	Aaron and his sons and his sons will be careful to obey all seven days .
GOLD:	“ This is how you will ordain Aaron and his sons to their offices , just as I have commanded you . The ordination ceremony will go on for seven days .

ID:	6235
INPUT:	Diné ił ééhózin bee hólǫ́ǫgo éí bizaad ááyoosįįł , áádóó diné ak'idi'yiitįįhii doo ádił nídiiltéeh da .
PRED:	The lips of a wise person with a heart , and a person 's heart is not right with good heart .
GOLD:	A truly wise person uses few words ; a person with understanding is even-tempered .

ID:	6236
INPUT:	Bee shide áhoot'éii t'áá ałtso bee bił hweeshne' ; bee shich'į' nahwii'náanii binááł baa hweeshne' .
PRED:	I have told you everything I told you , and I have told you everything I have seen .
GOLD:	I pour out my complaints before himand tell him all my troubles .

ID:	6237
INPUT:	T'áá áko hałóó' bee hahaltsósí t'áá ákǫ́ǫ́ nizhnínilgo bikéé' dashdii'áázh .
PRED:	So they left their nets and followed him .
GOLD:	And they left their nets at once and followed him .

ID:	6238
INPUT:	T'áá aaníí díí dine'é yich'į' ał<unk> dzihgo áádóó náánáła' bizaad yee yáłti' doo .
PRED:	They will say , ‘ We will teach you the truth . '
GOLD:	So now God will have to speak to his peoplethrough foreign oppressors who speak a strange language !

ID:	6239
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' nibik'eh ó'oo'níiłii ayóó'óósh'nínígíí bíká dah dideesh'nih , áádóó índa bee nihoyíní'áanii nabik'ítséskees doo .
PRED:	I will delight in your commands , and I will delight in your commands .
GOLD:	I honor and love your commands.I meditate on your decrees .

ID:	6240
INPUT:	Éí naadiin ashdla' binááhaigo aláahgo naat'áanii nilį́įgo hahoolzhiizh , áádóó naadiin náhást'éí nááhaijį' Jerúsalem kin haal'áagi nant'áá nít'éé' . Áko bimá éí Jerúsalemdóó naagháago Jiihó'adan wolyéé nít'éé' .
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . He reigned in Jerusalem eleven years .
GOLD:	Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years . His mother was Jehoaddin from Jerusalem .

ID:	6241
INPUT:	Diné doo ła'da bee hool'iní yidiiłtłi'go ásaa' yił yaa nií'aah da , doo nidi tsásk'eh yiyaa ii'aah da , nidi bá ya'ii'áhígi dah yi'ááh , áko yah adahakáhígíí éí bá adinídíingo da'oo'į́į dooleeł .
PRED:	“ Do n't make a light light for a light , but it is not bound in the middle of the light . It is a light to enter the light of the light , but it is a light to enter the light .
GOLD:	“ No one lights a lamp and then covers it with a bowl or hides it under a bed . A lamp is placed on a stand , where its light can be seen by all who enter the house .

ID:	6242
INPUT:	Áádóó nááda'iiłniihii éí Bóhólníihii bitsits'aa' dílzinii bee aha'deet'áanii bii' sinilii kin bii' sohodizin biyi' t'áá bá haz'ą́ąjį' ts'ídá agháago hodiyingo haz'ánígíí diyingo naal'a'í chérabim bit'a' biyaajį' nideiz'ą́ .
PRED:	The Ark of the Lord was placed in front of the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	Then the priests carried the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant into the inner sanctuary of the Temple — the Most Holy Place — and placed it beneath the wings of the cherubim .

ID:	6243
INPUT:	éí doodago , Háishą' Christ daaztsą́ą́dę́ę́' bił háázhdoot'ash biniyé nahasdzáán biyi' góyaa ahozhdooleeł ?
PRED:	Who will rise from the dead ? Who will rise from the earth ?
GOLD:	And do n't say , ‘ Who will go down to the place of the dead ? ' ( to bring Christ back to life again ) . ”

ID:	6244
INPUT:	Áko Kéína tó nílínígíí shádi'áahjigo haz'áníjį' hodeesdzo . Ákwii Manáseh dine'é bikin hadaas'áhígíí bitahgi Íífreiyim dine' é ałdó' bikin hadaas'á . Áko Manáseh dine'é bihoodzooígíí náhookǫsjigo tó nílíníjį' hodeesdzo áádóó tónteel siyíníjį' nihoodzo ,
PRED:	So the boundary went to the east side of the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea , and the half-tribe of Manasseh went to the Mediterranean Sea . The boundary of Manasseh went to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	From the spring of Tappuah , the boundary of Manasseh followed the Kanah Ravine to the Mediterranean Sea . Several towns south of the ravine were inside Manasseh 's territory , but they actually belonged to the tribe of Ephraim .

ID:	6245
INPUT:	Áko Heziikáíyah éí Aizéíyah ábizhdííniid , Bóhólníihii áníinii bee háínídzí'ígíí éí yá'át'ééh . Áádóó hanáádzoodzíí' , Háálá shíyooł<unk> ígíí biyi' hasht'ehodít'é áádóó t'áá aaníinii bee haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to Hezekiah , “ This is what the Lord says : The Lord has told you what you have done . ”
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ This message you have given me from the Lord is good. ” For the king was thinking , “ At least there will be peace and security during my lifetime . ”

ID:	6246
INPUT:	Áádóó náá'iiłniihii éí yiníł'į́įgo , jó , łóód haní'íí<unk> lá áádóó hatáshtł'oh ákwii dah yiigaiigo náá'iiłniihii , Doo ni'didéeh da lá , hodidoonii ł ; jishch'ozhígíí bii'dóó łóód ats'íís yiyáanii naałdzidii hááłnii'ígíí át'é .
PRED:	If the priest finds that the affected area is ceremonially clean , the priest must pronounce the person ceremonially clean , and if it is ceremonially clean , it is ceremonially clean , it is a skin disease .
GOLD:	If the priest examines it and finds it to be more than skin-deep , and if the hair in the affected area has turned white , the priest must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . The boil has become a serious skin disease .

ID:	6247
INPUT:	Áko nidahódééłkid , Háishą' diné shį́į́ , Bik'i nítéhí nídiiłtsóosgo dah diinááh , nidííniid ?
PRED:	“ Who is your mat ? ” they asked . “ Who is your mat ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who said such a thing as that ? ” they demanded .

ID:	6248
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Ízrel dine'é éí doo yildinígi át'éégóó ádił nida'iisí'ígíí t'áá ałtso biniinaa atihíláane' ! diníigo bik'ee ahínéika' áádóó nihínídiiltał , háálá diltłish bee , dichin bee índa naałniih bee atího'dilnééh .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will be disgraced , for I will destroy all your enemies and disease and disease .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Clap your hands in horror , and stamp your feet . Cry out because of all the detestable sins the people of Israel have committed . Now they are going to die from war and famine and disease .

ID:	6249
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip dine'é atíidoolííł , áádóó hadaałt'é ánéidoodlííł ; ákohgo Bóhólníihii yich'į' nináhidookah áádóó bisodizin yiyíists'ą́ą'go hadaałt'é ánéidoodlííł .
PRED:	Then the Lord will punish Egypt , and he will accept all his people . Then he will pray to the Lord , and he will accept his ears .
GOLD:	The Lord will strike Egypt , and then he will bring healing . For the Egyptians will turn to the Lord , and he will listen to their pleas and heal them .

ID:	6250
INPUT:	Éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , Shoo , shá nidaal'a'í da'dooyį́į́ł , nidi nihí éí dichin danohłį́į doo ; shoo , shá nidaal'a'í da'doodlį́į́ł , nidi nihí éí dibáá' danohłį́į doo ; shoo , shá nidaal'a'í bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo , nidi nihí ádaa yádanohdzin doo ;
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : You will eat my servants , but you will be hungry and thirsty , but you will be filled with thirst .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ My servants will eat , but you will starve.My servants will drink , but you will be thirsty.My servants will rejoice , but you will be sad and ashamed .

ID:	6251
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii índa bimá asdzą́ą́ naat'ááh nilíinii ábidiní , Nihinaat'á ch'ah nahjį' nihits'ą́ą́' kólyaa biniinaa ádaa hojiinołbá'í , í'dółnééh áádóó noohkeeh .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of the king 's mother and mother , ” the king said . “ Do n't be afraid of you . ”
GOLD:	Say to the king and his mother , “ Come down from your thronesand sit in the dust , for your glorious crownswill soon be snatched from your heads . ”

ID:	6252
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é éí Mózes bizaad yik'eh dahóół'įįdgo béésh łigaii áádóó óola yódí ádaat'éii índa <unk> da éí Ííjip dine'é bídajííkeed .
PRED:	So the people of Israel did what Moses had commanded Moses and gold , silver , gold , silver , and gold .
GOLD:	And the people of Israel did as Moses had instructed ; they asked the Egyptians for clothing and articles of silver and gold .

ID:	6253
INPUT:	Nizhé'é yę́ę nihiyéél nidaazgo áyósin nít'éé' ; éí bąą k'ad , nizhé'é yę́ę bik'ee ti'dahwii'níihgo bá nidasiil'a'ígíí áádóó hééł nidaazgo nihá áyósin nít'éé' yę́ę ászólígo nihá áníléehgo ná nideiil'a' dooleeł .
PRED:	“ I wish you were afraid of our ancestors , and you are heavy burden to your ancestors . You are the burden of your ancestors , and you will kill us . ”
GOLD:	“ Your father was a hard master , ” they said . “ Lighten the harsh labor demands and heavy taxes that your father imposed on us . Then we will be your loyal subjects . ”

ID:	6254
INPUT:	Bee aha'deet'áanii bił ádajiilaadóó bik'ijį' táá' yiską́ągo t'áá hoł kéédahat'íinii danilį́įgo índa hatahgóó kéédahat'į́įgo baa dahozdiizts'ą́ą́' .
PRED:	In the third day the covenant he confirmed his covenant with them , and everyone who lived among the people living in the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Three days after making the treaty , they learned that these people actually lived nearby !

ID:	6255
INPUT:	Kót'éego dííníniidígíí baa ha'niih le' áádóó nik'ihojidlíi le' , háálá díí jį́ diné séłhį́įgo bidił bits'ánílį́įgo índa ádá k'éhodee'nééh bits'ąą jé'ííníshnáago áshiinilaa .
PRED:	“ Remember that I am giving you today , for you have been cut off from the dead .
GOLD:	Thank God for your good sense ! Bless you for keeping me from murder and from carrying out vengeance with my own hands .

ID:	6256
INPUT:	Áko bik'ijį' ak'ah yanídaohdzi'go fránkinsens wolyéii bikáá' dah dadoohjih ; díí ak'áán nááhániihii át'ée doo .
PRED:	Take delight in the house of frankincense , and take delight in the house of burnt offerings .
GOLD:	Put olive oil on this grain offering , and sprinkle it with frankincense .

ID:	6257
INPUT:	Áko díidíígíí bee hadzoodzíi'go , hak'i dahodii'aahii t'áá ałtso ádaa yádaniidzį́į́' , áádóó ayóó ádaat'éii ájoolíłígíí biniinaa diné áłah silį́'ígíí t'áá ałtso baa bił dahóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	Then Jesus told them , “ We 've been healed of all the things of the disciples , and everyone was filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	This shamed his enemies , but all the people rejoiced at the wonderful things he did .

ID:	6258
INPUT:	Kintah nida'aztiingóó tł'oh azis yił áká daaszaaz ; kin dabighą́ą́'góó áádóó diné áłah ádaat'į́įgi t'ááłá'í nítínígo chaał hadahoyiiníihgo nida<unk> <unk> .
PRED:	The cry of the city is filled with mourning , and the city is filled with violence . The people cry for joy .
GOLD:	They will wear burlap as they wander the streets.From every home and public square will come the sound of wailing .

ID:	6259
INPUT:	Áádóó kin bii' áłah nída'adleehí naaznilgóó , áádóó naat'áanii índa bídahólníihii naazdáágóó nidanihii'éeshgo , ha'át'éegoda , doodaii' ha'át'íhída bee hadadoohdzihígíí , doodaii' ha'át'íhída dadidoohniiłígíí , t'áadoo bik'ee ádił nídahodołchiłí ,
PRED:	When you enter the synagogues and the synagogues , do n't be afraid of the synagogues or the other gods , or if you do n't worry about it .
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	6260
INPUT:	Áko t'áá íiyisí hodichinígíí bąą kéyah t'áá át'éé nít'éé' biyi' ch'iyáán ádaasdįįd , áko Ííjip kéyahgi índa Kéínan kéyahgi dine'é t'áá íiyisí dichin yik'ee ti'dahoonííh .
PRED:	The famine was very very severe throughout the land of Canaan , and the famine was severe throughout the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the famine became so severe that all the food was used up , and people were starving throughout the lands of Egypt and Canaan .

ID:	6261
INPUT:	Áádóó bii' tá'ádígisí bá naaznilígíí bikáa'gi bii' tá'ádígisí dah naaznilgo ałdó' áyiilaa .
PRED:	He also made the water carts for the water , and he also made the washbasin with the water .
GOLD:	the water carts holding the basins ;

ID:	6262
INPUT:	Éidí bee haa hwiinít'íinii nideeshkahgi doo shił bééhózingóó , Da' Jerúsalem gódeésh díínáałgo áadi bee shaa náhódóot'įįł nínízin ? hodííniid .
PRED:	“ But I know what I am going to go to Jerusalem , ” they replied . “ Will you go to Jerusalem ? ”
GOLD:	I was at a loss to know how to investigate these things , so I asked him whether he would be willing to stand trial on these charges in Jerusalem .

ID:	6263
INPUT:	Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í bisiláo dah yinéłígíí éí Jerúsalem áádóó Júdah kéyahgi kin hadaas'á , t'áá éí Léíkish áádóó Azííkah kin hadaas'á ditą́ągo binaa ahééda'astł'inii daadziihígíí yił da'ahoogą́ą́' .
PRED:	The king of Babylon also fought against the army of Judah , along with its surrounding villages .
GOLD:	At this time the Babylonian army was besieging Jerusalem , Lachish , and Azekah — the only fortified cities of Judah not yet captured .

ID:	6264
INPUT:	E'e'áahgo dah diighááh áádóó biiłkáhí índa e'asdzą́ą́ yíl'į́ baa ádahayą́ągo haz'áníjí náánádááh ; aláahgo naat'áanii bá naal'a'í Sheiyáshgaz , éí e'asdzą́ą́ daól'íinii yaa áhályáanii nilíinii yaa yighááh ; aláahgo naat'áanii éí doo bił yah anáázhdoodáał da , t'áá hazhó'ó aláahgo naat'áanii bił hojíshǫ́ǫgo háká áho'doo'niidgo t'éiyá ákǫ́ǫ́ jidoogááł .
PRED:	As they were traveling by night , they were traveling from the west of the night and from the evening . He said , “ I am a man who is greater than a woman , and he is greater than he is . ”
GOLD:	That evening she was taken to the king 's private rooms , and the next morning she was brought to the second harem , where the king 's wives lived . There she would be under the care of Shaashgaz , the king 's eunuch in charge of the concubines . She would never go to the king again unless he had especially enjoyed her and requested her by name .

ID:	6265
INPUT:	Nihainísht'į́įgo yidiiską́ądi daats'í hada'íínóhníigo bídanoł'ą́ą dooleeł , índa bich'į' daats'í danihidziil dooleeł ; ts'ídá bi'deeshłíłí , shí Bóhólníihii haasdzíí' .
PRED:	You must not be afraid of what I am going to do . I am going to do anything that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	How strong and courageous will you be in my day of reckoning ? I , the Lord , have spoken , and I will do what I said .

ID:	6266
INPUT:	E'elyaii bitsiits'iin óola t'éí bee ályaa , bijéíts'iin índa bigaan éí béésh łigaii bee ályaa áádóó biníí'dóó yaago bigodjį' béésh łitsoii bee ályaa .
PRED:	It was the head of the gold , and he wore a gold robe in his arms . It was the face of the tomb of his knees , and his knees were as weak as his knees .
GOLD:	The head of the statue was made of fine gold . Its chest and arms were silver , its belly and thighs were bronze ,

ID:	6267
INPUT:	t'ááłáhíjį' áłah silį́į́' ; Jáshowa áádóó Ízrel dine'é yik'iidoojah yiniyé łá'í daazlį́į́' .
PRED:	So Joshua and the entire community of Israel gathered up to fight the Israelites .
GOLD:	These kings combined their armies to fight as one against Joshua and the Israelites .

ID:	6268
INPUT:	Éí bijį́į́dą́ą́' Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso dabinááł Bóhólníihii éí Jáshowa ayóó át'éii nilį́įgo áyiilaa , áádóó Jáshowa deidísin nít'éé' ; Mózes deidísin yę́ęgi át'éego Jáshowa abíyííłką́ąjį' bił danilį́į́ nít'éé' .
PRED:	On that day the Israelites did as the Lord commanded Joshua and the glorious presence of the Lord , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	That day the Lord made Joshua a great leader in the eyes of all the Israelites , and for the rest of his life they revered him as much as they had revered Moses .

ID:	6269
INPUT:	Ákohgo Jáshowa ádííniid , Tsé'áán ąą ádaahłéehgo áádę́ę́' aláahgo naat'áanii ashdlalt'éhígíí shich'į' ninoh'éésh .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to the five kings , “ Get up from the cave with five kings , and bring me to me . ”
GOLD:	Then Joshua said , “ Remove the rocks covering the opening of the cave , and bring the five kings to me . ”

ID:	6270
INPUT:	áko dibé éí binish'náájígo niidoonił , tł'ízí éí binishtł'ajígo niidoonił .
PRED:	Then he will give you the sheep of goats , and he will raise your right hand .
GOLD:	He will place the sheep at his right hand and the goats at his left .

ID:	6271
INPUT:	háálá Bóhólníihii yee haadzí'ígíí éí Béthelgi bikáá' náá'iiniihí áádóó Samériya kéyahgi kin hadaas'áágóó ninádahałaah doo biniyé wódah nahaz'ą́ągo ádayiilaaígi kin naaznilii yik'ijį' haadzíi'ii t'áá aaníí bohodoolnííł .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord had commanded concerning Samaria . He built pagan shrines and built pagan shrines in Samaria to rebuild the towns of Samaria .
GOLD:	For the message the Lord told him to proclaim against the altar in Bethel and against the pagan shrines in the towns of Samaria will certainly come true . ”

ID:	6272
INPUT:	Shik'isóó , Christ Jesus binahjį' nihaa jííníshłíigo t'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá ákwíí jį́ shidiyoołhéełii kǫ́ǫ́ hólǫ́ .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , I am writing to you in Christ Jesus Christ . I am trying to find you today .
GOLD:	For I swear , dear brothers and sisters , that I face death daily . This is as certain as my pride in what Christ Jesus our Lord has done in you .

ID:	6273
INPUT:	Áko Stephen haadzíi'go ání : Shik'isóó , shahastóí danohłíinii , dashíínółts'ą́ą́' . Nihizhé'é yę́ę Éíbraham , t'ah doo Héíranjį' iinééhgóó , Mesopotéímiyagi naaghá yę́ędą́ą́' , Diyin God bits'ádi'nílíidii bich'į' yit'íní í'diilyaa ,
PRED:	Then Stephen said , “ Listen to me , my dear brothers and sisters , you are living in Bethel . You are living in the presence of Abraham .
GOLD:	This was Stephen 's reply : “ Brothers and fathers , listen to me . Our glorious God appeared to our ancestor Abraham in Mesopotamia before he settled in Haran .

ID:	6274
INPUT:	Áádóó diné bąąh háálínígíí éí t'áá ha'át'íhída bik'i dah ná'niłí yik'i dah neezdáago éí t'óó baa'ih dooleeł .
PRED:	If you touch anything that is unclean , you will be ceremonially unclean until you are defiled .
GOLD:	Any saddle blanket on which the man rides will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	6275
INPUT:	Áádóó Néíyathjį' Réímah nahós'a'góó dashdiiyá , áko hó ałdó' Diyin God biNíłch'i Diyinii hak'i hoole'go Réímah nahós'a'gi Néíyathdi jiníyáajį' Diyin God bá hojilne' .
PRED:	Then David left Ramah and went to Ramah to Ramah , and the Holy Spirit of God came to Ramah in Ramah .
GOLD:	But on the way to Naioth in Ramah the Spirit of God came even upon Saul , and he , too , began to prophesy all the way to Naioth !

ID:	6276
INPUT:	Bidáyi' jishcháá' ąą áhoot'é nidahalin , dabiyooch'íidgo binda'adlo' . Biwooshtł'ah góne' tł'iish bibik'asda' naaziid nahalingo bizaad dabizǫ́ǫ́z .
PRED:	I am telling lies in the grave , but they are trying to tell lies lies in the mouths of a poisonous snake .
GOLD:	“ Their talk is foul , like the stench from an open grave.Their tongues are filled with lies. ” “ Snake venom drips from their lips . ”

ID:	6277
INPUT:	Áko ánááhodoo'niid , T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Diyin God yá halne'ii doo ła'da t'áá bí bikéyahgi ts'ídá doo hodi'nidzin da .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , no one will ever survive . ”
GOLD:	But I tell you the truth , no prophet is accepted in his own hometown .

ID:	6278
INPUT:	Éí Ííjip kéyahdi bee éédahózinii áyiilaa índa Zówan hoolyéedi t'óó bik'eda'ayóii yaa naayá .
PRED:	He made the miraculous signs and wonders in Egypt , but he wrote down the power of Egypt .
GOLD:	They did not remember his miraculous signs in Egypt , his wonders on the plain of Zoan .

ID:	6279
INPUT:	Hanítáa doo , nidi doo bik'ídíínáał da ; nił nidaabaahgo nik'ijį' danilíinii éí t'áadoo nídandlíní da índa t'áadoo le'é t'áadoo násdlį́'ígíí nidahalin doo .
PRED:	Do n't worry about them , but do n't let them be afraid of their enemies . Do n't let them be afraid of their enemies .
GOLD:	You will look in vainfor those who tried to conquer you.Those who attack youwill come to nothing .

ID:	6280
INPUT:	Áko diné t'ááłá'í nítínígo aa deidooléełii nidayiijááh nít'éé' : éí béésh łigaii bee ádaalyaii áádóó óola bee ádaalyaii áádóó éé' ádaat'éii áádóó deezlá índa spáis daolyéhígíí , łį́į'da índa dzaanéezda t'ááłá'í nináháhááh bik'eh aa dajiinííł nít'éé' .
PRED:	When the people heard this , they put a gold robe in charge of silver , silver , gold , and spices , and spices , and spices , and spices .
GOLD:	Year after year everyone who visited brought him gifts of silver and gold , clothing , weapons , spices , horses , and mules .

ID:	6281
INPUT:	T'ááká diyin náánáła' dahólǫ́ǫgo íínísin yíila' .
PRED:	“ You must not worship other gods .
GOLD:	“ You must not have any other god but me .

ID:	6282
INPUT:	yá'ąąshdi bisodizin índa biná'ookąąh bá didííts'į́įłgo índa yiniyé ádaaníinii bá bich'ą́ą́h nihidi'nił'áa doo .
PRED:	Listen to the prayers of heaven and earth , and hear your decrees and regulations .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers from heaven and uphold their cause .

ID:	6283
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Séítan áyidííniid , Háádę́ę'shą' yínááł ? Ákohgo Séítan éí Bóhólníihii áyidííniidgo ání , Nahasdzáán bikáá'góó táhodishłeeh áádóó nahasdzáán bikáá'góó háádiishdááh .
PRED:	Then Satan asked Satan , “ Where is the Lord ? ” And the Lord said to Satan , “ I am going to meet the earth and the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Where have you come from ? ” the Lord asked Satan.Satan answered the Lord , “ I have been patrolling the earth , watching everything that 's going on . ”

ID:	6284
INPUT:	Doodago , t'ah nízaadę́ę́' yinéełgo , diné dzisnilii k'é náhodoodleeł jiníigo bich'į' jidooł'aał .
PRED:	Oh , how few people will come from a distance , and they will return to their journey .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	6285
INPUT:	Ízrel dine'é bitahgi dílzingo nidahideest'áanii t'áá ałtso níí' dooleeł .
PRED:	“ All the tribes of Israel will be yours , and it will be yours .
GOLD:	“ Everything in Israel that is specially set apart for the Lord also belongs to you .

ID:	6286
INPUT:	Nidi Saul , t'áá éí Paul yolyéii , Níłch'i Diyinii bii' hadeezbingo , t'áá íiyisí honíł'į́įgo
PRED:	But Saul , the Spirit of Saul , was filled with the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Saul , also known as Paul , was filled with the Holy Spirit , and he looked the sorcerer in the eye .

ID:	6287
INPUT:	T'áá háiida hazhé'é be'asdzą́ą́ bił jineezhtéezhii hóyée'go há ha'doodzih , háálá hazhé'é baazhdíílá : áko diné t'áá ałtso ádadidooniił , T'áá ákót'ée doo .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with a man who has sexual intercourse with his father , for everyone will say , ‘ Amen . ' ”
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with one of his father 's wives , for he has violated his father . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	6288
INPUT:	Aláahgo naat'áanii éí asdzání nayízhdééłkidgo hoł hoolne' . Áko aláahgo naat'áanii éí naat'áanii danilínígíí ła' há yik'i diilnii'go ííłní , Hakéyahdóó dashdiiyá yę́ędą́ą́' áádóó díí jį́įjį' kéyah chooz'įįd áádóó bikáá' dahazlį́į'ii bą́ą́h nida'iizlį́į'ii bíighahgo t'áá ałtso haa nídinooh'aah .
PRED:	Then the king took him to the king and told him what he had happened to the king . He said , “ Let us go to the land of the land of the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Is this true ? ” the king asked her . And she told him the story . So he directed one of his officials to see that everything she had lost was restored to her , including the value of any crops that had been harvested during her absence .

ID:	6289
INPUT:	T'áá aaníígóó ánihidishní , T'áá háiida doo áłchíní yázhí nahalingo Diyin God bee bóhólníihgo bił haz'áanii ádaazhdeet'ánígíí ts'ídá doo biishdoogáał da .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , anyone who believes in the Kingdom of God will never enter the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , anyone who does n't receive the Kingdom of God like a child will never enter it . ”

ID:	6290
INPUT:	Dooládó' t'óó dadíínółyéel dooleeł nisin , áko éí bee dahonohsą́ą doo nít'éé' .
PRED:	How foolish , you will be ! You will have no food to eat ! ”
GOLD:	If only you could be silent ! That 's the wisest thing you could do .

ID:	6291
INPUT:	Jó , aniné t'éí nihidada'ałtł'in ; tó ni'jį' yaaką́ągo łeesinootseedii doo áłah ánáolne' át'éegi ádaniit'é , índa Diyin God éí diné doo ła' a'ohgo yaa nitsíkees da , áko bits'ą́ą́' yóó'abi'dool'a'ígíí éí doo nahjį' niidó'ááł át'éégóó yaa nitsíkees .
PRED:	Look , let 's get the tower of the cave in the field . Let there be plenty of water in the field , and no one will accept it . He will show no attention to those who fear God .
GOLD:	All of us must die eventually . Our lives are like water spilled out on the ground , which can not be gathered up again . But God does not just sweep life away ; instead , he devises ways to bring us back when we have been separated from him .

ID:	6292
INPUT:	áádóó náádahidoonihii hózhǫ́ǫ́jí nááhániihii ádaat'éego éí béégashii naakigo , deenásts'aa' ashdla'go , tł'ízíchǫǫh ashdla'go , dibé yázhí biką'ii ła' béédááhaii ashdla'go , díí éí Zúrishádai biye' Shiilúmiyel nááyiisnii' .
PRED:	He brought two bulls , five rams , five rams , five rams , and five one-year-old male lambs . This was the offering brought by Nethanel son of Ammishaddai .
GOLD:	For a peace offering he brought two bulls , five rams , five male goats , and five one-year-old male lambs . This was the offering brought by Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai .

ID:	6293
INPUT:	Áádóó naaldlooshii bikéshgaan dahałgizhii nidi doo bita'nideezbaalii áádóó doo nída'at'aałii éí nihił t'óó badaa'ih ; t'ááłá'í jinítínígo éí bídahizhdiyii'náhígíí bee doo hoda'didoodah da .
PRED:	“ You must not eat any animal that is ceremonially unclean , but it is unclean for you . It is not defiled by touching a animal that is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ Any animal that has split hooves that are not evenly divided or that does not chew the cud is unclean for you . If you touch the carcass of such an animal , you will be defiled .

ID:	6294
INPUT:	Áádóó David ánáádoo'niid , Bóhólníihii éí náshdóítsoh bitsiijį' ditł'oii índa shash ałdó' bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshííłtį́ ; t'áá ákót'éego ałdó' díí Filístiya dine'é bits'ą́ąjį' yisdáshidoołtééł . Áádóó Saul éí David áyidííniid , Nílááhánee' , Bóhólníihii nił hólǫ́ǫgo bich'į' hidídááh .
PRED:	Then David said to David , “ I am the Lord , a lion from the tribe of Israel , and from whom I am going to save you from the Philistines . ” And David replied , “ Yes , I will come to you . ”
GOLD:	The Lord who rescued me from the claws of the lion and the bear will rescue me from this Philistine ! ” Saul finally consented . “ All right , go ahead , ” he said . “ And may the Lord be with you ! ”

ID:	6295
INPUT:	Nich'į' nahwii'náanii áádóó níyol yáhoołgohii índa doo níká a'alyeedii nílíinii , tsé nitł'izii nitł'ááh nástł'ingo áádóó tsé da'ílíinii bee kingo ándeeshłííł , jó'akon .
PRED:	I will make your breath , O Lord , and I will destroy your walls and crush your walls .
GOLD:	“ O storm-battered city , troubled and desolate ! I will rebuild you with precious jewelsand make your foundations from lapis lazuli .

ID:	6296
INPUT:	Áko nił hózhǫ́ǫgo yidííłtsééł , áádóó ił hózhǫ́ nijéí nayiiłnáa doo , háálá tónteel tsé'naadę́ę́' daat'íinii lą'í bee ákinidláa doo ; ał'ąą dine'é yee da'at'íinii naa hindéeh doo .
PRED:	When you see , you will see your heart , for your heart is filled with joy , and many nations will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Your eyes will shine , and your heart will thrill with joy , for merchants from around the world will come to you.They will bring you the wealth of many lands .

ID:	6297
INPUT:	Áko ájíní , Díí jį́ Shéífat biye' Iiláísha t'ahdii bitsiits'iin hólǫ́ǫ́ ládą́ą́' Bóhólníihii t'ah yówehgo t'óó tsé'édinda atíshidoolííł .
PRED:	“ At that day Elisha said , ‘ Elisha son of Elisha will not destroy the heads of Elisha 's head . ' ”
GOLD:	“ May God strike me and even kill me if I do n't separate Elisha 's head from his shoulders this very day , ” the king vowed .

ID:	6298
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' t'áá aaníí shił nanilnishí nílíinii , díí asdzání t'áá áłah bíká anánílwo' doogo baa nánooshkąąh , háálá shíká aná'ahi'nilchéehgo hane' yá'át'éehii baa hane'gi t'áá awołí bee shił naashnish , áádóó <unk> <unk> índa náádaała' shił nidaashnishígíí ałdó' t'áá ákódaat'į́ . Éí t'áá ałtso iiná naaltsoos biyi' bízhi' bik'idaasdzoh .
PRED:	I am telling you the truth , dear woman , for I have been faithful to you . I want you to preach the Good News for the Good News and the Good News . I have been given to those who have been faithful to me .
GOLD:	And I ask you , my true partner , to help these two women , for they worked hard with me in telling others the Good News . They worked along with Clement and the rest of my co-workers , whose names are written in the Book of Life .

ID:	6299
INPUT:	Áádóó Jánathan éí bizhé'é Saul áyidííniid , Ha'át'íishą' biniinaa hodi'yoolyééł ? Haash jíít'įįd ?
PRED:	Jonathan asked Saul , “ Why did he kill Saul ? Why did he kill him ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why should he be put to death ? ” Jonathan asked his father . “ What has he done ? ”

ID:	6300
INPUT:	Índa kin bii' sohodizin bidááhdóó ałdó' naakigo íí'áa dooígíí ashdladiindóó ba'aan naakidóó náá'áłníi'go ké silá áníłnéezgo éí bílátahdi t'áá ał'ąą dah sinilígíí éí tsosts'idóó náá'áłníí' ké silá áníłtso .
PRED:	The top of the Temple was 30 feet wide , and it was 71/2 feet high .
GOLD:	For the front of the Temple , he made two pillars that were 27 feet tall , each topped by a capital extending upward another 71/2 feet .

ID:	6301
INPUT:	Tsé yítł'inii ahiih náháłdaas nahalingo ahiih náshííyiizh ; yé'iitsoh ak'ijį' dah diilwod nahalingo shik'ijį' dah nídiilwo' .
PRED:	The walls of the city is fallen , and the earth is desolate , and the one who has fallen on me .
GOLD:	Again and again he smashes against me , charging at me like a warrior .

ID:	6302
INPUT:	Áko t'áá ha'át'éhígoda shidine'é , Jew dine'é danilíinii , da'oołch'į́įdgo ádadeeshłíiłgo binahjį' yisdáhidookah nisin .
PRED:	“ But I am determined to do anything , ” they said . “ I am determined to save you from being saved . ”
GOLD:	for I want somehow to make the people of Israel jealous of what you Gentiles have , so I might save some of them .

ID:	6303
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Building the Incense Altar

ID:	6304
INPUT:	Éí bąą diné t'áá ałtso binááł nihá nahat'i'go ánihiishłaa , háálá ánísht'éii doo bik'ehgo deínóhkáah da , nidi bee haz'áanii doo bik'ehgóó ał'oh át'éego baa nitsídasookééz lá .
PRED:	So I am telling you what I have done to you , for I am not right with you .
GOLD:	“ So I have made you despised and humiliated in the eyes of all the people . For you have not obeyed me but have shown favoritism in the way you carry out my instructions . ”

ID:	6305
INPUT:	Éí bąą , Agrípa aláahgo naat'áanii nílíinii , yá'ąąshdę́ę́' shił áhoodzaaígíí t'áá bik'ehgóó ásdzaa .
PRED:	So King Agrippa , the king of heaven , have done what was happened .
GOLD:	“ And so , King Agrippa , I obeyed that vision from heaven .

ID:	6306
INPUT:	Háálá t'áá bighąądígi nihił béédahózin , áádóó Diyin God bá hane'ii t'áá bighąądígi nihił béédahózingo baa dahwiilne' .
PRED:	For you know what is right , and we know that everything God has told you .
GOLD:	Now our knowledge is partial and incomplete , and even the gift of prophecy reveals only part of the whole picture !

ID:	6307
INPUT:	Béésh łigaii náneesne'go áłt'ą́ą́'í ádaalyaii éí Társhish haz'ánídę́ę́' nináhaashjaa' áádóó óola éí <unk> hoolyéédę́ę́' nináhaashjaa' ; éí béésh łigaii deitsidii binaanishgo ádaat'é , áádóó óola yee nidaalnishii binaanishgo ádaat'é . E'elyaii dabi'éé' éí yá nahalingo dootł'izh áádóó tsídídééh nahalingo łichí'ígíí , áko éí t'áá ałtso diné da'iichįįhii binaanish ádaat'é .
PRED:	The silver and gold that were collected from silver , silver , and the gold that were filled with gold , silver , gold , silver , and gold . This is what happened to the craftsmen and gold and gold .
GOLD:	They bring beaten sheets of silver from Tarshishand gold from Uphaz , and they give these materials to skillful craftsmenwho make their idols.Then they dress these gods in royal blue and purple robesmade by expert tailors .

ID:	6308
INPUT:	Áádóó diné ła' éí Bóhólníihii bá kéyah nayiis'nii'go dílzingo niidiní'ą́ą́ ládą́ą́' éí doo t'áá bí bikéyahígíí ła' ííł'į́į́góó ,
PRED:	“ If a man becomes a field that the Lord has taken a field to his own land ,
GOLD:	“ If someone dedicates to the Lord a field he has purchased but which is not part of his family property ,

ID:	6309
INPUT:	Bee ach'į' hózhóonii nideíníidlíí nít'éé' , t'áadoo nihaa yílyáa da . Ní'dooldzihígíí baa hodoolzhish daniidzin nít'éé' , ach'į' nahwii'ná nihaa honíle' !
PRED:	But the time came to you , but no one will help you in the dream .
GOLD:	We hoped for peace , but no peace came.We hoped for a time of healing , but found only terror . '

ID:	6310
INPUT:	Nihí ałdó' t'áá ákódanoht'é ; álílee k'ehgo yáti' bee yádaałti'go , baa yádaałti'ígíishą' haa yit'éego bééhózin doo ? Háálá éí ákót'éego t'óó dzólníígóó yádaałti'go át'é .
PRED:	“ Be careful to understand all these things , and what should you say ? For what is happening to you ? ”
GOLD:	It 's the same for you . If you speak to people in words they do n't understand , how will they know what you are saying ? You might as well be talking into empty space .

ID:	6311
INPUT:	Nít'éé' aláahgo naat'áanii Riihobówam éí hastóí danilíinii éí hazhé'é Sálaman yę́ę t'ah hiná yę́ędą́ą́' yidááhdóó naazį́į́ nít'é'ígíí bił baa nídadzist'įįdgo ííłní , Haash yit'éego díí diné bich'į' t'ą́ą́' háádeesdzihgo bee bił nídahodeeshnihígíí bee shił dahołne' ?
PRED:	Then King Rehoboam said to Rehoboam , “ How long will I tell you the advice of your ancestors ? ”
GOLD:	Then King Rehoboam discussed the matter with the older men who had counseled his father , Solomon . “ What is your advice ? ” he asked . “ How should I answer these people ? ”

ID:	6312
INPUT:	Áadi índída dził kódeiłníi dooleeł , Nihik'i daołdaas , áádóó dah daask'idígíí , Nídanihidoł'įįh , daaníigo yaa nídidookah .
PRED:	“ Sing , ‘ This is what the mountains says : Do n't weep for us ! '
GOLD:	People will beg the mountains , ‘ Fall on us , ' and plead with the hills , ‘ Bury us . '

ID:	6313
INPUT:	Áádóó Áízak hwe'asdzą́ą́ doo ałchíi dago biniinaa Bóhólníihii nídzooskan , áko Bóhólníihii hodiizts'ą́ą'go hwe'asdzą́ą́ Rebékah i'niiltsąąd .
PRED:	So Isaac 's wife heard that the Lord had said to Isaac , “ The Lord 's wife is ! ” So Isaac 's wife became pregnant .
GOLD:	Isaac pleaded with the Lord on behalf of his wife , because she was unable to have children . The Lord answered Isaac 's prayer , and Rebekah became pregnant with twins .

ID:	6314
INPUT:	T'áá ałtsoní bee Bóhólníihii kóní , Dį́į́' nídízííd binih áádóó ashdla' nídízííd binih áádóó tsosts'id nídízííd binih índa neeznáá nídízííd binih hodílzingo doo adánígíí nídaoł'aahgo Júdah dine'é yaa bił dahózhǫ́ǫgo bił nidahoozhǫǫh doo . Hodílzingo áłah nída'adleeh t'áá íiyisí yaa bił nidahoozhǫǫh dooleeł ; éí bąą t'áá aaníinii índa k'é hwiindzin ayóó'ádeínóh'ní .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ On the fourteenth day of the year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , you will be filled with joy and gladness in Judah . Then you will be filled with joy and gladness .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The traditional fasts and times of mourning you have kept in early summer , midsummer , autumn , and winter are now ended . They will become festivals of joy and celebration for the people of Judah . So love truth and peace .

ID:	6315
INPUT:	Kót'éego ayóó át'éii nishłínígíí áádóó t'áá íiyisí dinishyinígíí ííshją́ą́ ádeeshłííł índa ał'ąą dine'é t'óó ahayóí binááł ííshją́ą́ ídi'deeshnííł , áko índa Bóhólníihii nishłį́įgo hoł béédahodoozįįł .
PRED:	And I will show my glory and great power , and I will know that I am the Lord . Then I will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	In this way , I will show my greatness and holiness , and I will make myself known to all the nations of the world . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	6316
INPUT:	Biyol éí tsííd dook'ą́łígíí nahalinínda bizéé'dę́ę́' kǫ' hadino' nahalin .
PRED:	His mouth is like a flame of fire , and he burns up his mouth .
GOLD:	Its breath would kindle coals , for flames shoot from its mouth .

ID:	6317
INPUT:	Ákohgo Filístiya dine'é bindanit'a'í éí ał tįįtł'óól t'ah ditłée'ii tsosts'idgo asdzání yaa deiznil , áko yee hwe'aztł'ǫ́ .
PRED:	So I gave birth to the Philistines , and I gave birth to the servant of the Philistines . So she tied up the scarlet thread .
GOLD:	So the Philistine rulers brought Delilah seven new bowstrings , and she tied Samson up with them .

ID:	6318
INPUT:	Diné doo yá'áshóonii éí diné t'áá ákogi ááníiłii yinahagiz , áádóó yich'į' biwoo' ahíidiłk'ash ;
PRED:	The wicked say to the wicked , “ The wicked are trapped by their teeth . ”
GOLD:	The wicked plot against the godly ; they snarl at them in defiance .

ID:	6319
INPUT:	Áko éidí siláo yinanit'a'í Nébuzar'éídan éí Ríblahjį' Bábilan dine'é aláahgo binanit'a'í yich'į' yiní'eezh .
PRED:	So Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took him to Babylon at Riblah .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	6320
INPUT:	Áko dahóyáanii éí yádiłhiłdę́ę́' da'diníłdíinii nahalingo da'diníłdíin doo áádóó t'óó ahayóí t'áá ákogi át'éejį' nináda'iizh'eezhii sǫ'ígi ádaat'éego bits'áda'deezlíidgo hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áa doo .
PRED:	The wise are like the light of the sky , and the light of the sky will be known as the light of the sky .
GOLD:	Those who are wise will shine as bright as the sky , and those who lead many to righteousness will shine like the stars forever .

ID:	6321
INPUT:	Áádóó dáń'dítį́į́hdóó bits'ání'áhígíí éí wóne'dę́ę́' yí'nééł'ąądgo lók'aa' bee í'neel'ąąhí áníłtsoígi ákónízah .
PRED:	The entrance of the gateway was 101/2 feet wide , and it was 101/2 feet high .
GOLD:	He also measured the entry room of the gateway .

ID:	6322
INPUT:	bijéí tł'áahdi ák'eh ha'į́ hólǫ́ ; t'áá áłahíjį' doo yá'át'ééh áhodoonííł yinaha'á ; diné yił dahodiiłtáahgo naaghá .
PRED:	It is good in its heart ; it is good ; it is good to others .
GOLD:	Their perverted hearts plot evil , and they constantly stir up trouble .

ID:	6323
INPUT:	éí bąą t'óó shaa'ihgo índa łeezh dibahí áádóó łeeshch'iih ádééhésjáahgoDiyin God bich'į' łahgo át'éego tsíndíkééz .
PRED:	That is why the light of the dust , the dust of the dust , and the ashes of God came to me .
GOLD:	I take back everything I said , and I sit in dust and ashes to show my repentance . ”

ID:	6324
INPUT:	Áko ííshją́ą́ háadida léi' niye' nanídééłkidgo kóníigo , Díishą' ha'át'íí biniyé kódaaht'į́ ? Áko kót'éego bich'į' hadíídzih , Bóhólníihii bibee adziilii yee Ííjip kéyahdi naalte' daniidlį́ yę́ędóó háánihíí'eezh .
PRED:	“ Where did you know ? ” he asked . “ What do you want to say , ‘ This is what the Lord says ? ' And when you brought you out of Egypt , you are slaves in Egypt .
GOLD:	“ And in the future , your children will ask you , ‘ What does all this mean ? ' Then you will tell them , ‘ With the power of his mighty hand , the Lord brought us out of Egypt , the place of our slavery .

ID:	6325
INPUT:	kódaaníigo , Nihinanit'a'í nílíinii , éí anó'áahii t'ah hiná yę́ędą́ą́' , Táá' yiską́ągo náádideeshdááł , dííniidii béédeiilniih .
PRED:	“ O our master , ” they said , “ I will remember the days of our master . ”
GOLD:	They told him , “ Sir , we remember what that deceiver once said while he was still alive : ‘ After three days I will rise from the dead . '

ID:	6326
INPUT:	Áádóó aláahgo naat'áanii éí Júdah kéyahgi diné áádóó Jerúsalemgi kéédahat'ínígíí áádóó nááda'iiłniihii áádóó Diyin God yá dahalne'ii áádóó diné a'ohgo ádaat'éii índa ayóó ádaat'éii t'áá ałtso yił Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizingóó haaskai ; éí Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' saad bee aha'deet'áanii naaltsoos nídiit'ánígíí bii'dóó saad t'áá át'é bich'į' jííłta' .
PRED:	Then the people of Judah and Jerusalem sent this message to the Lord : “ The people of Judah , the least in the Temple of the Lord , the God of Judah , the people of Judah , and in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	And the king went up to the Temple of the Lord with all the people of Judah and Jerusalem , along with the priests and the prophets — all the people from the least to the greatest . There the king read to them the entire Book of the Covenant that had been found in the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	6327
INPUT:	Áko da'oosdląądii éí t'ááłá'í iiná áádóó t'ááłá'í nitsáhákees yee dah ahoojih daazlį́į́' , áko t'áadoo le'é bee dahólóonii t'áadoo , T'áá sáhí shí dooleeł , dadííniid da , nidi t'áá ałtso aheełt'éego chodayoos'įįd .
PRED:	So those who live in life , and those who put their trust in life . They said , “ Do n't have enough to share in the life of those who are living in life . ”
GOLD:	All the believers were united in heart and mind . And they felt that what they owned was not their own , so they shared everything they had .

ID:	6328
INPUT:	Bá'doogehii áádóó adooyehii
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	1:1

ID:	6329
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí atsą́ siláí ak'ah daabąąhígíí t'áá át'é áádóó azid bíighahgi ak'ahígíí índa atsą́ áshk'azhí bąąh ak'ahígíí t'áá bił néidiinilgo bikáá' náá'iiniihí yikáa'jį' yiidííłid .
PRED:	Then Moses took the fat of the internal organs , the fat around the internal organs , the fat around the altar , and the fat around the altar .
GOLD:	Then Moses took all the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , and he burned it all on the altar .

ID:	6330
INPUT:	Nít'éé' Jó'ab dah diiyáago Ábsalam bighandi Ábsalam yaa níyáago ííłní , Ha'át'éegoshą' ná nidaal'a'í éí shidá'ák'ehgi k'idííláhígíí yiih dah hodeeznil ?
PRED:	So Joab went to the house of Absalom and asked him , “ Why have you put your servants to death ? ”
GOLD:	Then Joab came to Absalom at his house and demanded , “ Why did your servants set my field on fire ? ”

ID:	6331
INPUT:	Áko nít'éé' ałní'ní'ą́ą́dóó bik'ijį' t'áá nidahidilgháashgo hííłch'į'go náá'iiniihjį' ahoolzhiizhgo doo nidi háádę́ę'da iinéé' dazdiizts'ą́ą' da , doo nidi háádę́ę'da ha'oodzíi' da , índa t'áadoo haa ákoniizį́į' da .
PRED:	As soon as they left the morning , as they left the camp , they did n't listen to his voice . But when they heard his voice , they did n't listen to him .
GOLD:	They raved all afternoon until the time of the evening sacrifice , but still there was no sound , no reply , no response .

ID:	6332
INPUT:	Áko binaagóó Ízrel dine'é t'áá ałtso haal'áhígíí éí hadazhdeeshghaazhgo hak'ee dah diijée'go ádaaní , Nihí éí ni' doo adanihidoołnah da .
PRED:	When the Israelite troops reached the town , they cried out to the men of Israel , “ We will not destroy us . ”
GOLD:	All the people around them fled when they heard their screams . “ The earth will swallow us , too ! ” they cried .

ID:	6333
INPUT:	Ádaa dadzódlíii bich'į' diltłish deez'á , áko doo ádahodoolyąął da ; bidine'é dahayóii bich'į' diltłish deez'á , áádóó nitsidadookah .
PRED:	Therefore , the sword will become a sword , and the sword will become a sword of war .
GOLD:	The sword will strike her wise counselors , and they will become fools.The sword will strike her mightiest warriors , and panic will seize them .

ID:	6334
INPUT:	Haash yit'éego shibóhólníihii binaal'a'í nishłíinii nił ałch'į' yáshti' doo ? Háálá shitah doo hwiina'góó ch'ééh disdziih .
PRED:	How can I speak to the servant of my servant ? For I am not ashamed of my servant .
GOLD:	How can someone like me , your servant , talk to you , my lord ? My strength is gone , and I can hardly breathe . ”

ID:	6335
INPUT:	Éí bee nihodziiz'áanii ayóó ádaat'éii áádóó ílíinii bee nihá hadzoodzíí' , áko nihokáá' dine'é bitahgóó adáhonooní ni'iiłchxǫǫhii bits'ą́ąjį' nihá yisdáhóót'i'go bąą , diyingo bee ájít'éii hoł ałts'ą́ą́' da'nołk'iiz .
PRED:	He told them , “ He has given us his great power and authority to destroy the world , and he has heard about us . He has heard that he is able to destroy us .
GOLD:	And because of his glory and excellence , he has given us great and precious promises . These are the promises that enable you to share his divine nature and escape the world 's corruption caused by human desires .

ID:	6336
INPUT:	Mózes índa Éran éí Ízrel dine'é kwíidííniid , I'íí'ą́ągo ííshją́ą́ díí nihił béédahodoozįįł ; jó , Bóhólníihii éí Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'éénihiní'eezhgo át'é ,
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron and the Israelites , “ You will know that the Lord is going to see the land of Egypt , for he has brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron said to all the people of Israel , “ By evening you will realize it was the Lord who brought you out of the land of Egypt .

ID:	6337
INPUT:	Áádóó aa nídahat'į́įjį' adanihidiyoo'ishgo , t'áá bítséedi ha'át'íhída dadidoohniiłígíí t'áadoo biniinaa ádił nídahodołchiłí ; áajį' ahoolzhiizhgo índa t'áá nihiih yilyáhígíí éí bee hadoohdzih , háálá nihí doo hadoohdzih da , nidi Níłch'i Diyinii éí hanihidiyoołdzih .
PRED:	You will bring them into your presence , but you will not bring them into your presence . You will say , ‘ You will be filled with the Holy Spirit . ' But you will say , ‘ You will be put to shame the Holy Spirit . ' ”
GOLD:	But when you are arrested and stand trial , do n't worry in advance about what to say . Just say what God tells you at that time , for it is not you who will be speaking , but the Holy Spirit .

ID:	6338
INPUT:	Azhą́ bee ach'oha'níinii diné doo yá'áshóonii bee bíká o'oolwodnidi , t'áá ákogi át'éii doo yíhwiidooł'áał da ; kéyah na'adlo' bąąh ádingo k'éhézdon iináadi t'áadoo ákǫ́ǫ́ éí áát'įįłgo bina'adlo' doo , áádóó Bóhólníihii yee ayóó át'éii doo t'áá k'ad yaa ákoniizį́į' da .
PRED:	But the wicked are crushed , but the wicked are crushed by the wicked , but the godly have no fear of justice . But the Lord has rejected the righteous , but he has rejected the righteous .
GOLD:	Your kindness to the wickeddoes not make them do good.Although others do right , the wicked keep doing wrongand take no notice of the Lord 's majesty .

ID:	6339
INPUT:	Hinishnánígíí jooshłxá , doo hool'áágóó hinishnáa da doo , t'áadoo shaa nánít'íní ; t'áadoo biniyéhígóó yee' shíyoołkááł .
PRED:	I hate and never live forever ; I am deeply troubled . I am innocent , and I am innocent .
GOLD:	I hate my life and do n't want to go on living.Oh , leave me alone for my few remaining days .

ID:	6340
INPUT:	Índa dine'é danohłíinii kéyah danihíí' dadooleełígíí yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo nihikéyah ałtaa doohdzoh ; lą'í danołt'éhígíí bik'ehgo kéyah dahótsaago hadahidoohsoh áádóó ádanołch'į́dígíí bik'ehgo kéyah t'áá nihidahoníłtsóhígo hadahidoohsoh ; yáá'iilt'e' bik'ehgo diné hakéyah hóó' nidahaleeh ; dine'é danohłíinii bik'ehgo kéyah danihíí' nidahaleeh doo .
PRED:	“ When you divide the land among the tribes of Israel , you must divide the land among you . Each tribe will be allotted to each tribe .
GOLD:	You must distribute the land among the clans by sacred lot and in proportion to their size . A larger portion of land will be allotted to each of the larger clans , and a smaller portion will be allotted to each of the smaller clans . The decision of the sacred lot is final . In this way , the portions of land will be divided among your ancestral tribes .

ID:	6341
INPUT:	Náásgóó nihe'iina' t'áá naaki nilį́įgo bá haz'ą́ą doo ; jį́įgo áádóó tł'ée'go nihił daayée' doo , índa nihe'iina' doo bá hasihgóó haz'ą́ą doo .
PRED:	Your life will be yours , and your life will be yours , and your life will be yours .
GOLD:	Your life will constantly hang in the balance . You will live night and day in fear , unsure if you will survive .

ID:	6342
INPUT:	Áádóó náábík'ijį' ła'ts'áadahígíí da'ayą́ągo bich'į' yit'íní ánáázh'diilyaa , áko dadziztsą́ą́dę́ę́' náázdiidzáádóó dahoołtsánígíí doo dayoodlą́ą́góó áádóó bijéí doo binídahaz'áhígíí biniinaa dzideezteh .
PRED:	On the next day he said to his disciples , “ Each of the twelve disciples must be raised from the dead , and he must not be raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	Still later he appeared to the eleven disciples as they were eating together . He rebuked them for their stubborn unbelief because they refused to believe those who had seen him after he had been raised from the dead .

ID:	6343
INPUT:	Éíbram éí Lat yił ałts'ázná
PRED:	Lot 's First Missionary Journey
GOLD:	Abram and Lot Separate

ID:	6344
INPUT:	Asdzání tsosts'idi ashchíinii nidi , doo bidziil da silį́į́' . Doo bitah hwiina' da , t'ahdii jį́įgo bee i'íí'ą́ . Yánízin áádóó t'óó baa yáhásin nít'éé' . Daadzí'ígíí binahjį' bida'ana'í binááł diltłish baa hodideesh'áá ł , ní Bóhólníihii .
PRED:	On the seventh day the seventh day of seven days , but the people of Israel have no peace . I will bring them to their enemies , ” says the Lord . “ I will bring them back to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The mother of seven grows faint and gasps for breath ; her sun has gone down while it is still day.She sits childless now , disgraced and humiliated.And I will hand over those who are leftto be killed by the enemy.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	6345
INPUT:	Nidi Kítim tábąąhdę́ę́' tsinaa'eeł nihidoo'ołgo Ásher dine'é áádóó Ííber dine'é yich'į' nahodiyoołnaał , áko hó ałdó' hool'áágóó áhodi'dooldįįł .
PRED:	But when he came from Galilee , he will destroy the nations of Edom , and he will destroy us forever .
GOLD:	Ships will come from the coasts of Cyprus ; they will oppress Assyria and afflict Eber , but they , too , will be utterly destroyed . ”

ID:	6346
INPUT:	Áko dashdiiyáago kéyah Diikápolis hoolyéégóó t'áá át'éé nít'éé' Jesus ayóó át'éii há yaa naayáhígíí baa hojilne'go tázhdíghááh , áko diné t'áá ałtso t'óó bił adahayóí .
PRED:	So Judas left the region and went to the region of the region to the region of the Red Sea .
GOLD:	So the man started off to visit the Ten Towns of that region and began to proclaim the great things Jesus had done for him ; and everyone was amazed at what he told them .

ID:	6347
INPUT:	Áádóó Mózes éí ak'ah ak'i yahiidzíidgo bee alzį́įhii néidiiką́ągo níbaal bii' hodílzinii áádóó bii' góne' naaznilii t'áá át'é yiyíísį́į'go dílzingo áyiilaa .
PRED:	Then Moses took the anointing oil and placed it in front of the Tabernacle with the priests and the sacred garments for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the Tabernacle and everything in it , making them holy .

ID:	6348
INPUT:	(
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Teaching about Money and Possessions

ID:	6349
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii ání , Éí bąą bich'į' yoołkááł , jó'akon , Bóhólníihii éí Ízrel dine'é Ííjip kéyahdę́ę́' ch'íiní'eezhii hiná , doo nááhá'níi da doo .
PRED:	“ The time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when the people of Israel will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel will not say , ‘ This is what the Lord says . '
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ when people are taking an oath , they will no longer say , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , who rescued the people of Israel from the land of Egypt . '

ID:	6350
INPUT:	Áádóó kéyah shádi'ááhjí hoolyéédę́ę'go hadziskaigo Hííbran kin haal'áajį' jíkai ; ákwii Éínak ba'áłchíní Aháíman , Shííshai índa Tálmai daolyéii kéédahat'į́į́ lá . ( Hííbran kin haal'áii ályaadóó bik'ijį' tsosts'id nááhaigo Ííjip kéyah nahós'a'gi Zówan kin haal'áago áhoolyaa . )
PRED:	From the Negev , they went to Hebron and settled in the Negev . These were the clans of the tribe of Caleb , Rehum , the court secretary , and Joah , the court of Egypt .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	6351
INPUT:	Rúben , ni alą́ąjį' shá yizhchíinii nílį́ ; shidziil áádóó <unk> xe' bee deezt'i'ii nílį́ ; Diné aláahgo baa ha'niihii índa alą́ąjį' hoo'áałii nílį́ .
PRED:	“ You are my oldest son ; you are my strength and stronger than I am the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ Reuben , you are my firstborn , my strength , the child of my vigorous youth.You are first in rank and first in power .

ID:	6352
INPUT:	Háálá diné hojooba' has'áanii bich'į' ániihgo yisdéíłtééh . Índa diné badahojoobá'íii áádóó t'áadoo bíká oolyeedíii bich'į' ániihgo yisdéinił .
PRED:	For I will save the poor , and I will save them from their eyes .
GOLD:	He will rescue the poor when they cry to him ; he will help the oppressed , who have no one to defend them .

ID:	6353
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii bikin bii' sohodizin góne' asdzání haa áhályánígíí bił nahodi'nil'ingo hastą́ą́h nááhai . Áádóó Athaláíyah éí kéyah yii' kéédahat'íinii yinant'áá nít'éé' .
PRED:	When Athaliah was in the Temple of the Lord , she hurried back to the palace of the Lord for six years . When Athaliah was Athaliah , she was Athaliah .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of God for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	6354
INPUT:	Ákohgo Fíniyas yiizį'go yá nihwiiz'ą́ągo naałniih áhodiilzee' .
PRED:	Then Phinehas stood up and stood up , and a plague covered it .
GOLD:	But Phinehas had the courage to intervene , and the plague was stopped .

ID:	6355
INPUT:	Ayóó'óósh'níinii bá ąą áshłaa , nít'éé' ayóó'óósh'níinii dah náádiidzáá lá , áko doo naagháhí da . Haadzíí' yę́ędą́ą́' k'asdą́ą́' shíni' ásdįįd ; hanítą́ą́' , nidi t'áadoo bik'íníyáa da ; bíká ádííniid , nidi t'áadoo shich'į' haadzíi' da .
PRED:	My lover opened the door , and I said , “ My lover has n't been healed . I did n't tell you what I am saying , but I did n't believe it . ”
GOLD:	I opened to my lover , but he was gone ! My heart sank.I searched for himbut could not find him anywhere.I called to him , but there was no reply .

ID:	6356
INPUT:	Áádóó ałdó' nida'iiłniihí bikéyahdi Kaldíya dine'é bich'į' íłjił nít'éé' ; azhą́ kónít'į́į́ nít'éé' nidi , t'áadoo hwiih sínílį́į' da .
PRED:	But the priests who lived in the land of the Babylonians , but they ate no more .
GOLD:	You added to your lovers by embracing Babylonia , the land of merchants , but you still were n't satisfied .

ID:	6357
INPUT:	2
PRED:	Jesus before the Council
GOLD:	The Burial of Jesus

ID:	6358
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii éí atsį' yee há nihoní'ą́
PRED:	The meat of the Lord
GOLD:	The People Complain to Moses

ID:	6359
INPUT:	Áádóó Jó'ab éí David yits'ą́ą́' dah nídiidzáago , t'áá áko bá nidaal'a'í Ábner yikéé' ayiis'a'go <unk> tó hahadleehdóó t'ą́ą́' hoł nídaaskai , nidi ákódzaaígíí David t'áadoo baa ákozniizį́į' da .
PRED:	So Joab returned to David and sent his servants to search for him , but they did n't know what David had done .
GOLD:	Joab then left David and sent messengers to catch up with Abner , asking him to return . They found him at the well of Sirah and brought him back , though David knew nothing about it .

ID:	6360
INPUT:	Áko Bóhólníihii niDiyin God éí deíníikáah dooleełgóó índa baa nideiikai dooleełígíí nihił yit'íní íidoolííł .
PRED:	And we will continue to live in the Lord our God , and we will return to you .
GOLD:	Pray that the Lord your God will show us what to do and where to go . ”

ID:	6361
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii ádííniid , Bee hoséł'áanii t'áá át'é áádóó bee haz'áanii t'áá át'é éí shá naal'a'í Mózes hach'į' yee haadzí'ígíí bik'eh dahojíł'į́įgo dahazhé'é yę́ę kéyah baa diní'áanii bits'ą́ą́dóó doo nahjį' kónááhodeeshdlíił da .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ I will not obey all my decrees and regulations . I will not obey my decrees . I will not break the land of their ancestors .
GOLD:	If the Israelites will be careful to obey my commands — all the laws my servant Moses gave them — I will not send them into exile from this land that I gave their ancestors . ”

ID:	6362
INPUT:	Áko David bidah na'ayizii yiih doolnii'go tsé hayíí'ą́ągo yee adzíítł'in , nít'éé' Filístiya diné bítáá' góne' yił dzideeztł'ingo bítáá' góne' tsé baa aalwodgo ni'jį' íítłizh .
PRED:	So David threw his hand into the middle of the wall and threw it into the house of the Philistines into the wall , and he ran out to the entrance of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Reaching into his shepherd 's bag and taking out a stone , he hurled it with his sling and hit the Philistine in the forehead . The stone sank in , and Goliath stumbled and fell face down on the ground .

ID:	6363
INPUT:	Áádóó náázdeeskaigo , kin sinil léi'gi Jesus jiníyá , áko asdzání Martha yolyéé léi' bighan góne' yah ajííyáago haa bił hóózhǫǫd .
PRED:	As Jesus arrived at the house of Martha , a woman named Martha , a woman named Martha .
GOLD:	As Jesus and the disciples continued on their way to Jerusalem , they came to a certain village where a woman named Martha welcomed him into her home .

ID:	6364
INPUT:	Áko Líívai dine'é danilį́įgo Jéshuwa , Kádmiyel , Béínai , Ha<unk> náíyah , Sheriibáíyah , Hodáíjah , Shebanáíyah índa Pethaháíyah ádadííniid , Daohsįįhgo Bóhólníihii nihiDiyin God baa dahohniihgo hool'áágóó ahóyéel'áa doo ; nízhi' ayóó át'éii éí ak'ihojidlíii índa aa ha'niihii biláahgo ayóó át'éego baa ha'niih doo .
PRED:	These are the Levites : Jeshua , Jeshua , Bani , Bani , Bani , Bani , Bani , and Mattaniah . Their voices will be filled with joy , and honor will be honored forever .
GOLD:	Then the leaders of the Levites — Jeshua , Kadmiel , Bani , Hashabneiah , Sherebiah , Hodiah , Shebaniah , and Pethahiah — called out to the people : “ Stand up and praise the Lord your God , for he lives from everlasting to everlasting ! ” Then they prayed : “ May your glorious name be praised ! May it be exalted above all blessing and praise !

ID:	6365
INPUT:	Ádadooniidgo , Haa léit'éego atídahodiilnííł lá ? T'áá bitł'ááhdę́ę́' bich'į' nahwii'nánígíí nihił béédahoozin dashíínóh'níigo
PRED:	“ How long will he comfort us ? ” they asked . “ You know what I am saying ,
GOLD:	“ How dare you go on persecuting me , saying , ‘ It 's his own fault ' ?

ID:	6366
INPUT:	jó , éí bąą Bóhólníihii Diyin God kóní , T'áá íiyisí shił halchíi'go łe'nisingo ał'ąą dine'é dajílíinii dadzidziihii hak'ijį' áádóó Íídam dine'é t'áá át'é hak'ijį' nishłį́įgo yáshti' , háálá hó shikéyah hwíí' dadooleeł áádóó t'óó bik'i nizhdookah biniyé t'áá íiyisí baa hoł dahózhǫ́ǫgo índa ak'ee dazhdiniihgo ádá shódadzoost'e' .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am a jealous jealous jealous of my anger , a jealous nation of Edom , for I am filled with joy and all the nations of Edom .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : My jealous anger burns against these nations , especially Edom , because they have shown utter contempt for me by gleefully taking my land for themselves as plunder .

ID:	6367
INPUT:	Áádóó biiskání t'óó ahayóí hodílzingo áłah ná'ádleehígi neheeskaígíí Jerúsalemjį' Jesus yigáałgo dayíínii' .
PRED:	The next day Jesus told his disciples what had happened to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The next day , the news that Jesus was on the way to Jerusalem swept through the city . A large crowd of Passover visitors

ID:	6368
INPUT:	Shí shinahjį' aláahgo naat'áanii danilíinii dahwée'aah , áádóó ałdó' shí shinahjį' naat'áanii danilíinii t'áá ákogi áhodooníiłgo hadahadziih .
PRED:	“ I am the kings of my kings , the kings of my people , and they will be wise .
GOLD:	Because of me , kings reign , and rulers make just decrees .

ID:	6369
INPUT:	Áádóó Éísahel éí Béthlehem kin shijaa'di bizhé'é yóó'ályaa yę́ędi yóó'ábi'diilyaa . Áádóó Jó'ab índa diné yił naakaígíí tł'éé' bíighah yikahgo ha'íí'ą́ągo Hííbran kin haal'áajį' nákai .
PRED:	They buried him in the town of Bethel and buried him at Bethel . Then Joab and his men went to Hebron and went to Hebron .
GOLD:	Joab and his men took Asahel 's body to Bethlehem and buried him there in his father 's tomb . Then they traveled all night and reached Hebron at daybreak .

ID:	6370
INPUT:	Áádóó Bóhólníihii éí Mózes yich'į' haadzíi'go ání ,
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	6371
INPUT:	Bóhólníihii , nihinaage' nílíinii , shidine'é doo deidiyoonahígíí biniyé ana'í t'áadoo naniłtseedí ! Nidi nidziilígíí bee tanoołkaadgo bik'eh dídleeh !
PRED:	O Lord , do n't be afraid of my shield ! Your enemies are at your shield .
GOLD:	Do n't kill them , for my people soon forget such lessons ; stagger them with your power , and bring them to their knees , O Lord our shield .

ID:	6372
INPUT:	Ízrel nílíinii , Gíbiyah kin haal'áagi ádił asínílziih yę́ędóó wóshdę́ę́' t'ahdii t'áá ákónít'į́ ; Gíbiyahgi ts'ídá doo ákwii ádáát'įįdii t'áadoo ałtso anaa' bił anoodaa' da .
PRED:	O Israel , you have sinned from Gibeah , and you have never sinned from Gibeah .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ O Israel , ever since Gibeah , there has been only sin and more sin ! You have made no progress whatsoever.Was it not right that the wicked men of Gibeah were attacked ?

ID:	6373
INPUT:	Áko nihitahgi ashiiké tsosts'id yilt'éego t'áá ła' háájéé' lá ; alą́ąjį'ígíí azyeh , nidi t'áadoo ba'áłchíní haleehí daaztsą́ , áko hatsilí éí hwe'asdzą́ą́ nít'é'ígíí yaa náánádzá .
PRED:	Some of the twelve sons of each other , for the oldest brother married one of the oldest brother 's brother . So they returned to his brother .
GOLD:	Well , suppose there were seven brothers . The oldest one married and then died without children , so his brother married the widow .

ID:	6374
INPUT:	Yishááłgóó nidahwiiłchxǫǫh ; shich'į' nidahwiiłnáa dooígíí yíká da'íłkeed ; t'áadoo yóweh bidóne'é da .
PRED:	They cry out to me , and they will never live forever .
GOLD:	They block my roadand do everything they can to destroy me.They know I have no one to help me .

ID:	6375
INPUT:	Háálá Bóhólníihii kóní , David éí Ízrel dine'é bitahdóó bikáá' dah asdáhí bikáá'dóó nant'áii yikáá' dah dínóodaałígíí éí doo bídin hóyée' da doo .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ Your throne will not be afraid of Israel .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says : David will have a descendant sitting on the throne of Israel forever .

ID:	6376
INPUT:	áádóó Ahólibéíma áádóó Íílah áádóó Pí<unk>
PRED:	Oholibamah , the son of Hamor and Tamar
GOLD:	Oholibamah , Elah , Pinon ,

ID:	6377
INPUT:	T'áadoo dabiniyéhígíí baa nihił nidahoozhǫǫh áádóó ádadohní , T'áá nihí ayóó adanihóodziilii bee danihidziil dasiidlį́į́' .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of these things , and rejoice in your power .
GOLD:	And you brag about your conquest of Lo-debar.You boast , “ Did n't we take Karnaim by our own strength ? ”

ID:	6378
INPUT:	Áko Ííjip dine'é bílák'ee hanihíínil , áádóó nihide ádahósinii t'áá ałtso bílák'ee hanihíínil , índa nihilą́ąjį' ałtso shaa ch'íheezhjée'go bikédaayah nihílák'edíí'ą́ .
PRED:	And if you were afraid of Egypt , I gave you victory over all the people of Egypt , do n't let us go out to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	I rescued you from the Egyptians and from all who oppressed you . I drove out your enemies and gave you their land .

ID:	6379
INPUT:	Ch'il na'atł'o'ii bitoo' dók'ǫ́zhígíí hawoo' yidíníłtsi' , áádóó łid éí hanáá' yiyiiłch'ih ; t'áá ákót'éego bił hóyée'ii nidajił'a'ígíí hach'į' ákót'é .
PRED:	It is a jar of wine , and it is a basket mixed with smoke . It is a Sovereign Lord !
GOLD:	Lazy people irritate their employers , like vinegar to the teeth or smoke in the eyes .

ID:	6380
INPUT:	Éí bąą nibik'ehgo iináanii t'áá ałtso t'áá ákogi ádaat'é nisin ; na'adlo'go áhooníłígíí t'áá ałtso jooshłxá .
PRED:	So I hate the righteous , and I hate all who obey your commandments .
GOLD:	Each of your commandments is right.That is why I hate every false way .

ID:	6381
INPUT:	nihidiináahgo t'áá áníiltso nihidah na'ayizii t'ááłá'í ádadiilnííł .
PRED:	Come and open our foes , and we will be our enemies .
GOLD:	Come , throw in your lot with us ; we 'll all share the loot . ”

ID:	6382
INPUT:	)
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Widow 's Offering

ID:	6383
INPUT:	Doo ákwii ádajit'į́į́góó shich'į' ádił nidadziisíi'ii éí t'áá ałtso hąąh dadeeshdah . Doo ákwii ádajit'į́į́góó ádił nidadziisíi'go shibee haz'áanii k'ídadzizti'ii éí t'áá ałtso há k'ééda'deeshchxǫǫł .
PRED:	I will turn my sins against me , and I will destroy all my sins . I will destroy the sins of the sins of the sins of sin .
GOLD:	I will cleanse them of their sins against me and forgive all their sins of rebellion .

ID:	6384
INPUT:	Éí bąągo Bóhólníihii éí aláahgo naat'áanii Ríízin bits'ą́ą́dóó ana'í danilíinii hak'ijį' danilį́įgo áádóó hweda'ana'í hoł háádahoniłchxa'go íidoolííł ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to Rehum the kings of the Lord , and his enemies will be killed .
GOLD:	But the Lord will bring Rezin 's enemies against Israeland stir up all their foes .

ID:	6385
INPUT:	Náá'iiłniihii Melkízedek át'éhígi át'éii
PRED:	Melchizedek , the High Priest in Melchizedek ,
GOLD:	Melchizedek Is Greater Than Abraham

ID:	6386
INPUT:	Ch'ikę́ę́h Ííjip bich'é'é nílíinii , Gíliyad kéyah góde hasínáahgo tłah azee' nídii'aah ; t'áadoo biniyéhígóó azee' t'óó ahayóí choidííł'įįł , háálá doo nándi'dooldzih da .
PRED:	“ Come , wake up , O daughter of Egypt , and do n't let her go into the land of Egypt , for I will heal you . ”
GOLD:	“ Go up to Gilead to get medicine , O virgin daughter of Egypt ! But your many treatmentswill bring you no healing .

ID:	6387
INPUT:	Éí bąą shiyáázh k'ad bee nich'į' haasdzí'ígíí bik'eh honíł'įįh .
PRED:	Now you are my son , my son .
GOLD:	Now , my son , listen to me . Do exactly as I tell you .

ID:	6388
INPUT:	Éí lá bee ayóó'ó'ó'ní nihiyi' hadaałt'éego hasht'eelyaa ni , áko ánihwiit'aah beiníłką́ądi doo nitsideiidáa da dooleeł , háálá nihokáa'gi nihí ałdó' t'áá bí át'éhígi ádaniit'é .
PRED:	For we love God 's love , and we do n't want us to be our own bodies . We will be like the bodies of our lives .
GOLD:	And as we live in God , our love grows more perfect . So we will not be afraid on the day of judgment , but we can face him with confidence because we live like Jesus here in this world .

ID:	6389
INPUT:	t'áá níléí Éíbel bidił deezna' yę́ędóó níléí Zekaráíyah bidił deezna' yę́ęjį' , éí bikáá' náá'iiniihí índa kin bii' sohodizin bita'gi ábi'disdįįdígíí . T'áá aaníí ánihidishní , Díí oochíłígíí éí yá ninádínóodah .
PRED:	Zechariah son of Zechariah , Zechariah , was taken away from the altar of Zechariah and the altar of Zechariah . And I tell you the truth , ‘ This is what happened . ' ”
GOLD:	from the murder of Abel to the murder of Zechariah , who was killed between the altar and the sanctuary . Yes , it will certainly be charged against this generation .

ID:	6390
INPUT:	Óola éí Bóhólníihii baa nídahideest'ánígíí t'áá ałtso hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' t'áá át'é bee hahodidzaii éí naadiin náhást'éí tálent wolyéii áádóó tsosts'idi neeznádiindóó ba'aan tádiin shékel dah hidiidlohígíí bíighahgo ánéelą́ą́' ; éí hodiyingo haz'ą́ą́ góne' shékel choo'íinii bik'ehgo wólta' .
PRED:	These are the articles used for the Lord 's Temple , which was collected from the sanctuary of the Lord 's sanctuary . The weight of the sanctuary shekel , which equals twenty pounds of silver .
GOLD:	The people brought special offerings of gold totaling 2,193 pounds , as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel . This gold was used throughout the Tabernacle .

